9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 1/571
ORDINANCES PENDING CODIFICATION
Ordinances listed under this folder in the table of contents to the left,
have been passed, but have not been incorporated in the actual code.
Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning the ordinances listed.
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official
hard copy. In the case of any discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard
copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NO. 2019-16
CONSIDERATION OF AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE STREET PARKING IN WINTER MONTHS
WHEREAS, Mapleton City Code (MCC) Section 10.05.070 does not allow for vehicles or trailers to be parked on any
city street between the hours of 11 pm to 6 am during the period beginning November 15th thru March 15th; and
WHEREAS, the enforcement for parking on the street comes with mixed reviews as some residents feel we should not be
enforcing it unless there is snow forecasted; and
WHEREAS, the proposed ordinance would prohibit parking on a city street during snow storms and for up to 48 hours
thereafter, or until snow plowing and snow removal efforts are completed.
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED by the City Council of Mapleton, Utah, to amend Mapleton City Code Title
10 as described in Exhibit “A”.
PASSED AND ORDERED PUBLISHED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF MAPLETON, UTAH,
This 4th Day of December, 2019
________________________________
Dallas Hakes Mayor
ATTEST:
_________________________
Camille Brown
City Recorder
Publication Date: December 6, 2019
Effective Date: December 25, 2019
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 2/571
Exhibit “A”
Changes Shown in red and underlined
10.05.070: STREET PARKING IN WINTER MONTHS SNOW REMOVAL OPERATIONS:
A person may not park a vehicle or trailer on any street between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. of any day and six
o'clock (6:00) A.M. of the following day during the period beginning November 15 of one year, and continuing until March 15 of
the following year. Parking is prohibited on city public streets having an asphalt width of 36 feet or less during snow removal
operations. All vehicles are to be removed from city public streets during snow storms and for up to 48 hours thereafter, or until
snow plowing and snow removal efforts are completed, as determined by the Public Works Director, whichever is sooner. During
snow storms shall mean at the point in time that snow begins to accumulate on the streets. The Public Works Director has the
authority to extend the 48 hours in the event of a storm which takes City crews more than 48 hours to clear the streets of snow.
Notice of the 48 hour extension is to be posted on the City web page. In addition to any citation which may be issued for violation
of this section, any vehicle or trailer parked or left standing in violation of this section may be impounded as provided in this
section.
For purposes of impoundment and removal, a police officer may immediately impound and remove any vehicle in violation of this
section which he reasonably believes constitutes a safety hazard to the public or snow removal equipment. For all vehicles parked
in violation of this section, a police officer may, after placing a notice on the vehicle, impound and remove any vehicle or trailer
which reasonably appears to have been unmoved for twenty four (24) consecutive hours after the posting of the notice on the
vehicle. The cost of impoundment and removal shall be charged to the owner or any person who claims the impounded vehicle.
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official
hard copy. In the case of any discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard
copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NO. 2020-01
CONSIDERATION OF AN ORDINANCE ADDING CHAPTER 13.29 CONTROL OF BACKFLOW AND CROSS
CONNECTIONS FOR PUBLIC DRIKING WATER SYSTEMS TO MAPLETON CITY CODE.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 3/571
WHEREAS, Title 13 of the Mapleton City Code contains the City’s Public Services; and
WHEREAS, the water supply for Mapleton City must be protected from contamination or pollution from cross
connections; and
WHEREAS, the approved backflow assemblies are tested when put into service on an annual basis; and
WHEREAS, it is necessary to comply with Section R309.105.12 of the Utah Public Drinking Water Rules (UPDRWR)
and the Plumbing Code as adopted by the State of Utah.
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED by the City Council of Mapleton, Utah, to add Mapleton City Code Title
13.29 as described in Exhibit “A”.
PASSED AND ORDERED PUBLISHED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF MAPLETON, UTAH,
This 15th Day of January, 2020.
________________________________
Dallas Hakes
Mayor
ATTEST:
___________________________
Camille Brown
City Recorder
Publication Date: January 18, 2020
Effective Date: February 7, 2020
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 4/571
Exhibit “A”
Chapter 13.29
CONTROL OF BACKFLOW AND CROSS CONNECTIONS FOR
PUBLIC DRINKING WATER STYEMS
13.29.010 PURPOSE
13.29.020 RESPONSIBILITY: WATER PURVEYOR
13.29.030 RESPONSIBILITY: CONSUMER
13.29.040 RESPONSIBILITY: BUILDING OFFICIAL
3.29.050 RESPONSIBILITY: CERTIFIED BACKFLOW TECHNICICAN, SURVEYOR, or REPAIR PERSON
13.29.060 RESPONSIBILITY: REPAIR OF BACKFLOW ASSEMBLIES
13.29.070 DEFINITIONS
13.29.080 REQUIREMENTS
13.29.010: Purpose
A To protect the Public drinking water supply of Mapleton City from the possibility of contamination or pollution by
requiring compliance with the Utah State Rules for Public Drinking Water Systems and the Plumbing Code as adopted by the
State of Utah, that require a cross connection control protection of all public drinking water systems in the State of Utah.
Compliance with these minimum safety codes will be considered reasonable diligence for the prevention of contaminants or
pollutants which could backflow into the public drinking water system; and,
B To promote the reasonable elimination or control of cross connection in the plumbing fixtures and industrial piping
system(s) of the consumer, as required by the state and plumbing regulations to assure water system safety; and,
C To provide for the administration of a continuing program of backflow prevention which will systematically examine risk
and effectively prevent the contamination or pollution of the drinking water system.
13.29.020: RESPONSIBILITY: WATER PURVEYOR
A Mapleton City shall be responsible for the protection of the drinking water distribution system from the foreseeable
condition leading to the possible contamination or pollution of the drinking water system due to the backflow of contaminants or
pollutants into the drinking water supply.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 5/571
B Drinking water system surveys/inspections of the consumer’s water distribution system(s) shall be conducted or caused to
be conducted by individuals deemed qualified by and representing Mapleton City. Survey records shall indicate compliance with
the State of Utah Regulations. All such records will be maintained by Mapleton City.
C Mapleton City shall schedule and notify in writing, all consumers of the need for the periodic system survey to ensure
compliance with existing applicable minimum health and safety standards.
D Selection of an approved backflow prevention assembly for containment control required at the service entrance shall be
determined from the results of the system survey.
13.29.030: RESPONSIBILITY: CONSUMER
A To comply with this ordinance as a term and condition of water supply and consumer’s acceptance of service is admittance
of his/her awareness of his/her responsibilities as a water system user.
B It shall be the responsibility of the consumer to purchase, install, and arrange testing and maintenance of any backflow
prevention device/assembly required to comply with this ordinance. Failure to comply with this ordinance shall constitute grounds
for discontinuation of water service.
13.29.040: RESPONSIBILITY: BUILDING OFFICIAL
A The building official’s responsibility to enforce the applicable sections of the plumbing code begins at the point of service
(downstream or consumer side of the meter) and continues throughout the length of the consumer’s water system.
B The building official will review all plans to ensure that unprotected cross connections are not an integral part of the
consumer’s water system. If a cross connection cannot be eliminated, it must be protected by the installation of an air gap or an
approved backflow prevention device/assembly, in accordance with the Plumbing Code as adopted by the State of Utah.
13.29.050: RESPONSIBILITY: CERTIFIED BACKFLOW TECHNICICAN, SURVEYOR, or REPAIR PERSON
A Whether employed by the consumer or a utility to survey, test, repair, or maintain backflow prevention assemblies the
Certified Backflow Technician, Surveyor, or Repair Person will have the following responsibilities:
1. Ensuring that acceptable testing equipment and procedures are used for testing, repairing or overhauling backflow
prevention assemblies.
2. Make reports of such testing and/or repairs to the consumer and the water purveyor on form approved for such use by the
water purveyor within time frames as described by the Division of Drinking Water.
3. Include the list of materials or replacement parts being used of the reports.
4. Ensuring that replacement parts are equal in quality to parts originally supplied by the manufacturer of the assembly being
repaired.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 6/571
5. Not changing the design, material or operational characteristics of the assembly during testing, repair or maintenance.
6. Performing all tests of the mechanical devices/assemblies and shall be responsible for the competence and accuracy of all
tests and reports.
7. Ensuring that his/her license is current, the testing equipment being used is acceptable to the State of Utah and is in proper
operating condition.
8. Being equipped with, and competent to use, all necessary tools, gauges, test tags, and other equipment necessary to properly
test, and maintain backflow prevention assemblies.
9. Tagging each double check valve, pressure vacuum breaker, reduced pressure backflow assembly and high hazard air gap,
showing the serial number date tested and by whom. The certified technician’s license number must also be on the tag.
13.29.060: RESPONSIBILITY: REPAIR OF BACKFLOW ASSEMBLIES
A In the case of a consumer requiring an assembly to be tested, any currently Certified Backflow Technician is authorized to
make the test and report the results to the consumer and the water purveyor. Any installation repair or relocation shall be done
with individuals having appropriate licensure from the department of licensing.
13.29.070: DEFINITIONS
A Water Purveyor: The person designated to be in charge of the Water Department of Mapleton City, is invested with the
authority and responsibility for the implementation of an effective cross connection control program and for the enforcement of
the provisions of this ordinance.
B Approved Backflow Assembly: An assembly accepted by the Utah State Department of Environmental Quality, Division
of Drinking Water, as meeting and applicable specification or as suitable for the proposed use.
C Auxiliary Water Supply: Any water supply on or available to the premises other than the purveyor’s public water supply
will be considered as an auxiliary water supply. These auxiliary waters may include water from another purveyor’s public potable
water supply or any natural source(s) such as a well, spring, river, stream, etc., or “used water” or “industrial fluids”. These waters
may be contaminated or polluted or they may be objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water source over which the water
purveyor does not have authority for sanitary control.
D Backflow: The reversal of the normal flow of water caused by wither back-pressure or back siphonage.
E Back-Pressure: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances from a region of high pressure to a region of
lower pressure into the water distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source(s) other than the intended
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 7/571
source.
F Back-Siphonage: The flow or water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances under vacuum conditions into the
distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source(s) other than the intended source, caused by the reduction of
pressure in the potable water system.
G Backflow Prevention Assembly: An assembly or means designed to prevent backflow. Specifications for backflow
prevention assemblies are contained within the Plumbing Code as adopted by the State of Utah and in the Cross Connection
Control Program for Utah maintained by the Division of Drinking Water.
H Cross Connection: Any physical connection or arrangement of piping or fixtures which may allow non-potable water or
industrial fluids or other material of questionable quality to come into contact with potable water inside a water distribution
system. This would include temporary conditions, such as swing connections, removable sections, four way plug valves, spools,
dummy sections of pipe, swivel or change-over devices or sliding multiport tubes or other plumbing arrangements.
I Contamination: Means a quality degradation of the potable water supply by sewage, industrial fluids, waste liquids,
compounds or other materials that may create a health hazard.
J Cross Connection-Controlled: A connection between a potable water system and a non-potable water system with an
approved backflow prevention assembly properly installed and maintained so that it will continuously afford the protection
commensurate with the degree of hazard.
K Cross Connection-Containment: The installation of an approved backflow assembly at the water service connection to
any customer’s premises where it is physically and economically infeasible to find permanently eliminate or control all actual or
potential cross connection within the customer’s water distribution system; or, it shall mean the installation of an approved
backflow prevention assembly in the service line leading to and supply a portion of a customer’s water distribution system; or, it
shall mean the installation of a portion of a customer’s water system where there are actual or potential cross connections which
cannot be effectively eliminated or controlled at the point of the cross connection (isolation).
13.29.080: REQUIREMENTS
A Policy:
1. No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or maintained by the Water Purveyor unless the water
supply is protected as required by State laws, regulations, codes, and this ordinance shall be discontinued by the water purveyor
after due process of written notifications of violation and an appropriate time suspense for voluntary compliance, if:
a. A backflow prevention assembly required by this ordinance for the control of backflow and cross connections is not
installed, tested, and maintained, or
b. If it is found that a backflow prevention assembly has been removed or by-passed, or
c. If an unprotected cross connection exists on the premises, or
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 8/571
d. If the periodic system survey has not been conducted.
e. Water service will not be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected.
2. The customer’s system(s) shall be open for inspection at all reasonable times to authorized representatives of the water
purveyor to determine whether cross connections or other structural or sanitary hazards, including violation of this ordinance exist
and to audit the results of the required survey (R309.105.12 of the Utah Administrative Code).
3. Whenever the public water purveyor deems a service connection’s water usage contributes a sufficient hazard to the water
supply, and approved backflow prevention assembly shall be installed on the service line of the identified consumer’s water
system, at or near the property line or immediately inside the building being served; but, in all cases, before the first branch line
leading off the service line.
4. The type of protective assembly required under subsection 13.29.080.3, shall depend upon the degree of hazard which
exist at the point of cross connection (whether direct or indirect), applicable to local and state requirements or resulting from the
required survey.
5. All presently installed backflow prevention assemblies which do not meet the requirements of this section but were
approved assemblies for the purposes described herein at the time of installation and which have been properly maintained, shall,
except for the inspection and maintenance requirements under subsection 13.29.080.6, be excluded from the requirements of these
rules so long as the water purveyor is assured that they will satisfactorily protect the public water system. Whenever the existing is
moved from the present location or requires more than minimum maintenance or when the water purveyor finds that the operation
or of this assembly constitutes a hazard to health, the unit shall be replaced by an approved backflow prevention assembly meeting
all local and state requirements.
6. It shall be the responsibility of the consumer at any premises where backflow prevention assemblies are installed to have
certified surveys; inspections, and operational tests made at least once per year at the consumer’s expense. In those instances
where the Public Water Purveyor deems the hazard to be great, he may require certified surveys/inspections and tests at a more
frequent interval. It shall be the duty of the purveyor to see that the tests are made according to the standards set forth by the State
Department of Environmental Quality, Division of Drinking Water.
7. All backflow prevention assemblies shall be inspected and tested within ten (10) working days of installation.
8. No backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed so as to create a safety hazard. (Example: Installed over and
electrical panel, steam pipes, boilers, or above ceiling level).
B Violation of this Policy:
A violation of this ordinance exists if there has not been any corrective action taken by the consumer within ten (10) days of the
written notification of the deficiencies as noted within the survey or test results. The water purveyor shall then deny or
immediately discontinue water service to the premises by providing a physical break in the service line until the customer has
corrected the condition(s) in conformance with all State and local regulations and statutes relating to plumbing, safe drinking
water suppliers, and this ordinance.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 9/571
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official
hard copy. In the case of any discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard
copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NO. 2020-03
CONSIDERATION OF AN ORDINANCE AMENDING MAPLETON CITY CODE SECTION 15.44 UPDATING THE
CITY’S FLOODPLAIN ORDINANCE
WHEREAS, MCC Section 15.44 outlines the City’s Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance; and
WHEREAS, the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) has adopted revised Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood
Boundary-Floodplain Maps, effective June 19, 2020; and
WHEREAS, the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) requires the City to adopt a “D Level Ordinance” along with
the Rate and Floodplain Maps if the City chooses to participate in the program; and
WHEREAS, Utah Code Unannotated 10-3-701 delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry; and
WHEREAS, the city of Mapleton City elects to comply with the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Act of
1968 (P.L. 90-488, as amended);
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED by the City Council of Mapleton, Utah, to amend Mapleton City Code
Section 15.44 as described in Exhibit “A”.
PASSED AND ORDERED PUBLISHED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF MAPLETON, UTAH,
This 6th Day of May, 2020.
________________________________
Dallas Hakes
Mayor
ATTEST:
___________________________
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 10/571
Camille Brown
City Recorder
Publication Date: May 12, 2020
Effective Date: May 20, 2020
Chapter 15.44
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION ORDINANCE
15.44.010: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION
15.44.020: FINDINGS OF FACT
15.44.030: PURPOSE:
15.44.040: METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES:
15.44.050: DEFINITIONS:
15.44.060: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
15.44.070: ADMINISTRATION:
15.44.080: PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION:
15.44.090: PENALTY:
15.44.010: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION
The Legislature of the State of Utah has in Utah Code Unannotated 10-3-701 delegated the responsibility
to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the City Council of Mapleton City Utah, does ordain as follows:
The city of Mapleton City elects to comply with the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (P.L. 90-488, as
amended). The National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) is a voluntary program administered by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA), a component of the U.S. Department of Homeland Security, and Mapleton City’s community
officials have elected to join the program, participate, and enforce this Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance and the requirements
and regulations of the NFIP. The NFIP, established in the aforesaid act, provides that areas of Mapleton City having a special flood
hazard be identified by FEMA, and that floodplain management measures be applied in such flood hazard areas. Furthermore,
Mapleton City may elect to administer the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance to areas not identified as Special Flood Hazard
Areas (SFHAs) by FEMA on the community’s effective Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), if the community has documentation
to support that there is an inherent risk of flooding in such areas.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 11/571
15.44.020: FINDINGS OF FACT
A. The flood hazard areas of Mapleton City are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health
and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood
protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
B. These flood loses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights
and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazards areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because
they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage.
15.44.030: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses
due to flood conditions to specific areas by provisions designed:
A. To protect human life and health;
B. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
C. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the
general public;
D. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets
and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;
F. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to
minimize future flood blight areas;
G. To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and
H. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazards assume responsibility for their action.
15.44.040: METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES:
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions for:
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which
result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the
time of initial construction;
C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or
channel floodwater;
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; and
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase
flood hazards in other areas.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 12/571
15.44:050: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give this chapter its most
reasonable application:
100-YEAR FLOOD: means a flood having a recurrence interval that has a 1-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded during
any given year (1-percent-annual-chance flood). The terms “100-hundred-year flood” and “1-percent-annual-chance flood” are
synonymous. The term does not imply that the flood will necessarily happen once every 100 hundred years. Mandatory flood
insurance requirements may apply.
100-YEAR FLOODPLAIN: means the area of land susceptible to being inundated due to the occurrence of a 1-percent-annualchance
flood.
500- YEAR FLOOD: means a flood having a recurrence interval that has a 0.2-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded
during any given year (0.2-percent-annual-chance flood). The term does not imply that the flood will necessarily happen once
every 500 years and mandatory flood insurance requirement generally does not apply.
500-YEAR FLOODPLAIN: means the area of land susceptible to being inundated due to the occurrence of a 0.2-percent-annualchance
flood.
ALLUVIAL FAN FLOODING: means flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or
similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active
processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths.
APEX: means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the
major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING: means a designated AO, AH, or VO zone on a
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one percent chance or greater annual
chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does
not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident.
Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent (1%) or
greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map
(FHBM). After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone A usually is refined into
Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1- 30, A99, VO, V1-30, VE or V.
BASE FLOOD: means the flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 13/571
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE):is the water surface elevation of the 1-percent-annual-chance flood event. It is the height in
relation to mean sea level expected to be reached by the waters of the base flood at pertinent points in the floodplains of coastal
and riverine areas. It is also the elevation shown on the FIRM and found in the accompanying Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for
Zones A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a 1-
percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year.
BASEMENT: means any area of the building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level)
on all sides.
CRITICAL FEATURE: means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection
system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be
compromised.
DEVELOPMENT: means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or
other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations located within the area of special
flood hazard or storage of equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING: means a non-basement building (i) built, in the case of a building in
Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, to have the top of the elevated floor, or in
the case of a building in Zones V1-30, VE, or V, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal
structure member of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means of pilings,
columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the floor of the water and (ii) adequately
anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the
magnitude of the base flood. In the case of Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D,
"elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation
perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of flood waters.
In the case of Zones V1-30, VE, or V, "elevated building" also includes a building otherwise
meeting the definition of "elevated building," even though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls if the
breakaway walls met the standards of Section 60.3(e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION: means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for
which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before
January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be
referred to as "existing structures."
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: means a manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which
the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities,
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 14/571
the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: means the preparation of additional
sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community. A FIRM that has been made available digitally is called a Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM).
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, water surface elevation of the base flood, as well as the Flood Boundary-
Floodway Map (if applicable), Flood Insurance Rate Map and supporting technical data.
FLOOD OR FLOODING: means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas
from:
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters and/or
B. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface water from any source.
FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD-PRONE AREA: means any land area susceptible to being
inundated by water from any source (see definition of flooding).
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT: means the operation of an overall program of corrective
and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency
preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS: means zoning ordinances, subdivision
regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain
ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police
power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which
provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM: means those physical structural works for which funds
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 15/571
have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically
to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas within a community subject to a
"special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system
typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized
flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
FLOOD PROOFING: means any combination of structural and non-structural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or
improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY (REGULATORY FLOODWAY): means the channel of a river or other
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE: means a use which cannot perform its intended
purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only
docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or
passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or
related manufacturing facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE: means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: means any structure that is:
A. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register;
B. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
C. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been
approved by the Secretary of Interior; or
D. Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:
by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or;
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 16/571
directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
LEVEE: means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow
of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.
LEVEE SYSTEM: means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and
associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated
in accordance with sound engineering practices.
LOWEST FLOOR: means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement).
An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access
or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor;
provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of the National Flood insurance
Program regulations.
MANUFACTURED HOME: means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is
designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL: means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum
(NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are
referenced.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for
which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or
after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which
the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management
regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 17/571
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or
after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: means a vehicle which is:
A. built on a single chassis;
B. 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections;
C. designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
D. designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.
START OF CONSTRUCTION - (for other than new construction or substantial improvements
under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348)), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building
permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction
of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work
beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor
does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE: means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as
well as a or manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent
of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the
cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of the improvement.
This includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does
not, however, include either:
A. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary; or
B. Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places., provided
that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure."
VARIANCE: is a grant of relief to a person from the requirement of this ordinance when
specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits
construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited by this ordinance. (For full
requirements see Section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.).
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 18/571
VIOLATION: means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with
the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without
the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in Section
60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such
time as that documentation is provided.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION: means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various
magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
15.44.060: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Lands To Which This Chapter Applies: This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of
Mapleton City, Utah.
B. Basis For Establishing The Areas Of Special Flood Hazard: The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study for Utah County,
dated June 19, 2020, with accompanying. Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood Boundary-Floodway Maps (FIRM and
FBFM) and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this ordinance.
C. Establishment of Development Permit. A Development Permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of
this ordinance.
D. Compliance: No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, or altered, or have its use changed without
full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations.
E. Abrogation And Greater Restrictions: This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements,
covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction
conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restriction shall prevail.
F. Interpretation: In the interpretation of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
1. Considered as minimum requirements;
2. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
3. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
G. Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability: The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the
areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of Mapleton City, any officer or employee thereof, or damages that result from reliance on
this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
15.44.070: ADMINISTRATION:
A. The Community Development Director is hereby appointed the Floodplain Administrator to administer and implement the
provisions of this ordinance and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (National Flood Insurance Program Regulations)
pertaining to floodplain management.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 19/571
B. Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
1. Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this ordinance.
2. Review permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites, including the placement of manufactured homes,
will be reasonably safe from flooding.
Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this ordinance.
4. Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those Federal,
State or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of
1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required.
5. Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for
example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the Floodplain
Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation.
6. Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the State Coordinating Agency prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
7. Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained.
8. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with subsection 15.44.060.B, the Floodplain
Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a
Federal, State or other source, in order to administer the provisions of Section 15.44.080.
9. When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the Floodplain Administrator must require that no new
construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and
AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development,
when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of
the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community.
10. Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a
community may approve certain development in Zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community's FIRM which increases the
water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot, provided that the community first applies for a conditional
FIRM revision through FEMA (Conditional Letter of Map Revision).
C. Permit Procedures: Application for a Development Permit shall be presented to the Floodplain Administrator on forms
furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location,
dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of
manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following
information is required:
Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved
structures;
Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed;
A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the
floodproofing criteria of subsection 15.44.080.B.2;
Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed
development.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 20/571
Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with subsection 15.44.070.B.1.
D. Approval or Denial of a Development Permit by the Floodplain Administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this
ordinance and the following relevant factors:
The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and
bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems;
The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site;
The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area.
E. Variance Procedures:
The City Council is established as the appeal authority and shall hear and render judgement on requests for variances from the
requirements of this ordinance.
The City Council shall hear and render judgement on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement,
decision, or determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this ordinance.
Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the City Council may appeal such decision in the courts of competent
jurisdiction.
The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency upon request.
Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this
ordinance.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 21/571
Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant
factors in subsection 15.44.070.D.2 have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.
Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this ordinance, the City Council may attach such conditions to the
granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this ordinance (Section 15.44.030).
Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge
would result.
Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the varianceis the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
. Prerequisites for granting variances:
a) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood
hazard, to afford relief.
b) Variances shall only be issued upon:
1) showing a good and sufficient cause;
2) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and
3) a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public
safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with
existing local laws or ordinances.
c) Any application to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be
built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be
commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
. Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development
necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
a) the criteria outlined in subsection 15.44.070.D.1-9 are met, and
b) the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and
create no additional threats to public safety.
15.44.080: PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION:
A. General Standards: In all areas of special flood hazards, the following standards are required for all new construction and
substantial improvements:
All new construction and substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement of the structure and capable of resisting the hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads, including the
effects of buoyancy.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 22/571
All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage;
All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
system;
New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
system and discharge from the systems into flood waters; and,
On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
B. Specific Standards: In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in (i)
subsection 15.44.060.B (ii) subsection 15.44.070.B, or (iii) subsection 15.44.080.C of this chapter the following standards are
required:
1. Residential Construction: New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or
land surveyor shall submit a certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standard of this subsection as
proposed in subsection 15.44.070.C., is satisfied.
2. Nonresidential Construction: New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other
nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to the level of the base flood level
or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or
architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that
the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection.
A record of such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures
are floodproofed shall be maintained by the Floodplain Administrator.
3. Enclosures: New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are
usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to
flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry
and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
a) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
area subject to flooding shall be provided.
b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.
c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
4. Manufactured Homes:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 23/571
a) Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within Zone A on a community's FHBM or FIRM shall be
installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement,
manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of
anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement
is in addition to applicable State and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
b) Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the
community's FIRM on sites (i) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, (ii) in a new manufactured home
park or subdivision, (iii) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or (iv) in an
existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage"
as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is
elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system
to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
c) Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home
park or subdivision with Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of
subsection 15.44.080.B.4 be elevated so that either:
1) the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation, or
2) the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least
equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
5. Recreational Vehicles - Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the
community's FIRM either:
a) be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days,
b) be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or
c) meet the permit requirements of subsection 15.44.070.C and the elevation and anchoring requirements for
"manufactured homes" in subsection 15.44.080.B.4 of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it
is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices
and has no permanently attached additions.
C. Standards for Subdivision Proposals:
All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with this
ordinance.
All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall
meet Development Permit requirements subsection 15.44.060.C, subsection 15.44.070.C; and the provisions of Section
15.44.080 of this ordinance.
Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development including the placement
of manufactured home parks and subdivisions with more than 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided
pursuant to subsection 15.44.060.B or subsection 15.44.070.B of this ordinance.
All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage
provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 24/571
All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
D. Standards for Areas of Shallow Flooding (AO/AH Zones): Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in
subsection 15.44.060.B, are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base
flood depths of 1 to 3 feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and
where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following
provisions apply:
Within Zone AO, all new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's
FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified).
Within Zone AO, all new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential structures;
a) have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth
number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified), or;
b) together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy.
A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standards of
subsection 15.44.080.B are satisfied.
Require within Zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide flood waters around and away
from proposed structures.
F. Floodways: Located within areas of special flood hazard established in subsection 15.44.060.B., are areas designated as
floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential
projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply:
Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the
adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance
with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the
community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
If subsection 15.44.080.E.1. above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all
applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of subsection 15.44.080.
Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Regulations, a community may
permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations,
provided that the community first applies for a conditional FIRM and floodway revision through FEMA.
15.090: PENALTY:
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms
of this ordinance and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this ordinance by failure to comply with any of its
requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a class
C misdemeanor, as defined by chapter 1.16 of this code. Any person who violates this ordinance or fails to comply with any of its
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 25/571
requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than $1,000.00 or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both, for
each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent
Mapleton City from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official
hard copy. In the case of any discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard
copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NO. 2020-06
CONSIDERATION OF AN ORDINANCE AMENDING MAPLETON CITY CODE SECTION 6.04.290 RELATED TO
THE SLAUGHTER OF ANIMALS WITHIN THE CITY LIMITS
WHEREAS, Mapleton City Code (MCC) Title 6 establishes regulations regarding animals within the City; and
WHEREAS, MCC Title 18 establishes requirements regarding animal rights on properties within the City; and
WHEREAS, the proposed ordinance would establish criteria for the slaughtering of an animal within the City, and is
intended to promote the general welfare of the community.
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED by the City Council of Mapleton, Utah, to amend Mapleton City Code
Section 6.04.290 as described in Exhibit “A”.
PASSED AND ORDERED PUBLISHED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF MAPLETON, UTAH,
This 15th Day of July, 2020.
________________________________
Dallas Hakes
Mayor
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 26/571
ATTEST:
___________________________
Camille Brown
City Recorder
Publication Date: July 17, 2020
Effective Date: August 6, 2020
Exhibit “A”
Proposed Ordinance
MCC Chapter 6.04.290
The slaughter of any animal within Mapleton City is prohibited, except:
1. In the case of animals listed under the definition of “animal unit” in section 18.08.010 of this code for personal consumption on
a lot or parcel zoned for animal rights as identified in Title 18 of this code;
2. In the case of sick or injured livestock on a lot or parcel zoned for animal rights as identified in Title 18 of this code;
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 27/571
3. In the case of an animal killed on a lot or parcel with a legal permit from an appropriate state agency to take wild animals that
are causing damage to agriculture or greenbelt property; or
4. In the case of chickens on properties without animal rights in accordance with section 18.84.240.A.6 of this code.
5. The slaughter of any animal under this section shall occur in an enclosed building or in a location that is at least one hundred
(100) feet from a neighboring residential structure and/or public right-of-way.
6. The slaughter of any animals allowed under this section shall comply with the cleanliness standard adopted in section 8.04.100
of this code.
PREFACE
This City Code of Mapleton City, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to and including Ordinance 2019-05,
passed April 17, 2019. Ordinances of the City adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this City Code
to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City office in order to ascertain whether any
particular provision of the Code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
Title 1
ADMINISTRATIVE
Chapter 1.01
TITLE; CODE ADOPTION; REPEALER; AMENDMENTS;
SEVERABILITY
1.01.010: TITLE OF CODE1:
The general ordinances of Mapleton City as revised and set forth herein shall be designated and referred to as the
MAPLETON CITY MUNICIPAL CODE - 1986 and may be so cited. The code may also be cited as the MAPLETON
CITY CODE. Reference by number to any section of this code shall refer not only to that section but also to the
penalty clause which is applicable thereto. (1986 Code)
1.01.020: ADOPTION OF CODE; EFFECTIVE DATE:
This code shall be adopted by an ordinance enacted in accordance with the applicable provisions of section 10-3-701
Utah Code Annotated, as amended, and shall become effective at the time set forth in the enacting ordinance. (1986
Code)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 28/571
1.01.030: REPEAL OF PRIOR CODE AND SUBSEQUENT GENERAL ORDINANCES;
EXCEPTIONS:
A. The "City Code of Mapleton City, Utah", 1971 edition, all subsequent amendments thereto and all other ordinances
of the city of a general and permanent character enacted prior to the adoption of this code are hereby repealed
except those ordinances which are by the next subsection or other reference contained herein expressly saved
from repeal2.
B. All existing ordinances of the city which are contractual in character, including franchises, grants, and dedications;
special tax ordinances; ordinances relating to bond issues; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations;
ordinances approving development projects; ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets or other public
places; improvement districts ordinances; ordinances relating to election; ordinances setting the salaries of elected
and statutory officers of the city and all other ordinances of a special rather than a general character, are hereby
expressly saved from repeal and shall remain in full force and effect. (1986 Code)
1.01.040: CONTINUATION OF SIMILAR PROVISIONS3:
Insofar as any provision of this code is the same in substance and effect as a provision in a previously existing general
ordinance, such provision shall be construed as a continuation of the previously existing provision and not a new
enactment. (1986 Code)
1.01.050: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
From and after the effective date of this code, all ordinances of general and permanent character enacted by the city
shall be enacted as amendments or additions to this code. All such ordinances shall be prepared in a format
consistent with this code and shall be adopted in accordance with the applicable provisions of this code and state law.
(1986 Code)
1.01.060: PROVISIONS SEVERABLE:
Each section and each provision or requirement of any section, subsection or paragraph of this code shall be
considered severable, and the invalidity of any section or any part of any section shall not affect the validity or
enforceability of any other section or part thereof. (1986 Code)
Chapter 1.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1.04.010: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
A. Whenever any word in any section of this code importing the plural number is used in describing or referring to any
matters, parties, or persons, any single matter, party, or person shall be deemed to be included, although
distributive words may not have been used.
B. When any subject matter, party or person is referred to in this code by words importing the singular number only, or
the masculine gender, several matters, parties, or persons and females as well as males and bodies corporate
shall be deemed to be included; provided, that these rules of construction shall not be applied to any section of this
code which contains any express provision excluding such construction or where the subject matter or content may
be repugnant thereto. (1986 Code)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 29/571
1.04.020: INTERPRETATIONS:
In the determination of the provisions of each section of this code the following rules shall be observed:
A. Intent To Defraud: Whenever an intent to defraud is required in order to constitute an offense, it shall be sufficient if
an intent appears to defraud any person.
B. Liability Of Employers And Agents: When the provisions of any section of this code prohibit the commission of an
act, not only the person actually doing the prohibited act or omitting to perform the directed act, but also the
employer and all other persons concerned with or in aiding or abetting the said person, shall be guilty of the
offense described and liable to the penalty set forth. (1986 Code)
1.04.030: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
A. No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance, whether such former ordinance is
expressly repealed or not, as to any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any
penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising under the former ordinance, or in
any way whatever to affect any such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes effect, save only that
the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment is mitigated by any provision of a new ordinance, such
provisions may be, by the consent of the party affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new
ordinance takes effect.
B. This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the
ordinance making any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
C. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any
general ordinance of the city herein repealed; or as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty
accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the
city under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the adoption of this code. (1986 Code)
1.04.040: CONFLICT:
Whenever anything in these ordinances contained shall be or become in conflict with any provision or provisions of the
laws of the state of Utah, such provision of these ordinances shall be deemed to be repealed and to be of no effect for
such period as such law so in conflict therewith shall remain in effect, and such law shall govern. (1986 Code)
1.04.050: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code they shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section unless the content makes such meaning repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another.
BRIBE: Signifies any money, goods, right in action, property, things of value or advantage, present or prospective, or
any promise or undertaking to give any, asked, given, or accepted, with a corrupt intent to influence unlawfully the
person to whom it is given in his action, vote or opinion in any public or official capacity.
CITY: Mapleton City.
CODE: Unless otherwise specifically stated, means this code.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 30/571
CORRUPTLY: Imports a wrongful design to acquire or cause some pecuniary or other advantage to the person guilty
of the act or omission referred to, or to some other person.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this code to a city employee by title only, this shall be construed as
though followed by the words "of Mapleton City".
FEE: A sum of money charged by the city for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
HIGHWAY AND ROAD: Include public bridges and may be held equivalent to the words "county way", "county road",
"common road", and "state road".
INTENT OR INTENTION: Is manifested by the circumstances connected with the offense and the sound mind and
discretion of the accused. All persons are of sound mind who are neither idiots, nor lunatics, nor affected with insanity.
KNOWINGLY: Imports only a knowledge that the facts exist which brings the act or omission within the provisions of
this code. It does not require any knowledge of the unlawfulness of such act or omission.
LAND, REAL ESTATE AND REAL PROPERTY: Include lands, tenements, hereditament, water rights, possessory
rights and claims.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
MALICE AND MALICIOUSLY: Import a wish to vex, annoy, or injure another person, or an intent to do a wrongful act,
established either by proof or by presumption of law.
MISDEMEANOR: Any offense deemed a violation of the provisions of this code which is a lesser offense than a felony
as defined by state law.
MONTH: Calendar month unless otherwise expressed, and "year" or the abbreviation "A.D." is equivalent to the
expression "year of our Lord".
NEGLIGENT, NEGLECT, NEGLIGENCE AND NEGLIGENTLY: Imports a want of such attention to the nature or
probable consequences of the act or omission as a prudent man ordinarily bestows in acting in his own concern.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the inhabitants of the city; or any act or thing
repugnant to, or creating a hazard to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of another person or to the
community.
OATH/SWEAR: Oath includes "affirmation", and "swear" includes "affirm". Every mode of oral statement under oath or
affirmation is embraced in the term "certify" and every written one in the term "depose".
OCCUPANT: Applied to a building or land, includes any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or
land whether alone or with others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any act required by the provisions of this
code.
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this code to a city officer by title only, this shall be construed as though
followed by the words "Mapleton City", and includes officers and boards in charge of departments and the members of
such boards.
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: Applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee
of the whole or of a part of such building or land.
PERSON: Includes the singular and the plural and shall also mean and include any person, firm, corporation,
association, partnership or any other form of association or organization.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Includes every description of money, goods, chattels, effects, evidence of rights in action
and all written instruments by which any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged,
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 31/571
transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or interest therein.
PROPERTY: Includes both real and personal property, unless the context otherwise clearly provides.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise,
articles or things in small quantities direct to the consumer.
SIGNATURE: Includes any name, mark or sign written with the intent to authenticate any instrument or writing.
STREET: Includes alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public squares, public places and sidewalks.
TENANT: Applied to a building or land, includes any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or
land whether alone or with others.
TIME: When any time is specified in this code, it means standard time, or daylight saving time when applicable, and
the words "midnight" or "noon" shall be taken to be midnight or noon standard time, or daylight saving time when
applicable.
WHOLESALER AND WHOLESALE DEALER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to
the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in quantity to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WILFULLY: When applied to the intent with which an act is done or omitted, implies simply a purpose or willingness to
commit the act or make the omission referred to. It does not require any intent to violate law, or to injure another, or to
acquire an advantage.
WRITING: Includes printing, writing and typewriting. (1986 Code)
Chapter 1.08
CITY LIMITS
1.08.010: CORPORATE LIMITS DESIGNATED:
The corporate limits of the city shall be as provided on the official map of the city on file in the office of the clerk. (1986
Code)
Chapter 1.12
CITY SEAL
1.12.010: DESCRIPTION:
The seal of Mapleton City shall be uniformly one and seven-eighths inches (17/8") in diameter, the impression of which
represents a maple leaf within the inner circle and the words "Corporate Seal of Mapleton, Utah County, State of
Utah", and two (2) small stars in the outer circle thereof. (1986 Code)
Chapter 1.16
PENALTY
1.16.010: GENERAL PENALTY1:
For the purpose of enforcing obedience to the provisions of this code or any duly enacted ordinance of the city, the city
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 32/571
council hereby establishes three (3) classifications of penalty which may be imposed for violation of such code or
ordinances and prescribes the fines and terms of imprisonment applicable to each, as follows:
A. Class B Misdemeanor: A fine up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by a term of imprisonment up to six (6)
months, or by both such fine or imprisonment.
B. Class C Misdemeanor: A fine up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by a term of imprisonment up to ninety (90)
days, or by both such fine or imprisonment.
C. Infraction: A fine up to five hundred dollars ($500.00), but no term of imprisonment.
Any offense designated a misdemeanor without specification as to class shall be a class B misdemeanor.
In any case where a person commits any act which is made unlawful or prohibited by this code, and no other
specific penalty is prescribed, such person shall be deemed guilty of a class B misdemeanor, provided, that where
the text of this code specifically provides a different penalty, the applicable penalty for violation of such provision
shall be as stated therein. (1986 Code)
1.16.020: DEFAULT; LABOR:
Any person in default of payment of any fine or fine and costs may be required to work for the city at such labor as his
strength will permit, not exceeding eight (8) hours in each working day, nor shall any person be required to work on
Sunday. (1986 Code)
1.16.030: LICENSE:
When a person is convicted of a violation of any section of this code any license previously issued to him by the city,
relating to the offense for which he has been convicted, may be revoked by the court or by the governing body. (1986
Code)
1.16.040: APPLICABILITY:
A. When no other specific penalty is prescribed, the penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every
section of this code the same as though it were a part of each and every separate section. Any person convicted of
a violation of any section of this code where any duty is prescribed or obligation imposed, or where any act which
is of a continuing nature or declared to be unlawful, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed upon each day such duty or obligation remains unperformed or such act continues,
unless otherwise specifically provided in this code.
B. In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this code
the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had against the
same person for the same offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a
recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
C. Whenever the doing or any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this
code and there is no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provision of this chapter shall apply
and a separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a breach or violation occurs
or continues. (1986 Code)
1.16.050: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 33/571
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee shall be so construed as to make such
officer or employee liable for any fine or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of the
governing body to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the
section creating the duty. (1986 Code)
Chapter 1.20
ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS
1.20.010: ORDINANCES:
A. Legislative Power To Be Exercised By Ordinance1: Except as otherwise specifically provided, the city council shall
exercise its legislative powers through ordinances.
B. Form Of Ordinances2: All ordinances shall contain and be in substantially the following order and form:
1. A number.
2. A title which indicates the nature of the subject matter of the ordinance.
3. A preamble which states the need or reason for the ordinance.
4. An ordaining clause which states "Be it Ordained by the City Council of Mapleton City, Utah".
5. The body or subject of the ordinance, prepared in a manner consistent with the form and outline of this code.
6. When applicable, a statement indicating the penalty for violation of the ordinance or a reference that the penalty
is covered by section 1.16.010 of this title prescribing the fines and terms of imprisonment for violation of a
municipal ordinance.
7. When intended for inclusion as an addition or amendment to this code, a statement authorizing the city recorder
to insert replacement pages containing the text of the amending ordinance in the "Official" copies of this code.
8. A statement indicating the effective date of the ordinance.
9. A line for the signature of the mayor or acting mayor, and
10. A place for the city recorder to attest the ordinance and fix the seal of the city.
Notwithstanding the above, no ordinance shall be void or unlawful by reason of its failure to conform to the
provisions of subsection B1, B2, B3, B4 or B7 of this section.
C. Adoption Of Ordinances3: The ordinances shall be adopted by roll call vote and shall be recorded. The minimum
number of yes votes required to pass any ordinances shall never be less than three (3). Every ordinance shall be
in writing before the vote is taken.
D. Recording, Numbering And Certification Of Ordinances4: The city recorder shall record, in a book used exclusively
for that purpose, all ordinances passed by the city council. The recorder shall give each ordinance a number if the
city council has not already done so. Immediately following each ordinance the recorder shall make or cause to be
made a certificate stating the date of passage and the date of publication or posting, as required by law. The record
and memorandum, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie evidence of the contents, passage, and
publication or posting of the ordinance.
E. Ordinances To Be Published Or Posted; Adoption Of Published Codes By Reference Permitted5: All ordinances,
before taking effect, shall be deposited in the office of the city recorder and a short summary thereof published at
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 34/571
least once in a newspaper published within the city or if there is no newspaper published therein, by posting
complete copies in three (3) public places within the city.
Any ordinance, code, or book relating to building or safety standards, municipal functions, administration, control or
regulations, may be adopted and shall take effect without further publication or posting, if reference is made to the
code or book and at least three (3) copies thereof have been filed for use and examination by the public in the
officers of the city recorder prior to the adoption of the ordinance by the city council. Provisions of state law may be
similarly adopted by reference. Any exception or other modification to any code, book or state law adopted by
reference or any changes necessary to conform such code, book or state law with the city's ordinances shall be
noted in the ordinance adopting such code, book or state law.
The ordinance which adopts such code, book or state law shall be published in the manner provided in this section
and by state law.
F. Effective Date Of Ordinances6: Ordinances shall become effective twenty (20) days after publication or posting or
thirty (30) days after final passage by the city council, whichever is more remote from the date of final passage, but
ordinances may become effective at an earlier or later date after publication or posting if so provided in the
ordinance. (1986 Code)
1.20.020: RESOLUTIONS:
A. Purpose Of Resolutions7: Unless otherwise required by law, the city council may exercise all administrative powers
by resolution including, but not limited to: 1) establishing water and sewer rates; 2) charges for garbage collection
and fees charged for municipal services; 3) establishing personnel policies and guidelines; 4) regulating the use
and operation of municipal property. Punishment, fines or forfeitures may not be imposed by resolution.
B. Form Of Resolution8: Any resolution passed by the city council shall be in a form and contain sections substantially
similar to that prescribed for ordinances.
C. Adoption, Recording: All resolutions shall be adopted and recorded in the manner prescribed for ordinances as set
forth under subsection 1.20.010C of this chapter. Every resolution shall be in writing before the vote is taken9.
D. Publication And Effective Date: Resolutions may become effective without publication or posting and may take
effect on passage or at a later date as the city council may determine, but resolutions may not become effective
more than three (3) months from the date of passage10. (1986 Code)
Chapter 1.30
FORM OF GOVERNMENT
1.30.010: POWERS VESTED IN COUNCIL:
A. In accordance with Utah Code title 10, chapter 3b, part 3 six member council form of municipal government,
Mapleton City municipal government shall operate under the six (6) member council form of government.
B. The powers of the municipal government are vested in a council consisting of six (6) members, one of which is the
mayor.
C. The mayor and council are and shall be the legislative and governing body of the city and shall:
1. Exercise, and discharge all of the rights, powers, privileges and authority conferred by law upon this city;
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 35/571
2. Perform all duties required of them by law;
3. Perform other acts and take other measures, not inconsistent with law, as may be necessary for the efficient
governance of this city. (Ord. 2008-15, 8-21-2008)
Title 2
OFFICERS AND PERSONNEL
Chapter 2.04
MAYOR
2.04.010: MAYOR AND MAYOR PRO TEMPORE:
A. The mayor:
1. Is, except as provided in subsection A2 of this section, a nonvoting member of the council;
2. Votes as a voting member of the council:
a. On each matter for which there is a tie vote of the other council members present at a council meeting; or
b. When the council is voting on:
(1) Whether to appoint or dismiss a municipal manager; or
(2) An ordinance that enlarges or restricts the mayor's powers, duties, or functions;
3. Is the chair of the council and presides at all council meetings;
4. Exercises ceremonial functions for the municipality;
5. May not veto an ordinance, tax levy, or appropriation passed by the council;
6. Except as modified by ordinance under subsection 2.08.010B of this title, has the powers and duties described
in section 2.04.020 of this chapter; and
7. May, within budget constraints, appoint one or more administrative assistants to the mayor.
B. 1. If the mayor is absent or unable or refuses to act, the council may elect a member of the council as mayor pro
tempore, to:
a. Preside at a council meeting; and
b. Perform, during the mayor's absence, disability, or refusal to act, the duties and functions of mayor.
2. The municipal clerk or recorder shall enter in the minutes of the council meeting the election of a council
member as mayor pro tempore under subsection B1 of this section. (Ord. 2008-15, 8-21-2008)
2.04.020: POWERS AND DUTIES:
In accordance with Utah code section 10-3b-104, the mayor:
A. Is the chief executive officer of the municipality to whom all employees of the municipality report;
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 36/571
B. Shall:
1. Keep the peace and enforce the laws of the municipality;
2. Ensure that all applicable statutes and municipal ordinances and resolutions are faithfully executed and
observed;
3. If the mayor remits a fine or forfeiture under subsection C2 of this section, report the remittance to the council at
the council's next meeting after the remittance;
4. Perform all duties prescribed by statute or municipal ordinance or resolution;
5. Report to the council the condition and needs of the municipality;
6. Provide a supportive and professional environment to allow the city administrator to perform the city
administrator's duties under section 2.14.110 of this title; and
7. Report to the council any release granted under subsection C4 of this section; and
C. May:
1. Recommend for council consideration any measure that the mayor considers to be in the best interests of the
municipality;
2. Remit fines and forfeitures;
3. If necessary, call on residents of the municipality over the age of twenty one (21) years to assist in enforcing the
laws of the state and ordinances of the municipality;
4. Release a person imprisoned for a violation of a municipal ordinance;
5. With the council's advice and consent:
a. Assign or appoint a member of the council to administer one or more departments of the municipality; and
b. Appoint a person to fill:
(1) A municipal office; or
(2) A vacancy on a commission or committee of the municipality; and
6. At any reasonable time, examine and inspect the official books, papers, records, or documents of:
a. The municipality; or
b. Any officer, employee, or agency of the municipality. (Ord. 2008-15, 8-21-2008)
Chapter 2.08
CITY COUNCIL
2.08.010: GOVERNING BODY; THE CITY COUNCIL:
A. The council:
1. Exercises any executive or administrative power and performs or supervises the performance of any executive
or administrative duty or function that:
a. Has not been given to the mayor under section 2.04.020 of this title; or
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 37/571
b. Has been given to the mayor under section 2.04.020 of this title but is removed from the mayor under
subsection A2a(1) of this section;
2. May:
a. Subject to subsections A3 and B of this section, adopt an ordinance:
(1) Removing from the mayor any power, duty, or function of the mayor under section 2.04.020 of this title; or
(2) Reinstating to the mayor any power, duty, or function previously removed under subsection A2a(1) of this
section;
b. Adopt an ordinance delegating to the mayor any executive or administrative power, duty, or function that the
council has under subsection A1 of this section;
c. Subject to subsection 2.04.010A2b(1) of this title:
(1) Appoint a manager to perform executive and administrative duties or functions that the council by
ordinance delegates to the manager, subject to subsection A3 of this section; and
(2) Dismiss a manager appointed under subsection A2c(1) of this section; and
d. Assign any or all council members, including the mayor, to supervise or serve as a council liaison to one or
more administrative departments, committees, subcommittees, or advisory groups of the municipality; and
3. May not remove from the mayor or delegate to a manager appointed by the council:
a. Any of the mayor's legislative or judicial powers or ceremonial functions;
b. The mayor's position as chair of the council; or
c. Any ex officio position that the mayor holds.
4. Shall perform all duties prescribed by the state statute or by the provisions of this code, and shall perform other
acts and take other measures, not inconsistent with law, as is necessary for the efficient government of the city;
and
5. May by resolution prescribe additional duties, powers and responsibilities for any elected or appointed official
which are not prohibited by any specific statute, except that the:
a. Mayor may not serve as recorder or treasurer;
b. Recorder may not serve as treasurer; and
c. Justice of the peace may not hold any other municipal office or position in the city.
B. Adopting an ordinance under subsection A2a of this section removing from or reinstating to the mayor a power,
duty, or function provided for in section 2.04.020 of this title requires the affirmative vote of:
1. The mayor and a majority of all other council members; or
2. All council members except the mayor. (Ord. 2008-15, 8-21-2008)
2.08.015: POWERS AND DUTIES:
In accordance with Utah code section 10-3b-105, the council:
A. Is the legislative body of the municipality and exercises the legislative powers and performs the legislative duties
and functions of the municipality;
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 38/571
B. May:
1. Adopt rules and regulations, not inconsistent with statute, for the efficient administration, organization, operation,
conduct, and business of the municipality;
2. Prescribe by resolution additional duties, powers, and responsibilities for any elected or appointed municipal
official, unless prohibited by statute;
3. Require by ordinance that any or all appointed officers reside in the municipality;
4. Create any office that the council considers necessary for the government of the municipality;
5. Provide for filling a vacancy in an elective or appointive office;
6. Take any action allowed under Utah code section 10-8-84; and
7. Perform any function specifically provided for by statute or necessarily implied by law;
C. Shall set the overall policy direction for the city by:
1. The adoption and oversight of the city's annual budget;
2. The adoption and amendment of city ordinances;
3. Setting city policies;
4. Providing advice and consent on appointments made by the mayor; and
5. Providing advice and consent on the removal or dismissal of appointed officers and department heads; (Ord.
2008-15, 8-21-2008)
D. Shall hear and render decisions on appeals of decisions of the planning commission;
E. Shall have right of review.
1. Upon the written request of three (3) members of the city council or two (2) members of the city council and the
mayor, the city council shall review any final decision of the planning commission. Requests made pursuant to
this section must be filed with the city recorder within ten (10) business days following the date of final action by
the planning commission.
2. Upon the written request of three (3) members of the city council or two (2) members of the city council and the
mayor, for council review of a decision of the planning commission, the city recorder shall set the date on which
the council will hold a hearing. All appeals shall be set for the next regular city council meeting, unless
insufficient time exists for public notice as established by state code. At the time of city council review of the
matter, the council may uphold the decision of the commission, amend the decision and/or conditions attached to
the decision, overturn the decision, or remand the matter back to planning commission for further consideration.
(Ord. 2013-04, 2-19-2013, eff. 4-1-2013)
2.08.020: REGULAR MEETINGS; MINIMUM VOTE REQUIRED:
A. The city council shall hold its regular meetings at least monthly. The starting time for each regular meeting is seven
o'clock (7:00) P.M.
B. An action of the council is not official or of any effect unless the action is taken with a quorum of its members
present.
C. The minimum number of yes votes required to pass any ordinance or resolution, or to take any action by the
council, unless otherwise prescribed by law, is three (3), a majority of all voting members of the council, without
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 39/571
considering any vacancy in the council.
D. Any ordinance, resolution, or motion of the council having fewer favorable votes than required in this section is
defeated and invalid.
E. A majority of the council, regardless of number, may fill any vacancy in the council.
F. The consent or concurrence of three (3) or more members is required to confirm an appointment or concur in the
removal or dismissal of an appointed officer or department head. (Ord. 2008-15, 8-21-2008)
2.08.030: SPECIAL MEETINGS:
A. 1. In accordance with Utah Code Annotated, section 10-3-502, the mayor or two (2) council members may order the
convening of a special meeting of the council.
2. Each order convening a special meeting of the council shall:
a. Be entered in the minutes of the council; and
b. Provide at least three (3) hours' notice of the special meeting.
3. The municipal recorder or clerk shall serve notice of the special meeting on each council member who did not
sign the order by delivering the notice personally or by leaving it at the member's usual place of abode.
4. The personal appearance by a council member at a special meeting of the council constitutes a waiver of the
notice required under subsection A3 of this section.
B. The council may not reconsider or rescind an action of the council at a special meeting, unless there is present at
the special meeting at least the number of council members as were present when action was taken.
C. The provisions of subsection 2.08.020C of this chapter apply to a special meeting. (Ord. 2008-15, 8-21-2008)
2.08.040: QUORUM DEFINED; ATTENDANCE:
A. The number of council members necessary to constitute a quorum is three (3), excluding the mayor, but a smaller
number of members may:
1. Adjourn a meeting of the council if a quorum is not present;
2. Compel the attendance of its own members; and
3. Provide penalties as it deems necessary for the failure to comply with an order to attend a council meeting.
B. A council member may be fined if:
1. The member refuses to attend when notified by proper authority that the member's presence is necessary to
form a quorum; or
2. The member leaves a council meeting when in session without the consent of the council, when leaving would
break the quorum. (Ord. 2008-15, 8-21-2008)
2.08.050: RULES; EXPULSION OF MEMBERS:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 40/571
A. The council may establish its own rules of procedures for the proper conduct of its meetings.
B. The council may fine or expel any member for disorderly conduct on a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the members of the
council. (Ord. 2008-15, 8-21-2008)
2.08.060: VACANCIES:
If a vacancy occurs in the office of mayor or a member of the city council, the city council shall appoint a person to fill
the vacancy in accordance with Utah code section 20A-1-510. (Ord. 2008-15, 8-21-2008)
2.08.070: ADDITIONAL DUTIES:
Salary increases for additional duties shall be authorized as set forth and provided in section 10-3-818 et seq., Utah
Code Annotated, 1953, as amended. (Ord. 2008-15, 8-21-2008)
Chapter 2.12
OFFICERS GENERALLY
2.12.010: ELECTIVE OFFICERS:
The municipal government of the city is vested in a mayor and council, to be composed of five (5) councilmen, to be
elected at large.
A. Candidates For Elective Office:
1. Qualifications: Candidates for any municipal office shall meet the following qualifications:
a. Candidates shall be registered voters in the municipality.
b. Candidates shall be U.S. citizens at the time of filing.
c. Candidates shall be residents of Mapleton City. Residency can be established by:
(1) Residing in Mapleton City for the twelve (12) consecutive months immediately before the date of the
election; or
(2) If the candidate resides in an area recently annexed into the city of Mapleton City, the candidate must have
resided in the annexed area or the city for twelve (12) months.
d. Pursuant to Utah constitution article IV, section 6, any mentally incompetent person, any person convicted of a
felony, or any person convicted of treason or a crime against the elective franchise may not hold office in this
state until the right to vote or hold elective office is restored as provided by statute.
e. Candidates employed by the city shall terminate their city employment before being sworn in, if elected.
2. Filing For Elective Office And Filing Fees:
a. Declaration Of Candidacy: Each person seeking to become a candidate for a municipal office shall file a
declaration of candidacy in person with the city recorder and pay a thirty five dollar ($35.00) (nonrefundable)
filing fee during office hours and not later than five o'clock (5:00) P.M. between July 15 and August 15 of any
odd numbered year.
b. Nominating Petition: Any resident of a municipality may nominate a candidate for a municipal office by filing a
nomination petition with the city recorder and by paying a thirty five dollar ($35.00) (nonrefundable) filing fee
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 41/571
during office hours, but not later than five o'clock (5:00) P.M. between July 15 and August 15 of any odd
numbered year.
c. Exception For Deadline: When August 15 is a Saturday or Sunday, the filing period shall be extended until five
o'clock (5:00) P.M. on the following Monday.
d. Write In Candidate: Any person wishing to become a valid write in candidate shall file a declaration of
candidacy with the city recorder and by paying a thirty five dollar ($35.00) (nonrefundable) filing fee not later
than fourteen (14) days before the municipal general election. (Ord. 2005-07, 6-15-2005, eff. 6-15-2005)
2.12.015: MUNICIPAL CAMPAIGN FINANCE DISCLOSURE:
A. Purpose And Intent: The purpose of this section is to comply with section 10-3-208 of the Utah Code Annotated and
to establish campaign financial disclosure requirements for candidates for elective office in Mapleton City.
B. Definitions:
CANDIDATE: Any person who files a declaration of candidacy for an elective office of the city, or is nominated by a
committee or party, or received contributions or made expenditures or consents to another person receiving
contributions or making expenditures with a view to bringing about such a person's nomination or election to such
office; or causes on his behalf any written material or advertisement to be printed, published, broadcast, distributed
or disseminated which indicates an intention to seek such an office.
CONTRIBUTION: Monetary and nonmonetary contributions such as in-kind contributions and contributions of
tangible things but shall not include personal services provided without compensation by individuals volunteering
their time on behalf of a candidate.
EXPENDITURE: A purchase, payment distribution, loan, advance, deposit or gift of money or anything of value
made for the purpose of influencing the nomination or election of a candidate.
MUNICIPAL GENERAL ELECTION: The election held in municipalities on the Tuesday after the first Monday in
November of each odd numbered year.
MUNICIPAL PRIMARY ELECTION: The election held in municipalities on the Tuesday after the first Monday in
October before the municipal general election.
C. Filing A Declaration Of Candidacy: The city shall provide a copy of this section to every candidate at the time the
candidate files a declaration of candidacy with the city.
D. Reporting And Time Of Filing:
1. The city recorder shall, at the time the candidate for municipal office files a declaration of candidacy and again
fourteen (14) days before each municipal general election, notify the candidate in writing of:
a. The provisions of this section governing the disclosure of campaign contributions and expenditures;
b. The dates when the candidate's campaign finance statement is required to be filed; and
c. The penalties that apply for failure to file a timely campaign statement, including the statutory provision that
requires removal of the candidate's name from the ballot for failure to file the required campaign finance
statement when required.
2. A report is considered filed if:
a. It is received in the city recorder's office no later than five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on the date that it is due;
b. It is received in the city recorder's office with a postmark three (3) days or more before the date that the report
was due; or
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 42/571
c. The candidate has proof that the report was mailed, with appropriate postage and addressing, three (3) days
before the report was due.
3. Each candidate for elected municipal office shall file a signed campaign financial statement with the city recorder
containing itemized and total campaign contributions and expenditures as outlined below:
a. Candidate Eliminated At The Municipal Primary Election: Candidates who are eliminated at the municipal
primary election shall file a campaign financial statement within the thirty (30) days after the municipal primary
election.
b. Candidates In The Municipal General Election: Candidates in the municipal general election shall file the
following campaign financial statements:
(1) A first campaign financial statement shall be filed at least seven (7) days, but not more than fourteen (14)
days before the municipal general election. The first campaign financial statement shall include contributions
received and expenditures made up through and including fifteen (15) days before the municipal general
election.
(2) A second campaign financial statement shall be filed within the thirty (30) days following the municipal
general election. The second campaign financial statement shall include contributions received and
expenditures made from fourteen (14) days before the municipal general election (all contributions received
and expenditures made after the cutoff date for the first campaign financial statement filing period) until the
date the candidate files the second campaign financial statement.
(3) If the candidate receives contributions or makes expenditures after the date the candidate files the second
campaign financial statement, the candidate shall file an additional campaign financial statement(s) within
thirty (30) days of receiving the contribution or making the expenditure.
(4) The campaign financial statement must include the following information:
(A) For each contribution of more than fifty dollars ($50.00), the name of the donor of the contribution and
the amount of the contribution.
(B) An aggregate total of all contributions of fifty dollars ($50.00) or less received by the candidate.
(C) For each expenditure for a political purpose made during the campaign period, the name of the recipient
and the amount of the expenditure.
E. Public Information: The statements required by this section shall be public documents and shall be available for
public inspection and copying during all regular city business hours.
F. Penalty For Noncompliance: Any candidate who fails to comply with this section is guilty of an infraction and shall
pay a fine of ten dollars ($10.00) per day for every day they are late up to a maximum fine of seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00). Each and every failure to file the required campaign financial statement shall constitute a
separate offense. (Ord. 2005-07, 6-15-2005, eff. 6-15-2005)
2.12.020: APPOINTIVE OFFICERS:
On or before the first Monday in February following a city election, the mayor, with the advice and consent of the
council, shall appoint a qualified person to each of the offices of city administrator, recorder, treasurer, police chief, and
justice court judge. The mayor, by and with the advice and consent of the council, may also appoint all such other
officers and agents as may be provided for by law or ordinance, and in like manner fill all vacancies among the same,
except as otherwise provided by law. All officers shall continue in office until their successors are appointed and
qualified. (Ord. 2008-16, 8-21-2008)
2.12.030: ELIGIBILITY OF OFFICERS:
All elective officers shall be chosen by qualified voters of the city. No person shall be eligible to any elective office who
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 43/571
is not a qualified elector of the city nor shall any person be eligible to any office who is a defaulter to the corporation.
The council may prescribe by ordinance that any or all appointive officers be qualified electors of the city. (1986 Code)
2.12.040: TERM OF APPOINTIVE OFFICERS:
A. The city administrator, recorder, treasurer, police chief, justice court judge, and all department heads appointed by
the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council, shall remain in office until voluntarily or involuntarily
discharged. Such officer or department head may be involuntarily discharged for cause or for no cause by the
mayor with the concurrence of a majority of the members of the council or by the council, with the concurrence of
the mayor. However, if the city administrator, recorder, treasurer, police chief, justice court judge, or any
department head is involuntarily discharged for no cause within one year after a change in the city's mayoral seat,
such officer or department head is entitled to be paid any unpaid balance of his or her salary due at the date of his
or her discharge together with his or her salary at the same rate for a specified number of months, to be
determined as follows:
1. If the discharge occurs within six (6) months from the change in the mayoral seat, the officer or department head
is entitled to receive his or her salary at the same rate for six (6) additional calendar months following the date of
his or her discharge.
2. If the discharge occurs after the end of the sixth month but prior to the end of the seventh month following the
change in the mayoral seat, the officer or department head is entitled to receive his or her salary at the same
rate for five (5) additional calendar months following the date of his or her discharge.
3. If the discharge occurs after the end of the seventh month but prior to the end of the eighth month following the
change in the mayoral seat, the officer or department head is entitled to receive his or her salary at the same
rate for four (4) additional calendar months following the date of his or her discharge.
4. If the discharge occurs after the end of the eighth month but prior to the end of the ninth month following the
change in the mayoral seat, the officer or department head is entitled to receive his or her salary at the same
rate for three (3) additional calendar months following the date of his or her discharge.
5. If the discharge occurs after the end of the ninth month but prior to the end of the tenth month following the
change in the mayoral seat, the officer or department head is entitled to receive his or her salary at the same
rate for two (2) additional calendar months following the date of his or her discharge.
6. If the discharge occurs after the end of the tenth month but prior to the end of the eleventh month following the
change in the mayoral seat, the officer or department head is entitled to receive his or her salary at the same
rate for one additional calendar month following the date of his or her discharge.
7. If the discharge occurs after the end of the eleventh month but prior to the end of the twelfth month following the
change in the mayoral seat, the officer or department head is entitled to receive his or her salary at the same
rate for two (2) additional calendar weeks following the date of his or her discharge.
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any officer or department head that is involuntarily discharged for cause is not
entitled to any additional compensation, regardless of whether his or her involuntary discharge occurred within one
year of a change in the mayoral seat. (Ord. 2007-20, 8-21-2007, eff. 12-11-2007)
2.12.050: OATHS AND BONDS:
All officers, whether elected or appointed, shall, before they enter upon the duties of their respective office, take,
subscribe and file the constitutional oath of office, and every such officer shall, before entering upon the duties of his
office, execute a bond with good and sufficient sureties, payable to the city, in such penal sum as may by resolution or
ordinance be directed, and conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of his office and the payment of all
monies received by such officer according to the laws of the city; provided, that the treasurer's bond shall be fixed at a
sum not less than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). The bonds of the councilmen shall be approved by
the mayor and the bonds of all other officers shall be approved by the council. The premium charged by a corporate
surety for any official bond shall be paid by the city. (1986 Code)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 44/571
2.12.060: SALARIES:
A. The elective and appointive officers of the city shall receive such compensation for their services as the council may
fix by ordinance, adopting compensation or compensation schedules enacted after public hearing.
B. Upon its own motion the council may review or consider the compensation of any officer of the city or a salary
schedule applicable to any officer for the purpose of determining whether or not it should be adopted, changed or
amended. In the event that the council decides that such compensation or compensation schedules should be
adopted, changed or amended, it shall set a time and place of a public hearing at which all interested persons shall
be given an opportunity to be heard.
C. Notice of the time, place and purpose of the meeting shall be published at least seven (7) days prior thereto by
publication in at least one issue of a newspaper published in the county within which the city is situated and
generally circulated in the city, if there is one; otherwise, by posting in three (3) conspicuous places within the city.
D. After the conclusion of the public hearing, the council may enact an ordinance fixing, changing or amending the
compensation of any elective or appointive officer of the city or adopting a compensation schedule applicable to
any officer.
E. The compensation of all city officers shall be paid at least monthly out of the treasury. (1986 Code)
2.12.070: SALARIES ESTABLISHED:
A. The annual salaries of the following officers of the city shall be set by ordinance:
1. Mayor.
2. Councilmen.
3. Treasurer.
4. Recorder.
5. City administrator.
6. Police chief.
7. Municipal court judge.
B. All appointive officers shall receive such salary as may be fixed by the council. (Ord. 99-07)
2.12.080: PECUNIARY INTEREST OF OFFICERS:
No officer of the city shall be directly or indirectly interested in any contract, work or business, or in the sale of any
article, the expense, price or consideration of which is paid from the treasury or in any other consideration, or favor as
provided or prohibited by state law. (1986 Code)
2.12.090: POWERS AND DUTIES OF OFFICERS:
The duties, powers and privileges of all officers in any way connected with the city government not defined in this
chapter shall be defined by the council, and the defining by this chapter of the duties of city officers shall not preclude
the council from defining further any additional duties to be performed by any such officer. (1986 Code)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 45/571
2.12.100: DELIVERY OF PROPERTY TO SUCCESSOR:
If any person, having been an officer of this city, shall not, within five (5) days after notification and request, deliver to
his successor in office all property, papers and effects of every description in his possession belonging to the city or
appertaining to the office he held, he shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (1986 Code)
Chapter 2.14
CITY ADMINISTRATOR
2.14.010: OFFICE CREATED:
The office of city manager, which shall hereby and hereafter be known as "city administrator", is hereby created and
established pursuant to section 10-3-924 of the Utah Code Annotated (1953), as amended. (Ord. 99-07)
2.14.020: CONTROL:
The powers, duties and functions of the office of city administrator shall be subject to the control of the mayor
consistent with policies of the governing body. (Ord. 99-07)
2.14.030: APPOINTMENT:
The mayor shall appoint the city administrator, upon advice and consent of the city council. The city administrator shall
be appointed wholly on the basis of his or her administrative and executive ability and qualifications. (Ord. 99-07)
2.14.040: BOND:
Before taking office, the city administrator shall furnish a fidelity bond in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00), conditioned upon the faithful performance of his or her duties with a corporation licensed to do
business in this state as surety. Such bond shall be filed with the city recorder after being approved by the governing
body of Mapleton City. (Ord. 00-01)
2.14.050: TERM OF OFFICE:
The city administrator shall serve at the pleasure of the governing body and may be removed at any time, with or
without cause, by a majority vote of the city council as then constituted, convened in a regular city council meeting,
subject, however to the provisions of the next succeeding subsections.
A. Notice: In the case of intended removal by the city council, the city administrator shall be furnished with a written
notice stating the city council's intention to remove him or her, at least thirty (30) days before the effective date of
his or her removal.
B. Meeting: Within seven (7) days after the delivery to the city administrator of such notice of intention to remove, he
or she may, by written notification to the mayor or any member of the city council, request a confidential executive
meeting with the city council. Thereafter the city council shall fix a time for the meeting which shall be held at its
usual meeting place, but before the expiration of the thirty (30) day period, at which the city administrator shall
appear and be heard.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 46/571
C. Discretion Of The Council: In removing the city administrator, the city council may use its uncontrolled discretion
and its action shall be final and shall not depend upon any particular showing or degree of proof at the meeting.
D. Limitation On Removal: Notwithstanding the provisions of this section hereinabove set forth, the city administrator
shall not be removed from office, during or within a period of ninety (90) days next succeeding any general
municipal election held in the city at which a member of the city council is elected or when a new member of the
city council is appointed; the purpose of this provision is to allow any newly elected or appointed member of the city
council or a reorganized city council to directly observe the actions and abilities of the city administrator in the
performance of the powers and duties of his or her office. After the expiration of said ninety (90) day period
aforementioned, the provisions of this section as to the removal of said city administrator shall apply and be
effective. (Ord. 00-21)
2.14.060: EMPLOYMENT AGREEMENTS:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a limitation on the power or authority of the city council to enter into any
supplemental agreement with the city administrator delineating additional terms and conditions of employment not
inconsistent with any provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 99-07)
2.14.070: RESIGNATION:
Before voluntarily resigning from the position of city administrator, the city administrator shall give the city council thirty
(30) days' notice in writing of his or her intention to resign. (Ord. 99-07)
2.14.080: SALARY:
The salary and other compensation of the city administrator shall be set from time to time by the city council. On
termination of employment of the city administrator by reason of involuntary removal from service, severance pay shall
be paid by the city in an amount equal to four (4) weeks of the city administrator's salary at the time of dismissal.
Involuntary removal from service shall include, but not be limited to, reductions in force, forced resignation and
reductions in pay not consistent with the policies applicable to all employees of the city. (Ord. 00-21)
2.14.090: OFFICE AND TIME SPENT:
The city administrator shall maintain an office in the city hall and shall spend such time in the performance of the
duties of the city administrator as is necessary or may be required from time to time by the city council. The city
administrator shall not accept any outside employment in addition to employment by the city without prior approval of
the city council. (Ord. 99-07)
2.14.100: RESIDENCE:
The city administrator need not be a resident or qualified elector of Mapleton City at the time of the city administrator's
appointment or thereafter. (Ord. 99-07)
2.14.110: POWERS, DUTIES AND OBLIGATIONS:
Pursuant to the policies and programs established by the city council of Mapleton City, and under the general direction
and oversight of the mayor, the city administrator shall:
A. Be responsible for managing the internal affairs of the city; develop, recommend and implement city policies,
practices, rules, regulations and procedures; report to the mayor and city council; advise the mayor and city council
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 47/571
regarding policy options and implementation procedures; carry out legislative directives and decisions.
B. Establish and maintain effective working relationships with the mayor and city council, department heads, citizen
committees, special interest groups, employees, press, contractors, public vendors and representatives from other
city, county, special district, state and federal agencies; issue public statements to the press and respond to
questions from the press related to city management, policies, procedures and administrative decisions.
C. Be responsible for the full and effective use of city personnel by establishing, in consultation with department
heads, overall department objectives, priorities and standards consistent with the goals and objectives of the
mayor and city council; serve as a facilitator in the achievement by city departments of mayor and city council
goals and in coordinating with department heads for effective implementation of city service levels, ordinances,
resolutions, rules, regulations and directives; exercise managerial control to ensure that the Mapleton City
government and its respective departments function in the most efficient and effective manner.
D. Plan city financial operations and supervise the activities of the recorder/finance director and keep the mayor and
city council at all times advised as to the financial condition and needs of the city; solicit and assign responsibility
for the administration of grants; deliver financial reports to the city council as needed; supervise the preparation
and administration of the budget under the direction of the mayor and city council; act as the budget officer as
established by the uniform fiscal procedures act for the Utah cities as passed and amended by the Utah state
legislature; ensure that all executive procedures and activities are in compliance with the uniform fiscal procedures
act for Utah cities and Utah money management act as passed and amended by the Utah state legislature; assure
conformity to financial goals and budgets; conduct internal investigations, examine books, records and official
papers of any office department, agency, board or commission of the city as needed to assure integrity of
operations and prevent impropriety.
E. Represent the city at various meetings or other functions and respond to requests or inquiries about city policies,
rules, ordinances, regulations, resolutions or services rendered by the city government.
F. Enforce all applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations of the city. Assure that all franchises, leases, permits,
licenses, contracts and privileges granted by Mapleton City are fully performed and observed.
G. Recommend and prepare for considerations by the mayor and city council and advisory committees long range
strategic plans and programs to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the current and future inhabitants of
Mapleton City in accordance with the Mapleton City vision statement; review and supervise the preparation of the
capital facilities plan; review and supervise the preparation of an impact fee analysis; implement a comprehensive
maintenance and replacement program for all city owned facilities, infrastructure, and equipment; furnish reports to
the mayor and city council.
H. Be responsible for the overall personnel management function; prepare a staffing plan for city council approval;
approve all job descriptions; approve all employment advertising; participate in employment interviews; approve
final selection of job applicants; extend or approve extension of job offers; supervise annual employee evaluations;
supervise the development of annual salary scale for recommendation to the governing body; implement city
personnel ordinance and rules and regulations adopted by the city council; have authority to appoint and remove
all employees of Mapleton City except the following named officers for whom he or she shall have the responsibility
to recommend their appointment or removal to the mayor: city recorder, city treasurer, city attorney, fire chief,
police chief, city engineer, and other department heads; occupy a step in the appeals process available to
employees with grievances; monitor personnel actions, promotion, discipline, demotion, separation and
reclassification; coordinate personnel decisions with department heads; coordinate activities of the city attorney,
city engineer and other individuals rendering professional services under contract with the city.
I. Supervise the management of city data processing and information systems; determine software and hardware
needs.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 48/571
J. Act as the city risk manager and implement policies and procedures related to risk elimination, reduction or transfer;
acquire insurance.
K. Investigate into the affairs of the city and any department or division thereof, and any contract for the proper
performance of any obligation of the city.
L. Recommend to the mayor and city council the creation of all necessary departments, divisions, bureaus and offices
necessary for the government of the city; prepare recommendations for the mayor and city council regarding the
addition, deletion or reduction in municipal services.
M. Attend and participate in all meetings of the city council but shall not vote in such meetings.
N. Keep a current inventory accounting for real and personal property of the city and its location.
O. Perform all other duties, obligations and exercise the powers set forth by ordinance, resolution, regulation, or
directive imposed by the governing body. (Ord. 99-07)
2.14.120: DEPARTMENT COOPERATION:
The city administrator shall have direct supervisory responsibility for the city recorder/finance director, planning and
zoning director, police chief, fire chief, ambulance director, court, public works director and literacy center director. It
shall be the duty of all subordinate city employees and officers and the city engineer, city treasurer and city attorney to
cooperate with the city administrator in administering the affairs of the city efficiently, economically and harmoniously.
(Ord. 99-07)
2.14.130: PLANNING AND ZONING:
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city administrator shall exercise no authority over the planning commission. (Ord.
2013-04, 2-19-2013, eff. 4-1-2013)
2.14.140: PERFORMANCE EVALUATION:
The mayor and city council shall, not less than annually, evaluate the performance of the city administrator in a
meeting between the city administrator and the governing body. This meeting shall serve as a forum to evaluate past
performance of the city administrator and to establish goals and objectives for the coming year. (Ord. 99-07)
2.14.150: POWERS OF THE MAYOR NOT DELEGATED:
Nothing herein shall be construed to delegate to the city administrator the legislative and judicial powers of the mayor,
his position as chairman of the governing body or any ex officio position which the mayor shall hold. (Ord. 99-07)
Chapter 2.16
RECORDER
2.16.010: DUTIES:
The recorder shall keep his office at the place of meeting of the council or at some other place convenient thereto as
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 49/571
the council may direct. He shall keep the corporate seal and all papers and records of the city and shall keep a record
of the proceedings of the council, whose meetings it shall be his duty to attend. Copies of all papers filed in his office
and transcripts from all records of the council, certified by him under the corporate seal, shall be evidence in all courts
as if the originals thereof were produced. The recorder shall be ex officio the auditor and shall perform the duties of
such office. (1986 Code)
2.16.020: WARRANTS:
In the event the city is without funds on deposit in one of its appropriate bank accounts with which to pay any lawfully
approved claim, the recorder shall draw and sign a warrant upon the treasurer for payment of the claim, the warrant to
be tendered to the payee named thereon. (1986 Code)
2.16.030: PAYMENT OF CLAIMS:
A. The recorder shall maintain or cause to be maintained the general books for each fund of the city and all subsidiary
and detailed records relating thereto, including a list of the outstanding bonds, for what purpose, when and where
payable, and the rate of interest they respectively bear, together with the amount of each outstanding.
B. The city auditor or city recorder, as appropriate, shall keep accounts with all receiving and disbursing officers of the
city, shall preaudit all claims and demands against the city before they are allowed, and shall prepare the
necessary checks in payment. Such checks shall include an appropriate certification pursuant to Utah Code
Annotated section 11-1-1, examples of which shall be presented in the "Uniform Accounting Manual For Utah
Cities". The city auditor or city recorder shall also certify on the voucher or check copy, as appropriate, that:
1. The claim has been preaudited and documented;
2. The claim has been approved in one of the following ways:
a. Purchase order directly approved by the mayor in the council-mayor optional form of government, or the
governing body or its delegate in other cities,
b. Claim directly approved by the governing body, or
c. Claim approved by the financial officer;
3. The claim is within the lawful debt limit of the city; and
4. The claim does not overexpend the appropriate departmental budget established by the governing body. (1986
Code)
2.16.040: PAYMENT OF MONEY AND FILING OF RECEIPTS:
The recorder shall pay into the treasury all money belonging to the city coming into his hands by virtue of his office,
and shall take a receipt for the same, which receipts shall be filed with other papers in the recorder's office. He shall
keep a list of all property coming into his possession from his predecessor in office, and by purchase during his term,
and deliver the list, together with the property, to his successor in office. (1986 Code)
2.16.050: RECORDING OF ORDINANCES:
The recorder shall keep and file a copy of each ordinance hereafter passed by order of the council showing all
amendments and additions, and those ordinances repealed. It shall be the duty of the recorder to update the Mapleton
City code on the city's official website to reflect all ordinances, amendments, additions and repeals. (Ord. 2013-04, 2-
19-2013, eff. 4-1-2013)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 50/571
2.16.060: CONTRACTS:
The recorder shall countersign all contracts made on behalf of the city, and every contract made on behalf of the city
or to which the city is a party shall be void unless signed by the recorder. He shall maintain a record of all contracts,
properly indexed, which record shall be open to the inspection of all interested persons. (1986 Code)
2.16.070: FINANCIAL STATEMENTS:
The recorder shall prepare and present to the council the following financial statements:
A. As of the end of each month a summary of cash receipts and disbursements by funds of appropriate groups of
funds, showing in total, the beginning cash and invested balances, the receipts and disbursements separately for
the period, and cash and invested balances in each fund or groups of funds at the end of the period;
B. As of the end of such periods as the council may direct, but not less often than once each quarter, a statement of
revenues and expenditures and comparison with the budget of the general fund, including a comparison of actual
expenditures for the period with the allotments pertaining thereto;
C. A statement of income and expense of each utility fund, reflecting operations to date in the current year, and a
comparison thereof with operating results for the same period during the preceding year;
D. As of the end of such periods as the council may require, a condensed statement of receipts and disbursements
and comparison with the cash budget of each utility fund, including a comparison of actual disbursements for the
period with allotments pertaining thereto;
E. Such statements of operations in other special funds of reports on financial condition at such times as the council
may require. (1986 Code)
2.16.080: ANNUAL FINANCIAL REPORTS; INDEPENDENT AUDIT REPORTS:
Within one hundred eighty (180) days after the close of each fiscal year the city recorder or other delegated person in
cities of the third class shall present to the governing body an annual financial report prepared in conformity with
generally accepted accounting principles, as prescribed in the "Uniform Accounting Manual For Utah Cities". This
requirement may be satisfied by presentation of the audit report furnished by the independent auditor, if the financial
statements included therein are appropriately prepared and reviewed with the governing body. Notwithstanding the
acceptability of the audit report furnished by the independent auditor in substitution for financial statements prepared
by an officer of the city, the governing body has the responsibility for the financial statements included therein. The
independent auditor has the responsibility of reporting whether the governing body's financial statements are prepared
in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles. Copies of the annual financial report or the audit report
furnished by the independent auditor shall be filed with the state auditor and shall be filed as a public document in the
office of the city recorder. (1986 Code)
2.16.090: STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL CONDITION:
The recorder shall prepare on or before the first Monday in October of each year, a detailed statement of the financial
condition of the city, and of all the revenues and expenditures for the previous year. (1986 Code)
Chapter 2.20
TREASURER
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 51/571
2.20.010: DUTIES GENERALLY:
The city treasurer shall:
A. Be custodian of all money, bonds or other securities of the city;
B. Determine the cash requirements of the city and provide for the investment of all idle cash;
C. Receive all money payable to the city, within three (3) business days after collection, including all taxes, licenses,
fines and intergovernmental revenue, and keep an accurate detailed account thereof in the manner provided in this
chapter, and as the governing body of the city may by ordinance or resolution from time to time direct; and
D. Collect all special taxes and assessments as provided by law and ordinance. (1986 Code)
2.20.020: ISSUANCE OF CHECKS:
The treasurer or such other person as the council may by resolution designate shall sign all checks prepared by the
recorder. Prior to affixing the signatures, the treasurer or such other person shall determine that sufficient funds are on
deposit in the appropriate bank account of the city to honor such check. The treasurer shall make provision for
payment of all warrants issued before signing any subsequently issued checks. (1986 Code)
2.20.030: WARRANTS:
The treasurer shall pay all warrants in the order in which presented and as money becomes available for payment
thereof in the appropriate funds of the city. The treasurer shall note upon the back of each warrant presented to him
the date of presentation and the date of payment. (1986 Code)
2.20.040: RECEIPTS FOR PAYMENT OF MONEY:
The treasurer shall give or cause to be given to every person paying money to the treasury a receipt or other evidence
of payment therefor, specifying the date of payment and upon what account paid; shall file the duplicate of such
receipt or other evidence of payment in the office of the recorder. (1986 Code)
2.20.050: DEPOSIT OF CITY FUNDS; COMMINGLING WITH PERSONAL FUNDS UNLAWFUL:
The treasurer shall promptly deposit all city funds in the appropriate bank accounts of the city. It shall be unlawful for
any person to commingle city funds with his or her own money. Whenever it shall appear that the treasurer or any
other officer is making profit out of public money, or is using the same for any purpose not authorized by law, such
treasurer or officer shall be suspended from office. (1986 Code)
2.20.060: FINANCIAL REPORTS:
The treasurer shall report to the council at such times as may be prescribed by it, giving a full and detailed account of
the receipts and expenditures since his last report, and the condition of the treasury. He shall also keep a registry of all
warrants redeemed and paid, and the person to whom paid, specifying also the time of payment. All such warrants
shall be examined by the council at the time of making such report. (1986 Code)
2.20.070: SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 52/571
All money received by the treasurer on any special assessment shall be applied to the payment of the improvement
for which the assessment was made. Such money shall be used for the payment of interest and principal on bonds or
other indebtedness issued in settlement thereof, and shall be used for no other purpose whatever. (1986 Code)
Chapter 2.24
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SAFETY
2.24.010: APPOINTMENT:
The Director of Public Safety shall be a resident of the City, appointed by the Mayor and a majority vote of the City
Council. This exempt position shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council and may be removed by the City Council
at any time upon a majority vote of the Council. (Ord. 2018-06, 6-6-2018, eff. 6-28-2018)
2.24.020: DUTIES AND POWERS:
The Director of Public Safety shall be the Chief Administrative Officer of the Police Department and Fire Department. It
shall be the Director's duty to supervise all employees and volunteers of the said departments and to coordinate the
activities of said departments providing emergency services to the public. The Director shall also be the Budget Officer
of said departments and as such shall be responsible for funds appropriated for the operation thereof. (Ord. 2018-06,
6-6-2018, eff. 6-28-2018)
2.24.030: MAY HOLD OTHER OFFICES:
With the approval of the City Council the Director of Public Safety may hold any office in any of the departments which
they supervise, as long, as they are trained, experienced and qualified to do so. (Ord. 2018-06, 6-6-2018, eff. 6-28-
2018)
Chapter 2.26
POLICE DEPARTMENT
2.26.010: CREATION OF POLICE DEPARTMENT:
Under the direction of the Director of Public Safety, the department shall include a Chief of Police. The Chief of Police
shall be a resident of the City, appointed by the Mayor and a majority vote of the City Council. This exempt position
shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council and may be removed by the City Council at any time upon a majority
vote of the Council. With the approval of the City Council the Chief of Police may hold any office in any of the
departments which they supervise, as long, as they are trained, experienced and qualified to do so.
The Police Department shall consist of a Chief of Police, and such other peace officers and employees as may be
provided for from time to time by the City Council. (Ord. 2018-06, 6-6-2018, eff. 6-28-2018)
2.26.020: CERTIFICATION OF OFFICERS:
No person shall serve as a peace officer of the City unless such person is certified as a peace officer as required by
Utah State law. (Ord. 2018-06, 6-6-2018, eff. 6-28-2018)
2.26.030: OATH OF OFFICE:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 53/571
All peace officers for the City shall, before they enter upon the duties of their respective offices, take, subscribe, and
file the constitutional oath of office. (Ord. 2018-06, 6-6-2018, eff. 6-28-2018)
2.26.040: DUTIES OF PEACE OFFICERS:
It shall be the duty of the Police Department in the City at all times to preserve the public peace, prevent crime, detect
and arrest offenders, suppress riots, protect persons and property, remove nuisances existing in the public streets,
roads, and highways, enforce every law relating to the suppression of offenses and perform all other duties required of
them by Federal law, State law, and ordinance or resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 2018-06, 6-6-2018, eff. 6-28-
2018)
2.26.050: CONDUCT:
It shall be the duty of each member of the Police Department to conduct himself or herself in a proper and law-abiding
manner at all times and to avoid the use of unnecessary force. Each member of the department shall obey the orders
and directions of his superior, as well as the adopted policies and procedures of the Mapleton City Police Department.
The Chief of Police may promulgate rules and regulations to govern the conduct and duties of the members of the
Police Department which shall take effect upon approval of such regulations by the City Council. (Ord. 2018-06, 6-6-
2018, eff. 6-28-2018)
2.26.060: TRAFFIC ENFORCEMENT:
It shall be the duty of the Police Department to enforce the street traffic regulations of all State and local vehicle laws
and/or ordinances applicable to street traffic in the City, to make arrests and/or issue citations for traffic violations, to
investigate accidents, and to cooperate with the officials of the City in the administration of the traffic laws and in
developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions. (Ord. 2018-06, 6-6-2018, eff. 6-28-2018)
2.26.070: TEMPORARY STREET CLOSURE:
The Chief of Police, or his/her designee, may whenever they shall determine it to be necessary for the public safety
temporarily close all or any portion of a public street and restrict public travel thereon or use thereof. (Ord. 2018-06, 6-
6-2018, eff. 6-28-2018)
2.26.080: RIGHTS OF ARREST:
The several members of the Police Department shall have the power and authority, without process, to arrest and take
into custody any person who shall commit or threaten or attempt to commit in the presence of such officer, or within
his view, any breach of the peace, or any offense directly prohibited by the laws of this State or by ordinance. (Ord.
2018-06, 6-6-2018, eff. 6-28-2018)
2.26.090: PROPERTY HELD BY DEPARTMENT:
All lost, stolen, embezzled, abandoned, or otherwise unclaimed property which comes into the possession of the
Police Department shall be delivered into the custody of the Chief of Police or a member of the department designated
to have custody of such property. It shall be the duty of the person having custody of such property to enter into a
suitable book, a description of every article of property, to attach a number to each article and make corresponding
entry thereof, and to make every reasonable effort to locate the owner thereof. When property alleged to have been
stolen or embezzled comes into the custody of the Police Department, it shall be held subject to the order of a
magistrate authorized by law to direct the disposal thereof.
When money or other property is taken from a defendant arrested upon the charge of a public offense, the officers
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 54/571
taking it shall at the time make duplicate receipts therefor specifying particularly the amount of money or the kind of
property taken, one of which receipts shall be delivered to the defendant, and the other, with the property, at once to
the Chief of Police or other person designated by him to have custody of such property. (Ord. 2018-06, 6-6-2018, eff.
6-28-2018)
2.26.100: DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY:
In the event that an owner of any lost, stolen, embezzled, abandoned, or otherwise unclaimed property cannot be
found within three (3) months after such property comes into the possession of the Police Department, or if the owner
does not claim or redeem such property within three (3) months after notification, the Police Department may advertise
the sale of such property once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks in a newspaper published in the City and may, on
the date specified in such advertisement, offer at public sale for the highest and best price obtainable, all such
property thereon listed. The price received for each article sold and the name of the purchaser thereof shall be entered
in the register kept by the person having custody of such property, and all money received from such sale shall be
delivered to the City Treasurer. (Ord. 2018-06, 6-6-2018, eff. 6-28-2018)
Chapter 2.28
JUSTICE OF THE PEACE
2.28.010: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Each municipality which does not have a municipal department of the circuit court may, in the manner it appoints
other officers, appoint a justice of the peace. Justices of the peace shall be appointed to terms of four (4) years
beginning the first Monday in February 1980; provided, that justices now holding office or appointed to fill any
vacancy shall hold office until the successor is duly appointed and qualified. Municipal justices of the peace may be
removed from office in the same manner as county justices.
B. If a vacancy shall occur in the office of a municipal judge, the mayor, by and with the consent of the council, shall
forthwith fill such vacancy by appointment for the unexpired term. The person appointed shall qualify in the same
manner as a municipal justice and shall have and exercise all the powers conferred by law upon such municipal
justice. In case any municipal justice shall for any reason be unable or disqualified to perform the duties of his
office, or shall be absent, the mayor shall appoint some other justice of the peace residing within the county to act
as the municipal justice of the peace pro tempore, and he shall have and discharge the duties as such municipal
justice might have, but during the existence of such disability or absence only.
C. The salary of the municipal justices of the peace shall be set by ordinance in the manner prescribed by Utah Code
Annotated section 78-5-29.
D. All fees, fines, forfeitures or any other sums collected by the justice of the peace shall be paid to the municipal
treasurer within seven (7) days of receipt.
E. Whenever there is a vacancy in the office of a municipal justice of the peace, the municipality may contract with the
county or another municipality to share the services of a justice. The contract shall be for the same term as the
term of the justice whose services are sought. Municipalities may contract for the services of a county or municipal
justice during their entire term at any time there is a vacancy in the office of municipal justice. Vacancies may be
created by refusing to reappoint a person to the office of justice of the peace. (1986 Code)
Chapter 2.32
FIRE DEPARTMENT
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 55/571
2.32.010: PURPOSE:
There is hereby established a combined fire and EMS service in the City to be known as the Mapleton City Fire
Department. The department will consist of full-time and part-time employees and volunteers. Its purpose shall be the
preservation and protection of life and property from and during fires, rescues and EMS emergencies as may occur in
Mapleton City and Utah County, Utah. (Ord. 2018-06, 6-6-2018, eff. 6-28-2018)
2.32.020: CITY EMPLOYEES OF DEPARTMENT:
Under the direction of the Director of Public Safety, the department shall include a Fire Chief, who shall be an exempt
full-time or part-time employee of the City and shall reside within five (5) miles of the City limits. The Fire Chief shall be
appointed by the Mayor and with a majority vote of the City Council. This exempt position shall serve at the pleasure
of the City Council and may be removed by the City Council at any time upon a majority vote of the Council.
Employees of the department shall be under the supervision of the Fire Chief, and shall perform such duties as may
be prescribed by the Fire Chief or Director of Public Safety. (Ord. 2018-06, 6-6-2018, eff. 6-28-2018)
2.32.030: VOLUNTEERS OF DEPARTMENT:
Volunteers of the department, including on-call volunteers shall be appointed by the Fire Chief and shall perform such
duties as may be prescribed by the Fire Chief. The volunteer position is considered an exempt position and a
volunteer may be removed by the Fire Chief or Director of Public Safety at any time. (Ord. 2018-06, 6-6-2018, eff. 6-
28-2018)
2.32.040: STANDING OPERATING PROCEDURES:
The members of the department who are volunteers may adopt standing operating procedures, and such other rules
and regulations as may be necessary for the effective operation of the department, hereafter referred to as
"association", including requirements for membership therein. All such rules and regulations governing the operation
of the by-laws shall be approved by the Director of Public Safety, Fire Chief and City Council. The association by-laws
do not apply to full-time or part-time paid employees of the department. (Ord. 2018-06, 6-6-2018, eff. 6-28-2018)
2.32.050: COMPENSATION:
Compensation for all employees and volunteers of the department shall be fixed by resolution of the City Council
during the annual budget. (Ord. 2018-06, 6-6-2018, eff. 6-28-2018)
2.32.060: RIGHT-OF-WAY:
City fire engines, fire trucks, ambulance vehicles, and other emergency response vehicles are hereby declared to be
emergency vehicles and shall have all of the rights-of-way and exemptions from traffic regulations that are provided by
State law. (Ord. 2018-06, 6-6-2018, eff. 6-28-2018)
2.32.070: BLOCKADE STREETS:
It shall be lawful for the Fire Chief or the officer in command to blockade any street, avenue, alley, sidewalk, or other
place if in his or her judgment it is necessary to secure the efficient working of the members of the department. It shall
be unlawful for any person to break through said blockade. (Ord. 2018-06, 6-6-2018, eff. 6-28-2018)
2.32.080: ENTERING UPON PREMISES:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 56/571
During emergencies, or upon consent of the property owner, the Fire Chief or the officer in command have the right to
enter upon any premises at all reasonable hours for the purpose of inspecting the same. (Ord. 2018-06, 6-6-2018, eff.
6-28-2018)
2.32.090: MAINTENANCE OF APPARATUS AND VEHICLES:
All vehicles and equipment shall be kept in proper condition for immediate use. (Ord. 2018-06, 6-6-2018, eff. 6-28-
2018)
2.32.100: INTERFERENCE WITH APPARATUS AND VEHICLES:
Any person who may use or in any way interfere with any of the apparatus or vehicles, without the consent of the Fire
Chief or Director of Public Safety, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 2018-06, 6-6-2018, eff. 6-28-2018)
2.32.110: REMOVAL OF OBSTRUCTIONS:
The Fire Chief, or the officer in command, may order the removal or destruction of any building, fence, or any
telephone, telegraph or electric light poles or wires or any other obstruction in order to prevent the progress of the
emergency, but neither the Fire Chief nor any other officer or member of the department shall unnecessarily or
recklessly destroy or injure any building or other property. (Ord. 2018-06, 6-6-2018, eff. 6-28-2018)
2.32.120: USE OF WATER:
The Fire Chief, or the officer in command, shall have the right to use water from any source for the purpose of an
emergency. (Ord. 2018-06, 6-6-2018, eff. 6-28-2018)
2.32.130: INVESTIGATION:
The Fire Chief, or the officer in command, shall make a prompt and thorough investigation of the cause of the incident
and shall make a written report on each incident in accordance with City records retention policy. (Ord. 2018-06, 6-6-
2018, eff. 6-28-2018)
2.32.140: CONFORMANCE WITH STATE LAW:
The department established by this chapter shall conform to the standards set forth in State law. (Ord. 2018-06, 6-6-
2018, eff. 6-28-2018)
2.32.150: EMS OPERATIONS:
The department will provide emergency medical services up to the paramedic level as defined by the State Bureau of
Emergency Medical Services. (Ord. 2018-06, 6-6-2018, eff. 6-28-2018)
Chapter 2.40
SHADE TREE COMMISSION
2.40.010: MEMBERSHIP; COMPENSATION:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 57/571
There is created a shade tree commission consisting of three (3) to five (5) members, who shall be representative
citizens, interested in tree culture and residents of the city. The members shall serve terms of four (4) years; provided,
that of the first members appointed, one shall serve two (2) years, one for three (3) years, and one for four (4) years.
The members of the commission shall serve without compensation and they are to be appointed by the council and
any member may be removed by the council. (Ord. 2002-20, 10-2-2002)
2.40.020: OFFICERS; ADOPTION OF RULES:
The commission shall select its chairman and such other officers it may deem necessary from among its own
members, for the terms of one year, with eligibility for reelection. The commission shall adopt rules and regulations for
the conduct of its business, subject to the approval of such rules and regulations by the council. (Ord. 2002-20, 10-2-
2002)
2.40.030: PLANS AND RECOMMENDATIONS:
It shall be the duty of the shade tree commission to make plans for the planting, care of, removal, and protection of
shade trees in any public easement along any public streets and other city owned property, and to foster shade tree
culture within the city. Such plans and recommendations shall be recommended to the council. The council shall hold
a public hearing thereon, after fourteen (14) days' notice by one publication in a local newspaper, and may then adopt
such regulations, with such changes as the council thinks desirable as the shade tree regulations of the city. (Ord.
2002-20, 10-2-2002)
2.40.040: RECEIPT OF GIFTS OR BEQUESTS:
The shade tree commission shall, on behalf of and with the consent of the council, have the authority to receive gifts
or bequests from any person or from any source for the building, improvement or maintenance of a civic arboretum, or
for tree planting or maintenance on any street or other public property. The gifts or bequests shall be received by the
treasurer and converted into a special fund for the purposes set out in this chapter. (Ord. 2002-20, 10-2-2002)
2.40.050: AUTHORITY AND REGULATIONS:
Refer to chapter 11.04, "Shade Trees", of this code. (Ord. 2002-20, 10-2-2002)
Chapter 2.43
PARKS AND RECREATION COMMITTEE
2.43.010: ESTABLISHED:
There is created a committee to be known and designated as the parks and recreation committee, to be appointed
and to hold office as is more particularly set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 2006-11, 5-3-2006, eff. 5-3-2006)
2.43.020: MEMBERSHIP; FILLING OF VACANCIES:
The parks and recreation committee shall consist of seven (7) to ten (10) members who are residents of Utah County.
(Ord. 2006-11, 5-3-2006, eff. 5-3-2006)
2.43.030: ORGANIZATION OF COMMITTEE:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 58/571
The mayor, upon advice and consent of the city council in open meeting, shall appoint officers for the committee
consisting of chairman, vice chairman, secretary/treasurer, one council member and shall appoint all other officers
necessary. (Ord. 2006-11, 5-3-2006, eff. 5-3-2006)
2.43.040: TERM OF OFFICE:
The chairman, vice chairman, and secretary/treasurer shall be appointed for a period of one year commencing with
their appointment. Thereafter, these officers may be reappointed to their office for up to a maximum of three (3)
consecutive years. New officers, or reappointed officers shall be nominated by the committee, in September to begin
their term of office the following January. The nominations shall be submitted to the mayor during the month of
September for review and appointment, with the consent of the city council during the council's October meetings.
(Ord. 2006-11, 5-3-2006, eff. 5-3-2006)
2.43.050: MEETINGS:
The meetings of the parks and recreation committee shall be held on a regular basis, but at least once each quarter at
a time to be decided by the committee; provided, however, that special meetings shall be called at any time by the
mayor, or upon the request of four (4) or more members. The meeting time and agenda are to be posted one day prior
to the meeting. (Ord. 2006-11, 5-3-2006, eff. 5-3-2006)
2.43.060: JURISDICTION:
Functioning as an advisory committee under the overall direction of the city council the parks and recreation
committee shall have oversight of development, equipping, maintenance, supervision, and operation of the city's park
facilities, parkways, recreation centers and other places which have previously, or may in the future, be dedicated to
the purpose of public recreation. The parks and recreation committee shall cooperate with the Nebo School District,
other governmental agencies, church and civic groups, or private individuals in the advancement of park and
recreation facilities. (Ord. 2006-11, 5-3-2006, eff. 5-3-2006)
2.43.070: DESIGNATION OF PROPERTY FOR PARKS AND RECREATIONAL PURPOSES:
The parks and recreation committee may request that city council designate and set apart for use as playgrounds,
athletic fields, gymnasiums, swimming pools, camps, recreation centers or other recreational facilities, any lands,
buildings or property owned by the city that may be suitable for such purposes. The parks and recreation committee
shall recommend to the city council lands, buildings, and property for acquisition to be used for recreational purposes
and may equip, maintain, operate, and supervise the employment of such leaders, directors, supervisors, and
volunteers as it may deem appropriate in use of said facilities. (Ord. 2006-11, 5-3-2006, eff. 5-3-2006)
2.43.080: ORGANIZATION OF ACTIVITIES:
The parks and recreation committee or such supervisors and volunteers as it appoints may organize and conduct
plays, games, calisthenics, gymnastics, athletic sports and games, tournaments, meets, leagues, dramatics, movies,
pageants, festivals and celebrations, community music, clubs, debating societies, public speaking, storytelling, hikes,
picnics, excursions, camping, handicraft activities, and other recreational, cultural and health promoting activities that
may employ the leisure time of the people in a constructive and wholesome manner. (Ord. 2006-11, 5-3-2006, eff. 5-3-
2006)
2.43.090: FINANCES:
A. The city council shall annually appropriate, and cause to be raised by taxation, fees, grants, and charges, money to
cover expenses incurred in the developing, equipping, operating and maintaining of park and recreation facilities.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 59/571
B. The parks and recreation committee shall be responsible for the use of any grounds, buildings, or other facilities
which may be offered, either temporarily or permanently, by any individual or corporation for playground and
recreational purposes; and may recommend to the city council set fees and charges for specific activities, solicit or
receive donations, gifts, legacies, bequests, or devises to be applied, principal or interest, either temporary or
permanent, for the establishment, improvement, or maintenance of recreational facilities and activities. All monies
so received shall, unless otherwise provided by the terms of the gift or devise, be deposited with the finance
controller and used for parks and recreation purposes only and administered by the parks and recreation
committee.
C. The parks and recreation committee shall prepare and submit to the council by March 1 a prior year's
accountability, a capital budget and an operating budget for the ensuing year, together with a long range capital
improvement program covering a period of time which, in the opinion of the parks and recreation committee, bears
a rational relationship to present and future parks' and recreation needs.
D. The capital budget shall be prepared in sufficient detail so that it may be adopted in whole or in part by the council
as part of the annual budget as required by law.
E. A prioritized list of long range capital improvements shall be prepared by the committee with the purpose in view of
facilitating the systematic, orderly and economical development of recreation and public parks' improvements in
accordance with the master plan and in scale with ability to pay. (Ord. 2006-11, 5-3-2006, eff. 5-3-2006)
Chapter 2.44
RECREATION BOARD
(Rep. by Ord. 2006-11, 5-3-2006, eff. 5-3-2006)
Chapter 2.45
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION
2.45.010: ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION CREATED:
There is hereby created the Mapleton City economic development commission. (1986 Code)
2.45.020: PURPOSE OF THE COMMISSION:
The purpose of the economic development commission is to provide input on economic development issues to the
Mapleton City council or provide other information as directed by the city council. (1986 Code)
2.45.030: RECOMMENDATION ADVISORY:
Recommendations of the economic development commission may be made to the city council. Such
recommendations shall be advisory only. The city council, after submitting policy questions to the commission in
accordance with section 2.45.040 of this chapter, may adopt, reject, or modify, in whole or in part any such proposed
policy. (1986 Code)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 60/571
2.45.040: POLICY ISSUES SUBMITTED TO THE COMMISSION:
As a general policy, the city council shall submit proposed policy to the economic development commission before
such policy is implemented. The economic development commission shall have thirty (30) days to respond to a
request from the council for recommendation and if none is received within thirty (30) days after the request is made to
the chairman, the city council may act on the proposed policy without the commission's recommendation. (1986 Code)
2.45.050: MEMBERS AND COMPENSATION:
The Mapleton City economic development commission shall consist of five (5) members appointed by the mayor with
the advice and consent of the council. Members shall serve without compensation except for travel expenses, which
have been approved by the mayor. (1986 Code)
2.45.060: TERMS OF OFFICE:
The five (5) appointed members of the commission shall serve for a four (4) year term. (1986 Code)
2.45.070: OFFICERS MEETINGS, QUORUM, SECRETARY:
The economic development commission shall elect from its members a chairman who shall preside over the meetings
and a vice chairman who shall preside for the chairman in his absence. The elections of officers shall be held at the
first regular meeting following January 1 of each even numbered year.
Three (3) members of the commission shall constitute a quorum. No action shall be taken by the commission except
by the affirmative vote of a majority of the quorum.
The commission shall adopt rules for the conduct of its meeting. Meetings shall be held at least quarterly at times and
places designated by the commission and special meetings as requested by the city council or economic development
commission chairman, except that meetings shall not be held during city council meeting times.
The secretary shall be appointed by vote of the commission members and be responsible for providing typed copies of
the minutes to the city recorder, who shall provide a copy to each member of the city council. (1986 Code)
2.45.080: REMOVAL FROM COMMISSION:
Any member of the economic development commission may be removed by a majority vote of the city council without
cause. Any member who fails to attend three (3) consecutive regularly scheduled meetings without excused absence
shall be removed without further action. Following removal a successor may be nominated immediately by the mayor
and approved by the city council to fill the remainder of the vacated term. (1986 Code)
2.45.090: COOPERATION WITH OTHER COMMISSIONS, AGENCIES, DEPARTMENTS, AND
ORGANIZATIONS:
In carrying out the provisions and purposes of this chapter, the commission shall cooperate with, and make use of, the
services of existing private or public agencies and organization to the fullest extent practicable. (1986 Code)
2.45.100: REPORTS:
The chairman of the commission shall provide reports, as needed, to the city council. (1986 Code)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 61/571
Chapter 2.46
MAPLETON CITY UTILITIES COMMISSION
2.46.010: UTILITIES COMMISSION CREATED:
There is hereby created the Mapleton City utilities commission. (Ord. 2002-15, 9-4-2002)
2.46.020: PURPOSE OF THE COMMISSION:
The utilities commission shall review and recommend action on proposed policy for the operation of Mapleton City
utilities. "Mapleton City utilities" shall be construed to mean those utilities owned and controlled by the city and those
utilities franchised by the city. "Policy" shall include any ordinance, resolution or administrative action which
establishes general principles by which the utilities shall be operated including, but not limited to, the establishment of
rates, plans for overall systems construction, improvement, major modification or expansion; and general development
and connection requirements. (Ord. 2002-15, 9-4-2002)
2.46.030: RECOMMENDATION ADVISORY:
As a general policy, the city council shall submit proposed policies to the utilities commission for their review, and for
the commission to provide the council with an advisory report. (Ord. 2002-15, 9-4-2002)
2.46.040: POLICY ISSUES SUBMITTED TO THE COMMISSION:
As a general policy, the city council should consider the commission's advisory report on policy issues; however, the
city council is not always required to do so. In the event the report is delayed, or the council decides the issue needs
to be addressed by the city council before an advisory report can be prepared, the council may take action on a
utilities issue without first receiving the commission's advisory report. (Ord. 2002-15, 9-4-2002)
2.46.050: UTILITIES COMMISSION MEMBERS AND COMPENSATION:
The Mapleton City utilities commission shall consist of members appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent
of the council. Members shall serve without compensation except for travel expenses, which have been approved by
the mayor. (Ord. 2002-15, 9-4-2002)
2.46.060: TERMS OF OFFICE:
After the expiration of the initial terms of its members, the commission members shall be appointed for two (2) year
terms. (Ord. 2002-15, 9-4-2002)
2.46.070: OFFICERS MEETINGS, QUORUM, SECRETARY:
The utilities commission shall elect from its members a chairman who shall preside over the meetings and a vice
chairman who shall preside for the chairman in his absence. The elections of officers shall be held at the first regular
meeting following January 1 of each even numbered year.
A simple majority shall constitute a quorum. No action shall be taken by the commission except by the affirmative vote
of a majority of the quorum.
The commission shall adopt rules for the conduct of its meeting. Meetings shall be held at times and places
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 62/571
designated by the commission or as requested by the city council or utilities commission chairman, except that
meetings shall not be held during city council meeting times.
The secretary shall be appointed by vote of the commission members and be responsible for providing typed copies of
the minutes to the city recorder, who shall provide a copy to each member of the city council. (Ord. 2002-15, 9-4-2002)
2.46.080: REMOVAL FROM COMMISSION:
Any member of the utilities commission may be removed by a majority vote of the city council without cause. Any
member who fails to attend three (3) consecutive regularly scheduled meetings without excused absence shall be
removed without further action. Following removal a successor may be nominated immediately by the mayor and
approved by the city council to fill the remainder of the vacated term. (Ord. 2002-15, 9-4-2002)
2.46.090: COOPERATION WITH OTHER COMMISSIONS, AGENCIES, DEPARTMENTS, AND
ORGANIZATIONS:
In carrying out the provisions and purposes of this chapter, the commission shall cooperate with, and make use of, the
services of existing private or public agencies and organization to the fullest extent practicable.
The commission shall submit to the planning commission or any planned or proposed policy which may affect this
code for which the planning commission has responsibility. (Ord. 2002-15, 9-4-2002)
2.46.100: REPORTS:
The chairman of the commission shall provide reports, as needed, to the city council. (Ord. 2002-15, 9-4-2002)
Chapter 2.48
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMITTEE
2.48.010: ESTABLISHED:
There is created a committee to be known and designated as the historic preservation committee, to be appointed and
to hold office as is more particularly set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 2001-35, 11-7-2001)
2.48.020: MEMBERSHIP; FILLING OF VACANCIES:
The historic preservation committee shall consist of five (5) to seven (7) members. Committee members are to be
appointed by the mayor with the consent of the council. Vacancies occurring otherwise than through the expiration of
terms shall be filled by appointment by the mayor with the consent of the council. Members may be removed after
public hearing, if such hearing is requested, by majority of the council. Members shall be selected without respect to
political affiliations and shall serve without compensation, except for prior approved expenses. (Ord. 2001-35, 11-7-
2001)
2.48.030: ORGANIZATION OF COMMITTEE:
The mayor, upon advice and consent of the council in open meeting, shall appoint officers for the committee consisting
of a chairman, two (2) vice chairmen, secretary/treasurer and shall appoint all other officers necessary. (Ord. 2001-35,
11-7-2001)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 63/571
2.48.035: TERM OF OFFICE:
The chairman, vice chairmen, secretary/treasurer shall be appointed for a period of one year commencing with their
appointment. Thereafter, these officers may be reappointed to their office for up to a maximum of three (3) consecutive
years. New officers, or reappointed officers shall be nominated by the committee, in September to begin their term of
office the following January. The nominations shall be submitted to the mayor during the month of September for
review and appointment, with the consent of the council during the council's October meetings. (Ord. 2001-35, 11-7-
2001)
2.48.040: MEETINGS:
The meetings of the historic preservation committee shall be held on a regular basis, but at least once each quarter at
a time to be decided by the committee; provided, however, that special meetings shall be called at any time by the
mayor, or upon the request of four (4) or more members. The meeting time and agenda are to be posted five (5) days
prior to the meeting. (Ord. 2001-35, 11-7-2001)
2.48.050: JURISDICTION:
The historic preservation committee shall have responsibility and jurisdiction over the Bird Museum and its contents,
and all historical recognition programs, and other programs which have previously, or may in the future, be dedicated
to the purpose of history preservation and are given over to the committee's control by the city council. The historic
preservation committee shall have authority to cooperate with other governmental and historical agencies, church and
civic groups, or private individuals in the advancement of history preservation. (Ord. 2001-35, 11-7-2001)
2.48.060: ORGANIZATION OF ACTIVITIES:
The historic preservation committee, or such supervisors and volunteers as it appoints, may organize and conduct
plays, dramatics, movies, pageants, festivals and celebrations, community music, debating societies, public speaking,
storytelling, picnics, and other historical preservation and cultural activities that may employ the leisure time of the
people in a constructive and wholesome manner. (Ord. 2001-35, 11-7-2001)
2.48.070: DESIGNATION OF PROPERTY FOR HISTORIC PRESERVATION PURPOSES:
The historic preservation committee, with approval of the city council, may designate and set apart for use as a
museum, the Bird family house, located at 105 South Main Street, Mapleton, Utah. That it may be suitable for such
purposes; and, with the consent and approval of the city council, may equip, maintain, operate, and supervise the
employment of such leaders, directors, supervisors, and volunteers as it may deem appropriate.
The historic preservation committee, with approval of the city council, may solicit for and accept title, possession or
temporary use of historically significant item of personal property to be owned, controlled, managed, or displayed.
(Ord. 2001-35, 11-7-2001)
2.48.080: FINANCES:
A. The city council shall annually appropriate, and cause to be raised by taxation, fees, and charges, money to cover
expenses incurred in the equipping, operating and maintaining of historic preservation facilities and activities.
B. The historic preservation committee shall take charge of and use any grounds, buildings, or other facilities which
may be offered, either temporarily or permanently, by any individual or corporation for historic preservation
purposes; and may set fees and charges for specific activities, solicit or receive donations, gifts, legacies,
bequests, or devises to be applied, principal or interest, either temporary or permanent, for the establishment,
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 64/571
improvement, or maintenance of historic preservation facilities and activities. All monies so received shall, unless
otherwise provided by the terms of the gift or devise, be deposited with the city treasurer and used for historic
preservation purposes only and administered by the historic preservation committee.
C. The historic preservation committee shall prepare and submit to the council by March 1, a capital budget and an
operating budget for the ensuing year, together with a long range capital improvement program covering a period
of time which, in the opinion of the historic preservation committee, bears a rational relationship to present and
future historic preservation needs.
D. The capital budget shall be prepared in sufficient detail so that it may be adopted in whole or in part by the council
as part of the annual budget as required by law.
E. A prioritized list of long range capital improvements shall be prepared with the purpose in view of facilitating the
systematic, orderly and economical development of historical preservation improvements in accordance with the
master plan and in scale with ability to pay. (Ord. 2001-35, 11-7-2001)
Chapter 2.50
FINE ARTS COMMITTEE
2.50.010: ESTABLISHED:
There is created a committee to be known and designated as the fine arts committee, to be appointed and to hold
office as is more particularly set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 2002-06, 4-24-2002)
2.50.020: MEMBERSHIP; FILLING OF VACANCIES:
The fine arts committee shall consist of five (5) to seven (7) members who are residents of the city. Committee
members are to be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the council. Vacancies occurring otherwise than
through the expiration of terms shall be filled by appointment by the mayor with the consent of the council. Members
may be removed after public hearing, if such hearing is requested, by majority of the council. Members shall be
selected without respect to political affiliations and shall serve without compensation, except for prior approved
expenses. (Ord. 2002-06, 4-24-2002)
2.50.030: ORGANIZATION OF COMMITTEE:
The mayor, upon the advice and consent of the council in open meeting, shall appoint officers for the committee
consisting of a chairman, a vice chairman, a secretary/treasurer and shall appoint other officers as needed. A council
member shall be assigned by the mayor to serve as liaison between the fine arts committee and the city council. (Ord.
2002-06, 4-24-2002)
2.50.040: TERM OF OFFICE:
The chairman, vice chairman, secretary/treasurer shall be appointed for a period of one year commencing with their
appointment. Thereafter, these officers may be reappointed to their office for up to a maximum of three (3) consecutive
years. New officers, or reappointed officers shall be nominated by the commission, in September to begin their term of
office the following January. The nominations shall be submitted to the mayor during the month of September for
review and appointment, with the consent of the council during the council's October meetings. (Ord. 2002-06, 4-24-
2002)
2.50.050: MEETINGS:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 65/571
The meetings of the fine arts committee shall be held on a regular basis, but at least once each quarter at a time to be
decided by the committee provided, however, that special meetings shall be called at any time by the mayor, or upon
the request of four (4) or more members. A council member assigned by the mayor to serve as liaison between the
fine arts committee and the city council shall be invited to attend each meeting of the committee. (Ord. 2002-06, 4-24-
2002)
2.50.060: JURISDICTION:
The fine arts committee shall be an advisory body, with responsibility to advise the council regarding the promotion,
establishment, operation and scope of productions, performances, concerts, readings, plays, and other forms of fine
arts presentations for the benefit of Mapleton City and its residents. The fine arts committee shall advise the council
regarding cooperation with other governmental and historical agencies, church and civic groups, or private individuals
in the advancement of the arts in the community. (Ord. 2002-06, 4-24-2002)
2.50.070: ORGANIZATION OF ACTIVITIES:
The fine arts committee, or such supervisors and volunteers as it appoints, subject to approval of the council, may
organize and conduct plays, dramatics, movies, pageants, festivals, and celebrations, community music, debating
societies, public speaking, storytelling, and other fine arts and cultural activities that may employ the leisure time of the
people in a constructive and wholesome manner. (Ord. 2002-06, 4-24-2002)
2.50.080: FINANCES:
A. The city council may annually appropriate, and cause to be raised by taxation, fees, and charges, money to cover
expenses incurred in the equipping, operating and maintaining of fine arts activities. This is intended to be a selffunding
organization.
B. The fine arts committee shall prepare and recommend to the council by March 1, a capital budget and an operating
budget for the ensuing year, together with a long range capital improvement program covering a period of time
which, in the opinion of the committee bears a rational relationship to present and future fine arts needs of the city.
C. A prioritized list of long range capital improvements shall be recommended to the council with the purpose in view
of facilitating the systematic, orderly and economical development of improvement to the fine arts programs in
accordance with the master plan and in scale with ability to pay. (Ord. 2002-06, 4-24-2002)
Chapter 2.52
TRANSPORTATION ADVISORY COMMISSION
2.52.010: ESTABLISHED:
The Mapleton City transportation advisory commission (hereinafter referred to as "commission") is hereby established.
(Ord. 2007-12, 5-15-2007)
2.52.020: DUTIES:
The commission shall act in an advisory capacity to the city council and shall have the following duties and
responsibilities:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 66/571
A. Recommend to the planning commission and city council a transportation master plan and updates to the
transportation master plan. The recommendation shall include road classifications.
B. Hear requests from citizens for traffic calming devices and recommend a priority list of traffic calming devices to the
city manager for consideration of inclusion in the proposed city budget.
C. Review and make recommendations to the city council regarding bike paths, bike lanes, bike trails, and other
issues regarding the use of bicycles in Mapleton City.
D. Review and make recommendations to the city council regarding mass transit issues in Mapleton City.
E. Review and make recommendations to the city council on other traffic and transportation issues brought to the
commission by the city administrator.
F. Work toward the continuing education of citizens regarding transportation issues in our community.
G. Plan and arrange for neighborhood meetings/open houses and attend such meetings to receive and review public
input.
H. Review and make recommendations to the city council regarding intersection improvements.
I. Review and make recommendations on other transportation issues, programs, and improvements to the city council.
(Ord. 2007-12, 5-15-2007)
2.52.030: MEMBERSHIP:
The commission shall consist of seven (7) members. A member of the city council shall be appointed to act as a
liaison between the commission and the city council, but the city council liaison shall not be considered a member of
the commission. (Ord. 2007-12, 5-15-2007)
2.52.040: APPOINTMENT:
A. Commission members shall be appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council.
B. Commission members shall be residents of the city of Mapleton City.
C. Commission members shall be selected without respect to political affiliation. (Ord. 2007-12, 5-15-2007)
2.52.050: TERM OF OFFICE:
A. The term of office for commission members shall be four (4) years even if the appointment was made to fill a
vacancy created by a member who was unable to complete a full term.
B. The term of office of the initial members of the commission shall be staggered so that four (4) are for four (4) year
terms and three (3) are for three (3) year terms.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 67/571
C. Lots shall be drawn at the first meeting of the commission to determine which of the members shall serve for four
(4) year terms and which shall serve for three (3) years.
D. No person shall serve more than one consecutive term on the commission.
E. Each term shall continue until a successor is chosen and qualified, except in the case of the member's death,
resignation, removal, or disqualification from holding office. (Ord. 2007-12, 5-15-2007)
2.52.060: REMOVAL AND VACANCY:
A. Any member of the commission may be removed from office by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city
council.
B. A member's office automatically becomes vacant if the member establishes residence outside of the city, or lives
outside of city boundaries for a continuous period of more than sixty (60) days.
C. A member's office automatically becomes vacant if the member misses more than twenty five percent (25%) of the
commission's meetings during any twelve (12) month period.
D. Vacancies shall be filled for any member whose office becomes vacant.
E. Vacancies occurring other than through the expiration of a regular term shall be filled by appointment of the mayor,
with the advice and consent of the city council. (Ord. 2007-12, 5-15-2007)
2.52.070: VOTING:
A. Each member of the commission shall have one vote.
B. A quorum shall consist of any four (4) members of the commission. No meeting is official unless a quorum of
members is present.
C. The minimum number of votes required to approve or disapprove any action or proposal shall be a majority of those
present at the meeting, provided there is a quorum, but shall never be less than four (4). (Ord. 2007-12, 5-15-2007)
2.52.080: MEETINGS:
A. The commission shall select one of the members to be chairperson. The chairperson shall conduct all meetings and
shall serve for one year. Elections for chairperson shall be held annually at the first January meeting of the year. A
chairperson may serve consecutive terms.
B. The commission shall meet at least monthly and may meet more often at the discretion of its chairperson.
C. Commission business and discussion shall be conducted in accordance with the Utah open public meeting laws
and city policies. This includes public notification of meeting place, time, and agenda items.
D. The commission shall keep written minutes for each of its meetings. The minutes shall be reviewed for approval at
the following commission meeting and shall be available for public inspection.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 68/571
E. The commission may establish subcommittees to help carry out its responsibilities.
F. The city administrator shall appoint appropriate staff support for the commission. (Ord. 2007-12, 5-15-2007)
2.52.090: COMPENSATION:
A. Members of the commission shall serve without monetary compensation.
B. Members may be compensated for reasonable expenses incurred for official responsibilities, if approved by the city
manager. (Ord. 2007-12, 5-15-2007)
2.52.100: RECOMMENDATIONS:
The chairperson of the commission shall, from time to time, present recommendations to the city council which have
been approved by the commission. (Ord. 2007-12, 5-15-2007)
Chapter 2.54
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
2.54.010: CONFLICT OF INTEREST; RULES FOR ABSTAINING FROM A VOTE:
A. Purpose: Public office is a public trust. The trust of the public is essential for government to function effectively. A
government's legitimacy is linked to the integrity of its public officers. Public policy must be based on honest and
fair deliberations and decisions. This process must be free from threats, favoritism, undue influence, and any other
form of impropriety so that the confidence of the public is not eroded. The interest of a public officer should not be
preferred over the public interest. Public officers should resist opportunities to benefit themselves over the citizens
they were elected or appointed to serve. Mapleton City is its people; its residents, its taxpayers. The purpose of
this chapter is to protect the integrity and fairness of Mapleton City government. (Ord. 2009-01, 2-18-2009, eff. 3-
20-2009)
B. Definitions: As used in this chapter:
CITY BODY: The Mapleton City council (including the mayor), the planning commission, and each commission,
board, committee, or other similar body of the city organized to make public policy decisions or to advise persons
who make public policy decisions including governing boards of any local district, special district or improvement
district controlled by the city.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST: 1. Any circumstance which requires disclosure by a member of a city body under the
provisions of Utah code title 10, chapter 3, part 13 of the municipal officers' and employees' ethics act including:
a. Receives or agrees to receive compensation for assisting any person in a transaction involving the city
under Utah code section 10-3-1305;
b. Is an officer, director, agent, or employee, or the owner of a substantial interest in a business entity which
is subject to the regulation of the city under Utah code section 10-3-1306;
c. Is an officer, director, agent, or employee, or the owner of a substantial interest in a business entity which
does or anticipates doing business with the city under Utah code section 10-3-1307;
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 69/571
d. Has a personal interest or investment which creates a conflict between the person's personal interests
and the person's public duties under Utah code section 10-3-1308;
2. Any circumstance not covered under subsection 1 of this definition in which it is reasonably foreseeable,
and not merely speculative or remote, that the decision of a member of a city body will be affected by a
member's direct interest in the matter before the city body, regardless of whether the direct interest is
pecuniary, familial, or otherwise, but only if the benefit or detriment of the decision is distinguishable from
the effects of that decision on the public or on the member's profession, occupation, or association
generally. (Ord. 2009-01, 2-18-2009, eff. 3-20-2009; amd. Ord. 2013-04, 2-19-2013, eff. 4-1-2013)
C. Abstaining From Vote:
1. If a member of a city body has a conflict of interest on a matter being considered by the city body, the member:
a. May not vote on the matter if:
(1) The conflict of interest involves the provisions of subsection 1a in the definition of "conflict of interest" of
this section;
(2) The matter involves the regulation of a business entity under subsection 1b in the definition of "conflict of
interest" of this section; or
(3) The matter involves the procurement of goods or services from a business entity under subsection 1c in
the definition of "conflict of interest" of this section; or
b. May abstain from voting on the matter if:
(1) The conflict of interest involves the provisions of subsection 1d in the definition of "conflict of interest" of
this section; or
(2) The conflict of interest involves the provisions of subsection 2 in the definition of "conflict of interest" of this
section.
2. If a person may not vote under subsection C1a of this section, the member:
a. Shall withdraw from the dais and leave the room while the matter is considered; and
b. Shall not discuss the matter with any member of the city body during the meeting.
3. Except as provided under subsection C1 of this section, a member of a city body who is in attendance at a
meeting when a vote is taken shall vote on every question put to a vote before the city body.
D. Disclosure Of Conflict Of Interest: In accordance with Utah code title 10, chapter 3, the municipal officers' and
employees' ethics act, a member of a city body shall make the required disclosures of a conflict of interest under
subsection 1 in the definition of "conflict of interest" of this section.
E. Representation Restrictions: In a case not amounting to a conflict of interest under subsection 1a in the definition of
"conflict of interest" of this section, a person who is a member of a city body may not represent any other person,
group, or entity before:
1. That body; or
2. A city body which has appellate jurisdiction over the body of which the person is a member. (Ord. 2009-01, 2-18-
2009, eff. 3-20-2009)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 70/571
Chapter 2.60
GREEN COMMITTEE
2.60.010: COMMITTEE ESTABLISHED:
The Mapleton City green committee (hereinafter referred to as "committee") is hereby established. (Ord. 2008-13, 7-
16-2008, eff. 9-25-2008)
2.60.020: DUTIES OF COMMITTEE:
The committee shall act in an advisory capacity to the city council and shall have the following duties and
responsibilities:
A. Recommend to the planning commission and city council and formulate proposals for and make recommendations
to the city council on a comprehensive program for conservation of water, energy, etc.; identify if grants are
available to assist in the implementation of conservation programs, projects consistent with environmental
protection and preservation.
B. Hear requests from citizens for traffic calming devices and recommend a priority list of traffic calming devices to the
city manager for consideration of inclusion in the proposed city budget.
C. Review and make recommendations to the city council regarding bike paths, bike lanes, bike trails, and other
issues regarding the use of bicycles in Mapleton City.
D. Review and make recommendations to the city council regarding mass transit issues in Mapleton City.
E. Review and make recommendations to the city council on other traffic and transportation issues brought to the
commission by the city administrator.
F. Work toward the continuing education of citizens regarding transportation issues in the community.
G. Plan and arrange for neighborhood meetings/open houses and attend such meetings to receive and review public
input.
H. Review and make recommendations to the city council regarding intersection improvements.
I. Review and make recommendations on other transportation issues, programs, and improvements to the city council.
(Ord. 2008-13, 7-16-2008, eff. 9-25-2008)
2.60.030: MEMBERSHIP OF COMMITTEE:
The committee shall consist of six (6) members. A member of the planning commission shall be appointed to act as a
liaison between the committee and the city council, but the planning commission liaison shall not be considered a
member of the committee. (Ord. 2008-13, 7-16-2008, eff. 9-25-2008)
2.60.040: APPOINTMENT:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 71/571
A. Committee members shall be appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council.
B. Committee members shall be residents of Mapleton City.
C. Committee members shall be selected without respect to political affiliation. (Ord. 2008-13, 7-16-2008, eff. 9-25-
2008)
2.60.050: TERM OF OFFICE:
A. The term of office for committee members shall be four (4) years even if the appointment was made to fill a vacancy
created by a member who was unable to complete a full term.
B. The term of office of the initial members of the committee shall be staggered so that four (4) are for four (4) year
terms and three (3) are for three (3) year terms.
C. Lots shall be drawn at the first meeting of the committee to determine which of the members shall serve for four (4)
year terms and which shall serve for three (3) years.
D. No person shall serve more than one consecutive term on the committee.
E. Each term shall continue until a successor is chosen and qualified, except in the case of the member's death,
resignation, removal, or disqualification from holding office. (Ord. 2008-13, 7-16-2008, eff. 9-25-2008)
2.60.060: REMOVAL AND VACANCY:
A. Any member of the committee may be removed from office by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city
council.
B. A member's office automatically becomes vacant if the member establishes residence outside of the city, or lives
outside of city boundaries for a continuous period of more than sixty (60) days.
C. A member's office automatically becomes vacant if the member misses more than twenty five percent (25%) of the
committee's meetings during any twelve (12) month period.
D. Vacancies shall be filled for any member whose office becomes vacant.
E. Vacancies occurring other than through the expiration of a regular term shall be filled by appointment of the mayor,
with the advice and consent of the city council. (Ord. 2008-13, 7-16-2008, eff. 9-25-2008)
2.60.070: VOTING:
A. Each member of the committee shall have one vote.
B. A quorum shall consist of any four (4) members of the committee. No meeting is official unless a quorum of
members is present.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 72/571
C. The minimum number of votes required to approve or disapprove any action or proposal shall be a majority of those
present at the meeting, provided there is a quorum, but shall never be less than four (4). (Ord. 2008-13, 7-16-2008,
eff. 9-25-2008)
2.60.080: MEETINGS:
A. The committee shall select one of the members to be chairperson. The chairperson shall conduct all meetings and
shall serve for one year. Elections for chairperson shall be held annually at the first January meeting of the year. A
chairperson may serve consecutive terms.
B. The committee shall meet at least monthly and may meet more often at the discretion of its chairperson.
C. Committee business and discussion shall be conducted in accordance with the Utah open public meeting laws and
city policies. This includes public notification of meeting place, time, and agenda items.
D. The committee shall keep written minutes for each of its meetings. The minutes shall be reviewed for approval at
the following committee meeting and shall be available for public inspection.
E. The committee may establish subcommittees to help carry out its responsibilities.
F. The city administrator shall appoint appropriate staff support for the committee. (Ord. 2008-13, 7-16-2008, eff. 9-25-
2008)
2.60.090: COMPENSATION:
A. Members of the committee shall serve without monetary compensation.
B. Members may be compensated for reasonable expenses incurred for official responsibilities, if approved by the city
manager. (Ord. 2008-13, 7-16-2008, eff. 9-25-2008)
2.60.100: RECOMMENDATIONS:
The chairperson of the committee shall, from time to time, present recommendations to the city council which have
been approved by the committee. (Ord. 2008-13, 7-16-2008, eff. 9-25-2008)
Title 3
REVENUE AND FINANCE
Chapter 3.04
FISCAL PROCEDURES AND BUDGETING
3.04.010: ADOPTION:
The city council adopts the uniform fiscal procedures act for Utah cities Utah Code Annotated 10-6-101 et seq., as
corrected and amended, and all provisions relating thereto, as the fiscal procedures and budgeting policy of the city,
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 73/571
and said act is adopted and approved to the same intent and extent as if it were copied verbatim in this code. (1986
Code)
Chapter 3.08
SALES AND USE TAXES
3.08.010: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the UNIFORM LOCAL SALES AND USE TAX ORDINANCE of Mapleton City. (1986
Code)
3.08.020: PURPOSE:
The Utah legislature has authorized municipalities of the state of Utah to enact sale and use tax ordinances imposing
a 58/64 percent local option sales and use tax effective July 1, 1986, and to authorize and designate the Utah state
tax commission as agent for the municipality to collect the tax and to conform with the requirements of the uniform
local sales and use tax law of Utah, chapter 9, title 11, Utah Code Annotated, 1953, as amended. (1986 Code)
3.08.030: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall become effective as of one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M., July 1, 1986. The provisions of
the previously enacted uniform local sales and use tax ordinance of the municipality which is repealed hereby and
which are in conflict herewith shall continue effective until twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight, June 30, 1986. The
provisions of this chapter which are not in conflict with said former chapter shall be deemed to be a continuation
thereof and any rights, duties and obligations arising thereunder shall not in any way be deemed abrogated or
terminated. (1986 Code)
3.08.040: SALES TAX:
A. Retail Sales To Be Taxed; Rate Of Tax:
1. From and after the effective date of this chapter, there is levied and there shall be collected and paid a tax on
every retail sale of tangible personal property, services and meals made within the municipality at the rate of
58/64 percent.
2. For the purpose of this chapter, all retail sales shall be presumed to have been consummated at the place of
business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an
out of state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out of state destination. If a retailer has no
permanent place of business in the state, or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which
the retail sales are consummated shall be as determined under the rules and regulations prescribed and
adopted by the state tax commission. Public utilities as defined by title 54, Utah Code Annotated 1953, shall not
be obligated to determine the place or places within any county or municipality where public utilities services are
rendered, but the place of sale or the sales tax revenues arising from such service allocable to the municipality
shall be as determined by the state tax commission pursuant to an appropriate formula and other rules and
regulations to be prescribed and adopted by it.
B. Adoption Of State Tax Provisions By Reference; Exceptions:
1. Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of the uniform
local sales and use tax law of Utah, all of the provisions of chapter 15, title 59, Utah Code Annotated 1953, as
amended, and in force and effect of the effective date of this chapter, insofar as they relate to sales taxes,
excepting for the amount of the sales tax levied therein, are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as
though fully set forth herein.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 74/571
2. Wherever, and to the extent that in chapter 15 of title 59, Utah Code Annotated 1953, as amended, the state of
Utah is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this municipality shall be substituted therefor.
Nothing in this subsection B shall be deemed to require substitution of the name of the municipality for the word
"state" when that word is used as part of the title of the state tax commission, or of the constitution of Utah, nor
shall the name of the municipality be substituted for that of the state in any section when the result of that
substitution would require action to be taken by or against the municipality or any agency thereof, rather than by
or against the state tax commission in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this
chapter.
3. There shall be excluded from the purchase price paid or charged by which tax is measured:
a. The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state of Utah on a retailer or consumer;
b. Receipts from the sale of tangible personal property on which a sales or use tax has become due by reason of
the same transaction to any other municipality and any county in the state of Utah, under a sales or use tax
ordinance enacted by that county or municipality in accordance with the uniform local sales and use tax law of
Utah. (1986 Code)
3.08.050: USE TAX:
A. Use And Consumption Of Property To Be Taxed; Rate Of Tax: An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use,
or other consumption in this municipality of tangible personal property from any retailer on or after the operative
date of this chapter for storage, use or other consumption in the municipality at the rate of 58/64 percent of the
sales price of the property.
B. Adoption Of State Provisions By Reference; Exceptions:
1. Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of the uniform
local sales and use tax law of Utah, all of the provisions of chapter 16, title 59, Utah Code Annotated, 1953, as
amended and in force and effect on the effective date of this chapter, applicable to use taxes, excepting the
provisions of sections 59-16-1 and 59-16-25 thereof, and excepting for the amount of the tax levied therein, are
hereby adopted and made a part of this section as though fully set forth herein.
2. Wherever and to the extent that in chapter 16 of title 59, Utah Code Annotated, 1953, the state of Utah is named
or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this municipality shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in this
subsection B shall be deemed to require the substitution of the name of this municipality for the word "state"
when that word is used as a part of the title of the state tax commission, or of the constitution of Utah, nor shall
the name of the municipality be substituted for that of the state in any section when the results of that
substitution would require action to be taken by or against the municipality or any agency thereof, rather than by
or against the state tax commission in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this
chapter.
3. There shall be exempt from the tax due under this section:
a. The amount of sales or use tax imposed by the state of Utah upon a retailer or consumer,
b. The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sales of or
the cost of which has been subject to sales or use tax under a sales or use tax ordinance enacted in
accordance with the uniform local sales and use tax law of Utah by any other municipality and any county of
the state. (1986 Code)
3.08.060: MAYOR AUTHORIZED TO EXECUTE DOCUMENTS RELATING TO DISTRIBUTION OF
TAX REVENUES:
The mayor is authorized to execute whatever documents are necessary to distribute sales and use tax revenues on
the combination of point of sale and population factors set forth in section 11-9-5, Utah Code Annotated, 1953, as
amended. (1986 Code)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 75/571
3.08.070: CONTRACT WITH STATE TAX COMMISSION:
Heretofore, the city has entered into an agreement with the state tax commission to perform all functions incident to
the administration or operation of the sales and use tax ordinance of the municipality. The contract is hereby confirmed
and the mayor is hereby authorized to enter into such supplementary agreement with the state tax commission as may
be necessary to the continued administration and operation of the local sales and use tax ordinance of the city as
reenacted by this chapter. (1986 Code)
3.08.080: PENALTY:
Violation of this chapter shall be a class B misdemeanor. (1986 Code)
Chapter 3.10
TRANSIENT ROOM TAX
3.10.010: PURPOSE:
The Utah state legislature has authorized municipalities to enact a transient room tax that may be collected from
persons and entities providing public accommodations in the city. It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the
uniform assessment and collection of that tax pursuant to Utah code section 59-12-301 (as amended). (Ord. 2014-12,
9-16-2014, eff. 10-1-2014)
3.10.020: DEFINITIONS:
PUBLIC ACCOMMODATIONS: A place providing temporary sleeping accommodations that are regularly rented to the
public, and includes:
A. A motel;
B. A hotel;
C. A motor court;
D. An inn;
E. A bed and breakfast establishment;
F. A short term residential rental property; and
G. A timeshare.
TRANSIENT: The occupation of a public accommodation, by a person, entity or group of less than thirty (30)
consecutive days. (Ord. 2014-12, 9-16-2014, eff. 10-1-2014)
3.10.030: TAX LEVIED:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 76/571
There is hereby levied upon the business of every person, company, corporation, or other like and similar persons,
groups, or organizations, providing "public accommodations" as defined in section 3.10.020 of this chapter, an annual
license tax equal to one percent (1%) of the gross revenue derived from the rent for each and every occupancy of a
suite, room, or rooms, for a period of less than thirty (30) days. (Ord. 2014-12, 9-16-2014, eff. 10-1-2014)
3.10.040: GROSS RECEIPTS:
For purposes of this section, gross receipts shall be computed upon the base room rental rate. There shall be
excluded from the gross revenue, by which this tax is measured:
A. The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state of Utah or by any other governmental agency upon a
retailer or consumer;
B. The amount of any transient room tax levied under authority of chapter 31 of title 17, Utah code (as amended), or
its successor;
C. Receipts from the sale or service charge for any food, beverage, or room service charges in conjunction with the
occupancy of the suite, room, or rooms, not included in the base room rate; and
D. Charges made for supplying telephone service, gas, or electrical energy service, not included in the base room
rate. (Ord. 2014-12, 9-16-2014, eff. 10-1-2014)
3.10.050: EXEMPTIONS TO TRANSIENT ROOM TAX:
A. No transient room tax shall be imposed under this chapter upon any person:
1. Engaged in business for solely religious, charitable, eleemosynary, or other types of strictly nonprofit purpose
who is tax exempt in such activities under the laws of the United States and the state of Utah;
2. Engaged in a business specifically exempted from municipal taxation and fees by the laws of the United States
or the state; or
3. An assisted living facility, residential treatment facility, senior living facility, or other medical treatment facility.
(Ord. 2014-12, 9-16-2014, eff. 10-1-2014)
3.10.060: PAYMENTS:
On or before the effective date of this chapter, Mapleton City shall contract with the state tax commission to perform all
functions incident to the administration and collection of the municipal transient room tax, in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. The city administrator is hereby authorized to enter into agreements with the state tax
commission that may be necessary for the continued administration and operation of the transient room tax enacted
by this chapter. (Ord. 2014-12, 9-16-2014, eff. 10-1-2014)
3.10.070: PENALTIES AND INTEREST:
Penalties and interest equal to those authorized by Utah Code Annotated sections 59-1-401 and 59-1-402 (as
amended), or its successor, shall be imposed on any person who:
A. Is required to pay the tax under this part; and
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 77/571
B. Does not remit the tax to the collecting agent within the time prescribed by law. (Ord. 2014-12, 9-16-2014, eff. 10-1-
2014)
Chapter 3.16
CLAIMS AGAINST THE CITY
3.16.010: APPROVAL OF CLAIMS:
It shall be the duty of the council to carefully examine all claims presented against the city, when properly verified, and
determine which are valid obligations of the city to be approved and ordered paid, or whether such claim should be
referred to the city attorney for defense, approval or denial. (1986 Code)
3.16.020: CLAIM FOR INJURY:
A claim is deemed to arise when the statute of limitations that would apply if the claim were against a private person
commences to run. (1986 Code)
3.16.030: FILING OF NOTICE:
Any person having a claim for injury against the city or against an employee of the city for an act of omission occurring
during the performance of his duties, within the scope of employment, or under color of authority shall, before
maintaining an action, file a written notice of claim with the city. (1986 Code)
3.16.040: CONTENTS OF NOTICE; SERVICE:
The notice of claim shall set forth a brief statement of facts, the nature of the claim asserted, and the damages
incurred by the claimant so far as they are known, shall be signed by the person making the claim or such person's
agent, attorney, parent or legal guardian, and shall be directed and delivered to the city in the manner and within one
year after the claim arises as prescribed by Utah Code Annotated 63-30-13, or before the expiration of any extension
of time granted by the court. (1986 Code)
3.16.050: LEGAL DISABILITY; EXTENSION:
If, at the time the claim arises, the claimant is under the age of majority, or mentally incompetent and without legal
guardian, or imprisoned, upon application by the claimant and after hearing and notice to the city, the court, in its
discretion, may extend the time for service of notice of claim; but in no event shall it grant an extension which exceeds
the applicable statute of limitations. In determining whether to grant an extension, the court shall consider whether the
delay in serving notice of claim will substantially prejudice the city in maintaining its defense on the merits. (1986
Code)
3.16.060: TIME LIMITATION:
A claim against the city or against its employees is barred unless notice of claim is filed within one year after the cause
of action arises, or before the expiration of any extension of notice granted by the court. (1986 Code)
3.16.070: DENIAL OF CLAIM FOR INJURY; FILING ACTION AGAINST CITY:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 78/571
If the claim is denied by the city or its agents, a claimant may file an action in the district court against the city in those
circumstances in which immunity from suit has been waived1. The action must be commenced within one year after
denial or the denial period as specified in this chapter. (1986 Code)
Chapter 3.20
LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS
3.20.010: STATE REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
The city council adopts the "Utah municipal improvements district act", Utah Code Annotated 10-16-1 et seq., as
compiled and amended, as if the text of the entire act were printed verbatim in this code. (1986 Code)
Title 4
RESERVED
Title 5
BUSINESS TAXES, LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
Chapter 5.04
BUSINESS LICENSES GENERALLY
5.04.010: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or carry on any business, trade, profession or calling, within the city, for
the transaction or carrying on of which a license is required without first taking out or procuring a license required for
such business, trade, profession or calling. (1986 Code)
5.04.020: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
A. Application for license shall be made in writing to the recorder. All certificates of license shall be signed by the
mayor and attested by the recorder under the seal of the city. The application will show:
1. The name of the person desiring a license;
2. The kind of license desired, stating the business, calling, trade or profession to be performed, practiced or
carried on;
3. The class of license desired, if such licenses are divided into classes;
4. The place where the business, calling, trade or profession is to be carried on, giving the street number, if such
business, calling, trade or profession is to be carried on in any building or enclosure;
5. The period of time for which the license is desired to be issued;
6. The application shall also state any other matter or thing required by law or statute.
B. No transfer of a license shall be made except on authorization by the council and the payment of a fee of two
dollars fifty cents ($2.50). (1986 Code)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 79/571
5.04.030: FAILURE TO PAY LICENSE:
If any person shall neglect, fail or refuse to pay the amount assessed when it becomes due on any license mentioned
or provided in this chapter, for a period of thirty (30) days after the date on which the license becomes due and
payable, a penalty of twenty percent (20%) of the amount of the license shall be added to the original amount for each
month or part thereof that the fee remains unpaid and the payment thereof enforced by the city. (Ord. 2008-09, 5-7-
2008, eff. 6-11-2008)
5.04.040: LICENSE CERTIFICATES:
A. Every certificate of license issued shall bear upon its face:
1. The name of the person to whom the certificate has been issued;
2. The amount paid to the treasurer;
3. The kind of license and the class of license, if the licenses are divided into classes;
4. The term of the license with commencing date, and the date of its expiration;
5. The place where the business, calling, trade or profession is to be carried on.
B. Every certificate of license issued shall be posted by the licensee in a conspicuous place upon the wall of the
building, room or office of the store or place in which the licensed business, calling, trade or profession is carried
on, so that the same may be easily seen, and when the certificate of license shall have expired it shall be removed
by the licensee from the place in which it has been posted, and no certificate of license which is not in force and
effect shall be permitted to remain posted upon the wall or any part of any room, store, office or place of business
after the period of the certificate or license has expired. It shall be the duty of every person to whom a certificate of
license has been issued to show the same at any proper time when requested to do so by any peace officer or
license inspector. No license granted or issued under any of the provisions of this chapter, or otherwise, shall be in
any manner assignable or transferable, or authorize any person, other than is therein named to do business, or
authorize any other business, calling, trade or profession than is therein named, to be done or transacted at any
place other than is therein named, unless by permission of the Council. (1986 Code)
5.04.050: FEES PENDING INVESTIGATION:
In all cases where application is made for a license and the amount of license is deposited with the Recorder, and the
application is referred to the Director of Public Safety for investigation, and pending investigation the applicant shall
engage in the business for which application is made, the application shall be thereafter denied, the Recorder shall
deduct from the deposit the proportionate part of the license earned during the time such applicant has engaged in
business pending such investigation. If any license shall be revoked for cause, none of the license fee paid shall be
refunded. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 2018-06, 6-6-2018, eff. 6-28-2018)
5.04.060: PAYMENT OF LICENSE FEES; TERMS:
All licenses provided for in this chapter shall be payable annually in advance, unless otherwise especially directed. A
license for any business, calling, trade or profession for which a yearly license is required may be issued for a term of
six (6) months upon the payment of ten percent (10%) additional upon one-half (1/2) of the amount of the yearly
license; provided, that no license shall be granted after July 1 for the unexpired portion of the year, except upon
payment of the full one-half (1/2) year rate required in this chapter, unless the license is issued upon payment of the
daily rate herein provided by law; and provided further, that nothing contained in this chapter shall be held to alter or
amend any law requiring a license fee for a year, or any part thereof. (1986 Code)
5.04.070: CIVIL ACTION:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 80/571
A. In all cases where a license from the City is required to be obtained to carry on or engage in any business,
occupation or calling, and the amount to be paid for the license is fixed by this chapter, and the amount shall not
have been paid at the time, or in the manner provided in this chapter, a civil action may be sought in any court of
this State having jurisdiction of the action in the name of the City against the person failing to pay the license to
recover the amount of the same. In any case where several or diverse amounts of license fee as fixed by this
chapter shall remain due and unpaid by any such person, the several amounts of unpaid license fee may be joined
as separate causes of action in the same complaint in the civil actions.
B. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent or in any manner interfere with the enforcement of the penalty
provision contained in title 1 of this Code. (1986 Code)
5.04.080: LICENSE FEES DESIGNATED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or pursue any business, vocation or calling mentioned in this chapter
without first obtaining a license to do so. The required license shall be for the calendar year or any part thereof and the
payment therefor shall be due and payable on the first day of each year or before commencement of any such
business, vocation or calling. (Ord. 94-21)
A. All home occupation licenses shall pay an annual license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) to the City.
B. All other businesses whether wholesale or retail operating within Mapleton City shall pay a license fee of fifty dollars
($50.00) per business license, plus twenty five dollars ($25.00) per employee, or independent contractor of the
business. For the purpose of calculating the business license only, the owner(s), manager(s), and other
administrative officers, directors or partners, who receive compensation of services rendered on behalf of the
business; and all family members of the owner(s), manager(s), and other administrative officers, directors or
partners, who receive compensation for services rendered on behalf of the business shall be counted as an
employee or independent contractor.
C. If any license fee payment is made after January 31, a penalty of twenty percent (20%) of the amount of such
license fee shall be added to the original amount thereof for each month or part thereof that the fee remains
unpaid, unless otherwise set forth herein. No license shall issue until all penalties legally assessed have been paid
in full.
If the license has not been renewed for sixty (60) days from the due date, the business shall be considered to be
doing business without a license in violation of this chapter and is subject to the criminal penalties set forth in this
chapter. (Ord. 2008-09, 5-7-2008, eff. 6-11-2008)
5.04.090: AMUSEMENT DEVICES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his place of business or any other place where the same is permitted to
be played, any amusement device, no matter under what name it may be called without first applying for and obtaining
a license for each such machine or contrivance. The fee payable for each calendar year or any part thereof shall be
fifty dollars ($50.00) per machine. (Ord. 86-4)
5.04.100: SALE OF TANGIBLE PERSONAL PROPERTY; LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person at any time to engage in the business of manufacturing any tangible personal
property at either retail or wholesale or both in the city without first obtaining a license as set forth in this section, or
to violate any provision or to fail to comply with all of the provisions of this chapter and any violation thereof or
failure to comply with any provisions thereof shall be punished as a misdemeanor.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 81/571
B. Every person engaging in one or more of the businesses as set forth in this section shall secure from the recorder a
license for each separate place of business. The license shall be issued by the recorder upon a written application
therefor filed with the recorder and upon payment of the fees as set forth in this section for each separate place of
business.
C. The required written application shall be billed for each separate place of business with the recorder on or before
January 31 each year or before commencing business if the same is commenced after said date of any year and
such application shall set forth the name under which applicant transacts or intends to transact business, the
location of each separate place of business and the gross sales both retail and wholesale made by him in each
separate place of business during the calendar year immediately preceding the required date of filing and such
other information as the recorder may require. The license is not transferable and valid only for the person under
whose name it is issued and for the transaction of business at the place designated therein. A change of location
may be endorsed upon the license by the recorder upon the payment of a fee of ten dollars ($10.00). The
foregoing license shall at all times be conspicuously displayed in the place of business for which issued.
D. For the privilege of engaging in any of the aforementioned businesses in the city, license fees are hereby imposed
on every person so engaged to be computed and paid by the person on each separate place of business
conducted by him, which fees are to be computed on the total gross sales of each separate place of business
during the calendar year immediately preceding the required filing date as follows:
1. For manufacturing and selling at retail, one-tenth of one percent of total gross sales;
2. For manufacturing and selling at wholesale, one-twentieth of one percent of total gross sales;
3. For selling at retail, one-tenth of one percent of total gross sales;
4. For selling at wholesale, one-twentieth of one percent of total gross sales.
No license shall be less than five dollars ($5.00) for each separate place of business.
E. The foregoing license fees are to be paid to the recorder at the time of filing the application required in this section.
F. For the privilege of engaging in any or all of the businesses as enumerated in this chapter and which businesses
are commenced in the city after January 1 in any year a license fee is imposed on all persons so engaged in the
amount of five dollars ($5.00) for each separate place of business payable at the time of commencing the
business.
G. The license fees imposed by this section shall be in addition to any and all other taxes or licenses imposed by any
other provision of this code.
H. Whenever any fee required to be paid by this section is not paid on or before the day on which it becomes
delinquent, a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount due shall be imposed. Such penalty shall become a part
of the fee imposed by this section.
I. It shall be the duty of every person liable for the payment of any license fee imposed by this section to keep and
preserve for a period of five (5) years such books and records as will accurately reflect the amount of his gross
wholesale and retail sales and from which can be determined the amount of any license fee for which he may be
liable under the provisions of this section.
J. Returns made to the recorder as required by this section shall not be made public nor shall they be subject to the
inspection of any person except the recorder or his authorized agent or to those persons first authorized to do so
by order of the council. It shall be unlawful for any person to make public or to inform any other person as to the
contents or any information contained in, or permit the inspection of any return except as is in this section
authorized.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 82/571
K. No person required by this section to make and file a return shall make and file a false return knowing the same to
be false.
L. Any person to whom a license is issued may have the same revoked by order of the council upon his violating any
provision, or his failing to fully comply with all of the provisions of this section.
M. If any licensee under this section fails, neglects or refuses to file his application and pay the fees as and when
required in this section, the recorder is authorized to determine the amount of the license fees due, together with
penalties and interest, and by mail to notify the licensee of the amount so determined. The amount so fixed shall
thereupon become the amount due and shall be immediately payable. For the purpose of determining the amount
of the license fees due, the recorder shall have access to all books, records, invoices, inventories and stock of
goods, wares, and merchandise of the licensee and it shall be unlawful for any such licensee to refuse the recorder
or his duly authorized agent free access thereto at all reasonable times.
N. Any license fee due and unpaid under this section and all penalties thereon shall constitute a debt to the city and
shall be collected by court proceedings in the same manner as any other debt in like amount, which remedy shall
be in addition to all other existing remedies. (1986 Code)
5.04.110: BUSINESS TERMS DEFINED:
For purposes of this chapter, any person engaging in the business of soliciting or selling services as well as tangible,
personal property at either retail or wholesale, or both, in the city such as a contractor, carpenter, plumber, electrician
or builder, either under contract or otherwise, shall be deemed to be engaging in the business of selling tangible,
personal property at either retail or wholesale, or both, in the city, but in computing gross sales under this chapter shall
take into consideration the amount received by the person as the selling price of the tangible, personal property at
either retail or wholesale, or both, as sold outright or as included in the contract.
EACH SEPARATE PLACE OF BUSINESS: Shall include each separate establishment or place of operation, whether
operating under the same name or not within the corporate limits of the city, including a home or other place of lodging
if the same is held out by advertisements, listings, or otherwise, as the establishment or place of operation of a person
engaging in the business of selling tangible, personal property at either retail or wholesale, or both, in the city, or the
place of business located outside the city of any person who maintains no established place of business in the city but
whose solicitations, taking of orders, and sales of or for tangible personal property at either retail or wholesale, or both,
in the city are continuous and persistent.
GROSS SALES: As used in this chapter, does not include:
A. The amount of any federal tax except excise taxes imposed upon or with respect to retail or wholesale sales,
whether imposed upon the retailer, wholesaler, jobber, or upon the consumer, and regardless of whether or not
the amount of federal tax is stated to customers as a separate charge;
B. The amount of net Utah sales tax.
"Gross sales", includes the amount of any manufacturer's or importer's excise tax included in the price of the
property sold, even though the manufacturer or importer is also the wholesaler or retailer thereof, and whether or
not the amount of such tax is stated as a separate charge.
MANUFACTURING TANGIBLE PERSONAL PROPERTY: Engaging in the business of manufacturing any tangible
personal property and selling the same at either retail or wholesale in the city shall mean the actual manufacturing
within the city and the selling within the city or the taking of an order within the city when the actual delivery is to be
anywhere within the state.
PERSON: Any individual, receiver, assignee, trustee in bankruptcy, trust, estate, firm, copartnership, joint venture,
club, company, joint stock company, business trust, corporation, association, society or other group of individuals
acting as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit or otherwise.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 83/571
SELLING TANGIBLE, PERSONAL PROPERTY: Engaging in the business of selling any tangible, personal property at
either retail or wholesale, or both, in the city shall mean the selling within the city or the taking of an order within the
city for any tangible, personal property at either retail or wholesale, or both, when the actual delivery of the tangible,
personal property is to, or does take place anywhere within the state.
WHOLESALE AND RETAIL SALES: Shall include retail or wholesale sales made by a merchandise broker, jobber,
factory representative, commission merchant, salesman, agent employee or by any person engaging in the business
of selling tangible, personal property at either retail or wholesale, or both, as herein defined, or who conducts such
business under or by any other name, style or method no herein specifically mentioned or defined, except producers
of farm produce, eggs, poultry, or dairy products. (1986 Code)
5.04.120: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
A. No license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be revoked, nor any application for license under the
provisions of this chapter be denied, except after notice to, and hearing of, the licensee or applicant.
B. If at any time a license under the provisions of this chapter is denied, or revoked, it shall thereafter be unlawful for
any person to open, operate, maintain, manage, or conduct any business, trade, profession or calling for the
transaction or carrying on of which a license is required at the premises where the license is revoked, or the
application for license denied, until a new license shall be granted by the council. (1986 Code)
5.04.130: POWER TO SET LICENSE BY RESOLUTION:
The council may set the license fees in this chapter by resolution passed by the council and the terms and conditions
thereof, copies of which will be available at the office of the recorder. (1986 Code)
5.04.140: COMPLIANCE WITH ZONING ORDINANCE:
No license for any business, profession, or pursuit shall issue to any applicant therefor, except upon proper and
sufficient showing of strict compliance with the construction and use requirements of the applicable zoning ordinances
of the city. (1986 Code)
5.04.150: COMPLIANCE WITH STATE REGULATORY LICENSING PROVISIONS:
No license for any business, profession, or pursuit shall be issued, nor be renewed, to any applicant therefor, except
upon delivery of proof showing applicant's strict compliance with all state regulatory licensing provisions for such
business, profession or pursuit. (Ord. 98-34)
Chapter 5.06
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
5.06.010: TITLE FOR CITATION:
The provisions codified in this chapter shall be known and may be referred to as the SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESS AND EMPLOYEE LICENSING ORDINANCE. (Ord. 2001-32, 9-5-2001)
5.06.020: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
It is the purpose of this chapter that the city establish reasonable and uniform regulations governing the time, place,
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 84/571
and manner of operation of sexually oriented businesses and their employees in the city. This chapter shall be
construed to protect the governmental interests recognized by this chapter in a manner consistent with constitutional
protections provided by the United States and Utah constitutions. (Ord. 2001-32, 9-5-2001)
5.06.030: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
This chapter imposes regulatory standards and license requirements on certain business activities which are
characterized as sexually oriented businesses, and certain employees of those businesses characterized as sexually
oriented business employees. Except where the context or specific provisions require, this chapter does not
supersede or nullify any other related ordinances, including, but not limited to, those codified in titles 5, "business
licensing", and 18, "zoning", of this code. (Ord. 2001-32, 9-5-2001)
5.06.040: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the following meanings:
ADULT BOOKSTORE OR ADULT VIDEO STORE: A commercial establishment:
A. Which excludes minors from more than five percent (5%) of the retail floor or shelf space of the premises; or
B. Which, as one of its principal purposes, offers for sale or rental, for any form of consideration, any one or more
of the following: books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter; or photographs, films, motion pictures,
videocassettes, or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations, the central theme of which depicts
or describes "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" or instruments, devices, or
paraphernalia which are designated for use in connection with "specified sexual activities", except for legitimate
medically recognized contraceptives.
ADULT BUSINESS: An adult motion picture theater, adult bookstore, or adult video store; or instruments, devices, or
paraphernalia which are designated for use in connection with "specified sexual activities", except for legitimate
medically recognized contraceptives.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: A commercial establishment which:
A. Excludes minors from the showing of two (2) consecutive exhibitions (repeated showings of any single
presentation shall not be considered a consecutive exhibition); or
B. As its principal business, shows, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or
similar photographic reproduction which are primarily characterized by the depiction or description of "specified
sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
ADULT THEATER: A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which:
A. Holds itself out as such a business; or
B. Excludes minors from the showing of two (2) consecutive exhibitions (repeated performance of the same
presentation shall not be considered a consecutive exhibition); or
C. As its principal business, features persons who appear in live performances in a state of seminudity or which are
characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities".
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 85/571
EMPLOY: Hiring an individual to work for pecuniary or any other form of compensation, whether such person is hired
on the payroll of the employer, as an independent contractor, as an agent, or in any other form of employment
relationship.
ESCORT: Any person who, for pecuniary compensation, dates, socializes, visits, consorts with, or accompanies or
offers to date, consort, socialize, visit, or accompany another or others to or about social affairs, entertainment, or
places of amusement, or within any place of public or private resort or any business or commercial establishment or
any private quarter. Escort shall not be construed to include persons who provided business or personal services,
such as licensed private nurses, aides for the elderly, or handicapped, social secretaries or similar service personnel
whose relationship with their patron is characterized by a bona fide contractual relationship having a duration of more
than twelve (12) hours and who provide a service not principally characterized as dating or socializing. Escort shall
also not be construed to include persons providing services such as singing telegrams, birthday greetings, or similar
activities characterized by appearances in a public place, contracted for by a party other than the person for whom the
service is being performed and of a duration not longer than one hour.
ESCORT SERVICE: An individual or entity who, for pecuniary compensation, furnishes or offers to furnish escorts, or
provides or offers to introduce patrons to escorts.
ESCORT SERVICE RUNNER: Any third person, not an escort, who, for pecuniary compensation, acts in the capacity
of an agent or broker for an escort service, escorts, or patrons at any location within the city, whether or not such third
person is employed by such escort service, escort, patron, or by another business, or is an independent contractor or
self employed.
LEWDNESS: Refer to section 76-9-702 Utah Code Annotated.
NUDITY: A state of dress in which the areola of the female breast, or male or female genitals, pubic region, or anus
are covered by less than the covering required in the definition of "seminude".
OPERATOR: The manager or other natural person principally in charge of a sexually oriented business.
OUTCALL SERVICES: Services of a type performed by a sexually oriented business employee outside of the
premises of the licensed sexually oriented business, including, but not limited to, escorts, models, dancers and other
similar employees.
PATRON: Any person who tracts with or employs any escort services or escort or the customer of any business
licensed pursuant to this chapter.
PECUNIARY COMPENSATION: Any commission, fee, salary, tip, gratuity, hire, profit, reward, or any other form of
consideration.
PERSON: Any person, unincorporated association, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity.
SEMINUDE: A state of dress in which opaque clothing covers no more than the areola of the female breast; and the
male or female genitals, pubic region, and anus shall be fully covered by an opaque covering no narrower than four
inches (4") wide in the front and five inches (5") wide in the back, which shall not taper to less than one inch (1") wide
at the narrowest point.
SEMINUDE DANCING AGENCY: Any person, agency, firm, corporation, partnership, or any other entity or individual
which furnishes, books, or otherwise engages or offers to furnish, book, or otherwise engage the service of a
professional dancer licensed pursuant to this chapter for performance or appearance at a business licensed for adult
theaters.
SEMINUDE ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS: A business, including adult theater, where employees perform or appear
in the presence of patrons of the business in a state of seminudity. A business shall also be presumed to be a
seminude entertainment business if the business holds itself out as such a business.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: Seminude entertainment businesses, sexually oriented outcall services, adult
businesses, and seminude dancing agencies, as defined by this chapter.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEES: Those employees who work on the premises of a sexually
oriented business in activities related to the sexually oriented portion of the business. This includes all managing
employees, dancers, escorts, models, and other similar employees, whether or not hired as employees, agents, or as
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 86/571
independent contractors. Employees shall not include individuals whose work is completely unrelated to the sexually
oriented portion of the business, such as janitors, bookkeepers, cooks, serving persons, and similar employees,
except where they may be managers or supervisors of the business. All persons making outcall meetings under this
chapter, including escorts, models, guards, escort runners, drivers, chauffeurs, and other similar employees, shall be
considered sexually oriented business employees.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: The human male or female pubic area or anus with less than a full opaque
covering, or the human female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, with less than full opaque
covering.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: A. Acts of:
1. Masturbation,
2. Human sexual intercourse,
3. Sexual copulation between a person and a beast,
4. Fellatio,
5. Cunnilingus,
6. Bestiality,
7. Pederasty,
8. Buggery, or
9. Any anal copulation between a human male and another human male, human female, or beast;
B. Manipulating, caressing or fondling by any person of:
1. The genitals of a human,
2. The pubic area of a human,
3. The breast or breasts of a human female;
4. Flagellation or torture by or upon a person clad in undergarments, a mask or bizarre costume, or the condition
of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained on the part of the one so clothed. (Ord. 2001-30, 9-
5-2001; amd. Ord. 2001-32, 9-5-2001)
5.06.050: OBSCENITY AND LEWDNESS; STATUTORY PROVISIONS:
A. Notwithstanding anything contained in this chapter, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to permit or allow the
showing or display of any matter which is contrary to applicable federal or state statutes prohibiting obscenity.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 87/571
B. Notwithstanding anything contained in this chapter, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to permit or allow
conduct or the showing or display of any matter which is contrary to the provisions of section 76-9-702 Utah Code
Annotated, "Lewdness". Provided, however, that for the purpose of sexually oriented businesses the definition of
"private parts" shall be construed to mean "nudity" as defined in this chapter. (Ord. 2001-32, 9-5-2001)
5.06.060: LOCATION AND ZONING RESTRICTIONS:
It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business to do business at any location within the city not zoned for such
business. Sexually oriented businesses licensed as adult businesses or seminude entertainment businesses pursuant
to this chapter shall only be allowed in areas zoned for their use pursuant to title 18 of this code. (Ord. 2001-32, 9-5-
2001)
5.06.070: BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to operate a sexually oriented business, as specified herein, without first obtaining a
general business license and a sexually oriented business license. The sexually oriented business license shall
specify the type of business for which it is obtained. (Ord. 2001-32, 9-5-2001)
5.06.080: EXEMPTIONS FROM LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any sex therapist or similar individual licensed by the state to provide
bona fide sexual therapy or counseling, licensed medical practitioner, licensed nurse, psychiatrist, psychologist, nor
shall it apply to any educator licensed by the state for activities in the classroom. (Ord. 2001-32, 9-5-2001)
5.06.090: LEGITIMATE ARTISTIC MODELING:
A. The city does not intend to unreasonably or improperly prohibit legitimate modeling which may occur in a state of
nudity for purposes protected by the first amendment or similar state protections. The city does intend to prohibit
prostitution and related offenses occurring under the guise of nude modeling. A licensed outcall employee may
appear in a state of nudity before a customer or patron, providing that a written contract for such appearance was
entered into between the customer or patron and the employee and signed at least twenty four (24) hours before
the nude appearance. All of the other applicable provisions of this chapter shall still apply to such nude
appearance.
B. In the event of a contract for nude modeling or appearance signed more than forty eight (48) hours in advance of
the modeling or appearance, the individual to appear nude shall not be required to obtain a license pursuant to this
chapter. During such unlicensed nude appearance, it is unlawful to:
1. Appear nude or seminude in the presence of persons under the age of eighteen (18);
2. Allow, offer, or agree to any touching of the contracting party or other person by the individual appearing nude;
3. Allow, offer, or agree to commit prostitution, solicitation of prostitution, solicitation of a minor, or committing
activities harmful to a minor;
4. Allow, offer, commit, or agree to any sex act as validly defined by city ordinances or state statute;
5. Allow, offer, agree, or permit the contracting party or other person to masturbate in the presence of the individual
contracted to appear nude;
6. Allow, offer, or agree for the individual appearing nude to be within five feet (5') of any other person while nude
or seminude. (Ord. 2001-32, 9-5-2001)
5.06.100: BUSINESS CATEGORIES; NUMBER OF LICENSES:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 88/571
A. It is unlawful for any business premises to operate or be licensed for more than one category of sexually oriented
business, except that a business may have a license for both outcall services and a seminude dancing agency on
the same premises.
B. The categories of sexually oriented businesses are:
1. Outcall services;
2. Adult businesses;
3. Seminude entertainment businesses;
4. Seminude dancing agency. (Ord. 2001-32, 9-5-2001)
5.06.110: EMPLOYEE LICENSES:
It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business to employ or for any individual to be employed by a sexually oriented
business in the capacity of a sexually oriented business employee, unless that employee first obtains a sexually
oriented business employee license. (Ord. 2001-32, 9-5-2001)
5.06.120: LICENSE; APPLICATION; DISCLOSURES REQUIRED:
Before any applicant may be licensed to operate a sexually oriented business or as a sexually oriented business
employee pursuant to this chapter, the applicant shall submit, on a form to be supplied by the city license authority, the
following:
A. The correct legal name of each applicant, corporation, partnership, limited partnership, or entity doing business
under an assumed name;
B. If the applicant is a corporation, partnership, or limited partnership, or individual or entity doing business under an
assumed name, the information required below for individual applicants shall be submitted for each partner and
each principal of an applicant, and for each officer, director, and any shareholder (corporate or personal) of more
than one percent (1%) of the equity of any applicant. Any holding company, or any entity holding more than one
percent (1%) of the equity of an applicant, shall be considered an applicant for purposes of disclosure under this
chapter;
C. All corporations, partnerships, or noncorporate entities included on the application shall also identify each individual
authorized by the corporation, partnership, or noncorporate entity to sign the checks for such corporation,
partnership, or noncorporate entity;
D. For all applicants or individuals, the application must also state:
1. Any other names or aliases used by the individual;
2. The age, date, and place of birth;
3. Height;
4. Weight;
5. Color of hair;
6. Color of eyes;
7. Present business address and telephone number;
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 89/571
8. Present residence and telephone number;
9. Utah driver's license or identification number; and
10. Social security number;
E. Acceptable written proof that any individual is at least eighteen (18) years of age;
F. Attached to the form, as provided above, two (2) color photographs of the applicant clearly showing the individual's
face and the individual's fingerprints on a form provided by the police department. For persons not residing in the
city, the photographs and fingerprints may be on a form from the law enforcement jurisdiction where the person
resides. Fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant directly to the issuing agency;
G. For any individual applicant required to obtain a sexually oriented business employee license as an escort or a
seminude entertainer, a certificate from the Utah County health department, stating that the individual has, within
thirty (30) days immediately preceding the date of the original or renewal application, been examined and found to
be free of any contagious or communicable diseases;
H. A statement of the business, occupation, or employment history of the applicant for three (3) years immediately
preceding the date of the filing of the application;
I. A statement detailing the license or permit history of the applicant for the five (5) year period immediately preceding
the date of the filing of the application, including whether such applicant previously operating or seeking to operate,
in this or any other county, city, state, or territory, has ever had a license, permit, or authorization to do business
denied, revoked, or suspended, or has had any professional or vocational license or permit denied, revoked, or
suspended. In the event of any such denial, revocation, or suspension, state the date, the name of the issuing or
denying jurisdiction, and state in full the reasons for the denial, revocation, or suspension. A copy of any order of
denial, revocation, or suspension shall be attached to the application;
J. All criminal convictions or pleas of nolo contendere, except those which have been expunged, and the disposition of
all such arrests for the applicant, individual, or other entity subject to disclosure under this chapter, for five (5) years
prior to the date of the application. This disclosure shall include identification of all ordinance violations, including
traffic offenses, stating the date, place, nature of each conviction or plea of nolo contendere, and sentence of each
conviction or other disposition, identifying the convicting jurisdiction and sentencing court, and providing the court
identifying case numbers or docket numbers. Application for a sexually oriented business or employee license shall
constitute a consent to disclosure of any criminal conviction or plea of nolo contendere for the purposes of any
proceeding involving the business or employee license;
K. In the event the applicant is not the owner of record of the real property upon which the business or proposed
business is or is to be located, the application must be accompanied by a current notarized statement from the
legal and equitable owner(s) of the possessory interest in the property specifically acknowledging the type of
business for which the applicant seeks a license for the property. In addition to furnishing such notarized
statement, the applicant shall furnish the name, address, and phone number of the owner of record of the property,
as well as the copy of the lease or rental agreement pertaining to the premises in which the service is or will be
located;
L. A description of the services to be provided by the business, with sufficient detail to allow reviewing authorities to
determine what business will be transacted on the premises, together with a schedule of usual fees for services to
be charged by the licensee, and any rules, regulations, or employment guidelines under or by which the business
intends to operate. This description shall also include:
1. The hours that the business or service will be open to the public, and the methods of promoting the health and
safety of the employees and patrons and preventing them from engaging in illegal activity;
2. The methods of supervision preventing the employees from engaging in acts of prostitution or other related
criminal activities;
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 90/571
3. The methods of supervising employees and patrons to prevent employees and patrons from charging or
receiving fees for services or acts prohibited by this chapter or other statutes or ordinances;
4. The methods of screening employees and customers in order to promote the health and safety of employees
and customers and prevent the transmission of disease, and prevent commission of acts of prostitution or other
criminal activity. It is unlawful to knowingly submit false or materially misleading information on or with a sexually
oriented business license application or to fail to disclose or omit information for the purpose of obtaining a
sexually oriented business or employee license. (Ord. 2001-32, 9-5-2001)
5.06.130: LICENSE; FEES:
Each applicant for a sexually oriented business or employee license shall be required to pay regulatory license fees as
set forth in the Mapleton City fee schedule. An application is not complete until all appropriate fees have been paid.
(Ord. 2001-32, 9-5-2001)
5.06.140: LICENSE; BOND:
Each application for a sexually oriented business license shall post, with the city's treasurer a cash bond payable to
Mapleton City in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). Any fines assessed against the business, officers, or
managers for violations of city ordinances shall be taken from this bond if not paid in cash within ten (10) days after
notice of the fine, unless an appeal is filed as provided by this chapter. In the event the funds are drawn against the
cash bond to pay such fines, the bond shall be replenished to five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) within fifteen (15) days
of the date of notice of any draw against it. (Ord. 2001-32, 9-5-2001)
5.06.150: LICENSE; PREMISES LOCATION AND NAME:
A. It is unlawful to conduct business under a license issued pursuant to this chapter at any location other than the
licensed premises. Any location to which telephone calls are automatically forwarded by such business shall
require a separate license.
B. It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business to do business in the city under any name other than the business
name specified in the application. (Ord. 2001-32, 9-5-2001)
5.06.160: LICENSE; ISSUANCE CONDITIONS:
The mayor or mayor's designee shall approve the issuance of a license to the applicant within forty five (45) days after
receipt of a completed application, unless the official finds one or more of the following:
A. The applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age;
B. The applicant is overdue in payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against the applicant or
imposed on the applicant in relation to a sexually oriented business;
C. The applicant has falsely answered a material question or request for information as authorized by this chapter;
D. The applicant has violated a provision of this chapter or similar provisions found in statutes or ordinances from any
jurisdiction within two (2) years immediately preceding the application; a criminal conviction for a violation of a
provision of this chapter or similar provisions from any jurisdiction, whether or not it is being appealed, is
conclusive evidence of a violation, but a conviction is not necessary to prove a violation;
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 91/571
E. The premises to be used for the business has been disapproved by the Utah County health department, or the
Mapleton City fire department, police department, building officials, or zoning officials as not being in compliance
with applicable laws and ordinances of the city. If any of the foregoing reviewing agencies cannot complete their
review within the forty five (45) day approval or denial period, the agency or department may obtain from the city's
mayor or mayor's designee an extension of time of no more than fifteen (15) days for their review. The total time for
the city to approve or deny a license shall not exceed sixty (60) days from the receipt of a completed application
and payment of all fees. Businesses located outside of the corporate boundaries of the city, but requiring a license
under this chapter, may be denied a license pursuant to this chapter if the business does not have a valid business
license to conduct business at the business location from the appropriate jurisdiction for the location.
1. Upon receipt of an application, all departments required to review the application shall determine within fourteen
(14) days whether or not the application is incomplete in items needed for processing. Incomplete applications
shall immediately be returned to the applicant with specification of the items which are incomplete;
2. The time for processing applications specified in this section shall begin to run from the receipt of a complete
application;
3. In the event that a license for seminude entertainment, seminude dancing agencies, adult businesses, or
seminude entertainment businesses has not been disapproved within the forty five (45) or the sixty (60) days
allowed after an extension, the city shall issue the license pending completing of the city's review;
4. Any license issued pursuant to subsection E3 of this section may be revoked by the city, pursuant to the
revocation procedures provided for herein, if the completed review determines that the license should have been
denied;
F. The required license fees have not been paid;
G. All applicable sales and use taxes have not been paid;
H. An applicant for the proposed business is in violation of or not in compliance with this chapter or similar provisions
found in statutes or ordinances from any jurisdiction;
I. An applicant has been convicted or pled nolo contendere to a crime:
1. Involving prostitution; exploitation of prostitution; aggravated promotion of prostitution; aggravated exploitation of
prostitution; solicitation of sex acts; sex acts for hire; compelling prostitution; aiding prostitution; sale, distribution,
or display of material harmful to minors; sexual performance by minors; possession of child pornography;
lewdness; indecent exposure; any crime involving sexual abuse or exploitation of a child; sexual assault or
aggravated sexual assault; rape; forcible sodomy; forcible sexual abuse; incest; harboring a runaway child;
criminal attempt; conspiracy; or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses or offenses involving similar
elements from any jurisdiction, regardless of the exact title of the offense; for which:
a. Less than two (2) years have elapsed from the date of conviction, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor
offense, or less than five (5) years if the convictions are of two (2) or more misdemeanors within the five (5)
years, or
b. Less than five (5) years have elapsed from the date of conviction, if the offense is of a felony;
2. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification pursuant to this section.
(Ord. 2001-32, 9-5-2001)
5.06.170: LICENSE; TERM:
Sexually oriented businesses and employee licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid from the date of
issuance through January 1 of each succeeding year. The license fees required under the Mapleton City fee schedule
shall not be prorated for any portion of a year, but shall be paid in full for whatever portion of the year the license is
applied for. (Ord. 2001-32, 9-5-2001)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 92/571
5.06.180: LICENSE; NOTICE OF CHANGE OF INFORMATION:
Any change in the information required to be submitted under this chapter for either a sexually oriented business
license or sexually oriented business employee license shall be given, in writing, to the city planning and zoning
director and the police department within fourteen (14) days after such change. (Ord. 2001-32, 9-5-2001)
5.06.190: LICENSE; TRANSFER LIMITATIONS:
Sexually oriented business licenses granted under this chapter shall not be transferable. It is unlawful for a license
held by an individual to be transferred. It is unlawful for a license held by a corporation, partnership, or other
noncorporate entity to transfer any part in excess of one percent (1%) thereof, without filing a new application and
obtaining prior city approval. If any transfer of the controlling interest in a business licensee occurs, the license is
immediately null and void, and the business shall not operate until a separate new license has been properly issued
by the city as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 2001-32, 9-5-2001)
5.06.200: LICENSE; DISPLAY:
It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business location within the boundaries of the city to fail to display the license
granted pursuant to this chapter in a prominent location within the business premises. It is unlawful for any individual
licensed pursuant to this chapter to fail to carry, at all times while engaged in licensed activities within the corporate
boundaries of the city, their employee license on their person. If the individual is nude, such license shall be visibly
displayed within the same room the employee is performing. When requested by police, city licensing or other
enforcement personnel or health official, it is unlawful to fail to show the appropriate licenses while engaged in
licensed activities within the corporate boundaries of the city. (Ord. 2001-32, 9-5-2001)
5.06.210: LICENSE; STATEMENT IN ADVERTISEMENTS:
It is unlawful for any advertisement by the sexually oriented business or employee to fail to state that the business or
employee is licensed by the city, and shall include the city license number. (Ord. 2001-32, 9-5-2001)
5.06.220: REGULATIONS AND UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES:
It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business or sexually oriented business employee to:
A. Allow persons under the age of eighteen (18) years on the licensed premises, except that in adult businesses which
exclude minors from less than all of the business premises, minors shall not be permitted in excluded area;
B. Allow, offer, or agree to conduct any outcall business with persons under the age of eighteen (18) years;
C. To allow, offer, or agree to allow any alcohol to be stored, used, or consumed on or in the licensed premises;
D. Allow the outside door to the premises to be locked while any customer is in the premises;
E. Allow, offer, or agree to gambling on the licensed premises;
F. Allow, offer, or agree to any sexually oriented business employee touching or being touched by any patron or
customer; except that outcall employees and customers may touch, except that any touching of "specified
anatomical areas" whether clothed or unclothed, is prohibited;
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 93/571
G. Allow, offer, or agree to illegal possession, use, sale, or distribution of controlled substances on the licensed
premises;
H. Allow sexually oriented business employees to possess, use, sell, or distribute controlled substances while
engaged in the activities of the business;
I. Allow, offer, or agree to commit prostitution, solicitation of prostitution, solicitation of a minor, or committing activities
harmful to a minor to occur on the licensed premises or, in the event of an outcall employee or business, the outcall
employee committing, offering, or agreeing to commit prostitution, attempting to commit prostitution, soliciting
prostitution, soliciting a minor, or committing activities harmful to a minor;
J. Allow, offer, commit, or agree to any "specified sexual activity" as validly defined by city ordinances or state statute
in the presence of any customer or patron;
K. Allow, offer, or agree to any outcall employee appearing before any customer or patron in a state of nudity;
L. Allow, offer, or agree to allow a patron or customer to masturbate in the presence of the sexually oriented business
employee or on the premises of a sexually oriented business;
M. Allow, offer, or agree to commit an act of lewdness. (Ord. 2001-32, 9-5-2001)
5.06.230: OUTCALL SERVICES; OPERATION REQUIREMENTS:
It is unlawful for any business or employee providing outcall services contracted for in the city to fail to comply with the
following requirements:
A. All businesses licensed to provide outcall services pursuant to this chapter shall provide to each patron a written
contract in receipt of pecuniary compensation for services. The contract shall clearly state the type of services to
be performed, the length of time such services shall be performed, the total amount such services shall cost the
patron, and any special terms or conditions relating to the services to be performed. The business licensee shall
keep and maintain a copy of each written contract entered into pursuant to this section for a period not less than
one year from the date of provision of services thereunder. The contracts shall be numbered and entered into a
register listing the contract number, date, names of all employees involved in the contract, and pecuniary
compensation paid.
B. All outcall businesses licensed pursuant to this chapter shall maintain an open office or telephone at which the
licensee or licensee's designated agent may be personally contacted during all hours outcall employees are
working. The address and phone number of the license location shall appear and be included in all patron
contracts and published advertisements. For outcall businesses which premises are licensed within the corporate
limits of the city, private rooms or booths where the patrons may meet with the outcall employee shall not be
provided at the open office or any other location by the service, nor shall patrons meet outcall employees at the
business premises.
C. Outcall services shall not advertise in such a manner that would lead a reasonably prudent person to conclude that
"specified sexual activities" would be performed by the outcall employee.
D. All employees of outcall services who provide outcall services within the city shall be licensed in accordance with
this chapter regardless of the primary location of the business. (Ord. 2001-32, 9-5-2001)
5.06.240: ADULT BUSINESS; DESIGN OF PREMISES:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 94/571
A. In addition to the general requirements of disclosure for a sexually oriented business, any applicant for a license as
an adult business shall also submit a diagram, drawn to scale, of the premises of the license. The design and
construction, prior to granting a license or opening for business, shall conform to the following:
1. The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a
manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose,
excluding restrooms;
2. Restrooms may not contain any video reproduction equipment nor any of the business merchandise. Signs shall
be posted requiring only one person being allowed in the restroom per stall, and only one person in any stall at a
time, and requiring that patrons shall not be allowed access to manager's stations areas;
3. For businesses which exclude minors from the entire premises, all windows, doors and other apertures to the
premises shall be darkened or otherwise constructed to prevent anyone outside the premises from seeing the
inside of the premises. Businesses which exclude minors from less than all of the premises shall be designed
and constructed so that minors may not see into the area from which they are excluded;
4. The diagram required shall not necessarily be a professional engineer's or architect's blueprint; however, the
diagram must show marked internal dimensions, all overhead lighting fixtures, and ratings for illumination
capacity.
B. It shall be the duty of the licensee and the licensee's employees to ensure that the views from the manager's station
in subsection A of this section remain unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks, or any other
materials at all times that any patron is present in the premises, and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to
any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted.
C. The premises shall at all times be equipped and operated with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to
illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one foot-candle,
measured at floor level. It shall be the duty of the licensee and the licensee's employees present on the premises
to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises.
(Ord. 2001-32, 9-5-2001)
5.06.250: SEMINUDE ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS; DESIGN OF PREMISES:
A. It is unlawful for business premises licensed for seminude entertainment to:
1. Permit a bed, sofa, mattress, or similar item in any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a
reception room open to the public or in any office to which patrons are not admitted, and except that in an adult
theater such items may be on the stage as part of a performance;
2. Allow any door on any room used for the business to be lockable from the inside, except for the door to an office
to which patrons shall not be admitted, outside doors, and restroom doors;
3. Provide any room in which the employee or employees and the patron or patrons are alone together without a
separation by a solid physical barrier at least three feet (3') high and six inches (6") wide. The patron or patrons
shall remain on one side of the barrier and the employee or employees shall remain on the other side of the
barrier.
B. Adult theaters shall also require that the performance area shall be separated from the patrons by a minimum of
three feet (3'), which separation shall be delineated by a physical barrier at least three feet (3') high. (Ord. 2001-32,
9-5-2001)
5.06.260: SEMINUDE ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS AND SEMINUDE DANCING; LOCATION
RESTRICTION:
It is unlawful for any business licensed for seminude entertainment or seminude dancing to be located within three
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 95/571
hundred thirty feet (330') of a business licensed for the sale or consumption of alcohol. (Ord. 2001-32, 9-5-2001)
5.06.270: ALCOHOL PROHIBITED:
A. It is unlawful for any business licensed pursuant to this chapter to allow the sale, storage, supply, or consumption of
alcoholic beverages on the premises.
B. It is unlawful for any person to possess or consume any alcoholic beverage on the premises of any sexually
oriented business. (Ord. 2001-32, 9-5-2001)
5.06.280: SEMINUDE DANCING AGENCIES:
A. It is unlawful for any individual or entity to furnish, book, or otherwise engage the services of a professional dancer,
model, or performer to appear in a state of seminudity for pecuniary compensation in or for any seminude
entertainment business or adult theater licensed pursuant to this chapter, unless such agency is licensed pursuant
to this chapter.
B. It is unlawful for any individual or entity to furnish, book, or otherwise engage or permit any person to perform as a
professional dancer, model, or performer in a state of seminudity or nudity, either gratuitously or for compensation,
in or for any business licensed pursuant to this chapter, unless such person is licensed pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 2001-32, 9-5-2001)
5.06.290: PERFORMERS; PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES:
It is unlawful for any professional dancer, model, or performer, while performing in any business licensed pursuant to
this chapter, to:
A. Touch in any manner any other person;
B. Throw any object or clothing off the stage area;
C. Accept any money, drink, or any other object directly from any person; or
D. Allow another person to touch such performer or to place any money or object on the performer or within the
costume or person of the performer; or
E. Place anything within the costume or adjust or move the costume while performing so as to render the performer in
a state of nudity. (Ord. 2001-32, 9-5-2001)
5.06.300: PATRONS; PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES:
It is unlawful for any person or any patron of any sexual oriented business to touch in any manner any performer; to
place any money or object on or within the costume or person of any performer; or to give or offer to give to any such
performer any drinks, money, or object while such performer is performing; except that money may be placed on the
stage, which shall not be picked up by the performer except by hand. (Ord. 2001-32, 9-5-2001)
5.06.310: NUDITY; DEFENSES TO PROSECUTION:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 96/571
It is a defense to prosecution or violation under this chapter that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a
modeling class operated:
A. By a proprietary school licensed by the state, or a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly
by taxation;
B. By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are
transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation. (Ord. 2001-32, 9-5-
2001)
5.06.320: EXISTING BUSINESSES; COMPLIANCE TIME LIMITS:
A. The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all persons and businesses described herein, whether the
herein described activities were established before or after the effective date of the provisions codified in this
chapter and regardless of whether such persons and businesses are currently licensed to do business in the city.
1. All such persons and businesses requiring outcall service licenses shall have forty five (45) days from the
effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or until their current license expires, whichever is first in
time, to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
2. All seminude dancing agency licenses shall have seventy five (75) days from the effective date of the ordinance
codified in this chapter, or until their license must be renewed, whichever is first, to comply with the provisions of
this chapter.
3. All adult businesses and seminude entertainment businesses shall have one hundred thirty five (135) days from
the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or until their current license must be renewed,
whichever is first, to comply with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2001-32, 9-5-2001)
5.06.330: VIOLATION; INJUNCTION WHEN:
An entity or individual who operates or causes a sexually oriented business to be operated without a valid license, or
who employs or is employed as an employee of a sexually oriented business, or who operates such a business or
functions as such an employee in violation of the provisions of this chapter is subject to a suit for injunction in addition
to the civil and criminal violations provided herein, and any other remedy available at law or in equity. (Ord. 2001-32,
9-5-2001)
5.06.340: VIOLATION; LICENSE SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
A. The city may issue a notice suspending or revoking a sexually oriented business or employee license granted
under this chapter if a licensee or an employee of the licensee has:
1. Violated or is not in compliance with this chapter;
2. Refused to allow any inspection of the premises of the sexually oriented business specifically authorized by this
chapter or by any other statute or ordinance;
3. Failed to replenish the cost bond as provided in this chapter (such a suspension shall extend until the bond has
been replenished);
4. Given materially false or misleading information in obtaining the license;
5. Knowingly operated the sexually oriented business or worked under the employee license during the period
when the business licensee or employee licensee's license was suspended;
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 97/571
6. A licensee has committed an offense which would be grounds for denial of a license for which the time period
required has not elapsed;
7. On two (2) or more occasions within a twelve (12) month period, a person or persons committed in or on, or
solicited for on or off the premises, an offense which would be grounds for denial of a license for which a
conviction has been obtained, and the person or persons were employees, whether or not licensed, of the
sexually oriented business at the time the offenses were committed;
8. A license is delinquent in payment to the city for ad valorem taxes, or sales taxes related to the sexually oriented
business.
B. Suspension or revocation shall take effect within fifteen (15) days of the issuance of notice, unless an appeal is filed
as provided by this chapter.
C. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license. (Ord. 2001-32, 9-
5-2001)
5.06.350: EFFECT OF LICENSE REVOCATION:
When a license issued pursuant to this chapter is revoked, the revocation shall continue for one year from its effective
date, and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business or employee license for one year from the date
of such revocation. (Ord. 2001-32, 9-5-2001)
5.06.360: APPEAL PROCEDURES:
The denial, suspension, or revocation of any license issued pursuant to this chapter may be appealed to the city
council within thirty (30) days of the denial, suspension, or revocation. Any decision of the city council may be
appealed to the district courts within thirty (30) days of the council's written decision. (Ord. 2001-32, 9-5-2001)
5.06.370: VIOLATION; PENALTY; RESPONSIBILITY:
A. In addition to revocation or suspension of a license, as provided in this chapter, each violation of this chapter shall,
upon citation by the city require the licensee to pay a civil penalty in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
Such fines shall be deducted from the cost bond posted pursuant to this chapter, unless paid within ten (10) days
of notice of the find or the final determination after any appeal. In addition to the civil fines provided in this chapter,
the violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a class B misdemeanor. Each day of a violation shall be
considered a separate offense.
B. Every act or omission by an employee constitutes a violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed the
act or omission of the sexually oriented business license and/or operator, if such act or omission occurs either with
the authorization, knowledge, or approval of the licensee and/or operator, or as a result of the licensee's and/or
operator's negligent failure to supervise the conduct of the employee, and the sexually oriented business licensee
shall be punishable for such act or omission in the same manner as if the licensee committed the act or caused the
omission.
C. A sexually oriented business licensee and/or operator shall be responsible for the conduct of all employees while
on the licensed premises, and any act or omission of any employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of the licensee and/or operator for the purpose of determining
whether the licensee's license shall be revoked, suspended, or renewed. (Ord. 2001-32, 9-5-2001)
Chapter 5.08
FRANCHISES
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 98/571
5.08.010: APPLICATION:
Whenever application shall be made to the council for a franchise or grant of special privilege, or for an extension or
renewal of any existing franchise, or grant of special privilege, the applicant shall furnish to the recorder for the use of
the council, ten (10) copies of the proposed resolution or ordinance and pay into the treasury a fee to be determined
by the council. (1986 Code)
5.08.020: NONASSIGNABLE; EXCEPTION:
All franchises and grants of special privilege shall be deemed to be nonassignable, without the express permission of
the council, whether such limitation is set forth in the body of the franchise or grant or not. (1986 Code)
5.08.030: MANNER OF ASSIGNMENT:
All assignments of franchise and special grants must be in writing and a copy thereof filed in the office of the recorder
before any such assignment or transfer will be recognized by the city. (1986 Code)
5.08.040: FORFEITURE:
Any attempted assignment or transfer of a franchise or a special privilege, not made in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter, shall operate as a forfeiture of all rights of the grantee therein given. (1986 Code)
Chapter 5.12
AUCTIONEERS
5.12.010: AUCTIONEER DEFINED:
An "auctioneer", as contemplated in this chapter, is a person who conducts a public competitive sale of property by
outcry to the highest bona fide bidder. (1986 Code)
5.12.020: LICENSE REQUIRED; BOND:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of auctioneer without first procuring a license to do so,
and paying the fee prescribed. He shall execute a bond to the city, with corporate surety in the sum of one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) conditional for the faithful observance of all laws of the city and the honest performance of all
duties required by this chapter; and the protection of all persons dealing with the auctioneer against all fraud,
deception and imposition, the bond to be approved by the council and filed with the recorder. (1986 Code)
5.12.030: TIME OF SALES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or conduct any sale of goods, wares or merchandise by public auction in the
city except between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. (1986 Code)
5.12.040: CHARITABLE OR CHURCH AUCTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any auction held for charitable or benevolent purposes or for any
church, fair, festival or bazaar. (1986 Code)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 99/571
5.12.050: LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE:
The license granted under the provisions of this chapter shall not be transferable, nor shall the same be loaned or
used by another person. (1986 Code)
5.12.060: FALSE REPRESENTATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any auctioneer when selling or offering for sale at public auction any goods, wares or
merchandise under the provisions of this chapter, while describing the goods, wares, or merchandise with respect to
character, quality, kind, value or otherwise, to make any fraudulent, untruthful or unwarranted statements tending in
any way to mislead bidders, or to substitute an article sold for another. (1986 Code)
5.12.070: UNLAWFUL SALES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or dispose of or offer for sale in the city, at public auction, or to cause or
permit to be sold, disposed of or offered for sale at public auction in the city any platinum, gold, silver plated ware, or
precious or semiprecious stones, or watches, clocks, jewelry, china or glassware, whether he shall sell same at
auction as agent or employee of others; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to judicial sales or sales by
executors or administrators, nor to sales by licensed pawnbrokers of their unredeemed pledges, in the manner
provided by law, nor to sales at public auction of stock on hand of any person, that shall have been continuously in
business in the city as a retail or wholesale merchant of platinum, gold, silver, or plated ware or precious or
semiprecious stones, or watches, clocks, jewelry, china or glassware, for the period of one year next preceding the
sales; provided further, that such sale at public auction of the stock on hand of such merchant shall not be fed or
replenished in anticipation of such auction sale, and that the auction sale shall be held on successive days, Sundays
and legal holidays excepted, and shall not continue for more than thirty (30) days during the period of one year, except
by permission of the council nor between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M., nor shall
any such auction be held during the month of December of any year. (1986 Code)
5.12.080: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Licenses issued under this chapter may be revoked by the council whenever it shall have been made to appear to its
satisfaction upon a proper hearing that the licensee has violated any of the terms or provisions of this chapter or of the
licensee's bond. Upon revocation the right of the licensee shall cease and the unearned portion of the license fee shall
be forfeited to the city. (1986 Code)
5.12.090: RECEIPTS FOR GOODS; COMMISSION:
It shall be the duty of all licensed auctioneers to receive all articles which may be offered them for sale at auction, and
give receipts thereof; and at the close of any sale, which must be made as the owner directs, the auctioneer shall
deliver a fair account of such sale, and pay the amount received for such articles to the person entitled thereto,
deducting therefrom a commission not to exceed ten percent (10%) on the amount of the sale. (1986 Code)
5.12.100: ATTRACTING SIDEWALK CROWDS:
All auctioneers are forbidden to conduct their sales in such manner as to cause people to gather in crowds on the
sidewalks so as to obstruct the same; nor shall they use immoral or indecent language in crying their sales, or make or
cause to be made noisy acclamations such as ringing of bells, blowing of whistles or otherwise, though not
enumerated here, through the streets in advertising their sales; and no bellman or crier or musical instrument or noise
making means of attracting the attention of passers by, except the customary auctioneer's flags, shall be employed at
or near any auction whatsoever. (1986 Code)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 100/571
Chapter 5.16
BEER SALES
5.16.010: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person, retailer, wholesaler, or other entity to engage in the business of the sale of beer at
retail, in bottles or draft, within the city without first having procured a license therefor from the council as provided in
this chapter. A separate license shall be required for each place of sale and the license shall at all times be
conspicuously displayed in the place to which it shall refer or for which it shall be issued. All licenses shall comply with
the alcoholic beverages control act of Utah and the regulations of the Utah alcoholic beverage control commission.
(Ord. 2014-05, 4-1-2014, eff. 4-24-2014)
5.16.020: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section unless
a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
BEER: Any beverage containing not less than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume, but no more than four
percent (4%) of alcohol by volume or 3.2 percent by weight and obtained by the alcoholic fermentation, infusion, or
decoction of any malted grain or similar products. "Beer" includes a product that contains alcohol as described herein
and is referred to as beer, ale, lager, stout, porter or a malt or malted beverage.
RETAILER: For the purposes of this chapter, "retailer" means any person or business establishment engaged in the
sale or distribution of beer to consumers whether for consumption on or off the establishment's premises and that is
licensed to sell beer by the Utah alcoholic beverage control commission, by the city pursuant to this chapter, or both.
SELL OR SALE: When used in this chapter in any prohibition, includes to solicit, or to receive an order for, to keep or
expose for sale, to deliver for value or gratuitously, to peddle, to possess with intent to sell or to traffic in, for any
consideration promised or obtained directly or indirectly or under any pretext or by any means whatsoever to procure
or allow to be procured for any other person.
WHOLESALER: Any person other than a brewer or retailer engaged in the importation for sale or in the sale of beer in
the wholesale or jobbing quantities. (Ord. 2014-05, 4-1-2014, eff. 4-24-2014)
5.16.030: WHOLESALER'S LICENSE:
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to engage in the business of selling beer at wholesale within the city
without first obtaining a license therefor from the Utah alcoholic beverage control commission and paying the required
fee therefor. (Ord. 2014-05, 4-1-2014, eff. 4-24-2014)
5.16.040: LICENSE PRIVILEGES:
A. Retail licenses issued under this chapter shall be of the following kinds and shall carry the following privileges and
be numbered numerically commencing from the number one:
1. A class A retail license shall entitle the licensee to sell beer on the premises licensed in original containers for
consumption off the premises in accordance with the Utah alcoholic beverages control act.
2. A class B retail license shall entitle the licensee to sell beer in the original containers on the premises for
consumption on the premises and to all of the privileges granted to the holder of a class A retail license and in
accordance with the Utah alcoholic beverages control act.
3. A class C retail license shall entitle the licensee to sell beer on draft for consumption on or off the premises and
to all the privileges granted the holders of class A and B retail licenses in accordance with the Utah alcoholic
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 101/571
beverages control act.
4. A "seasonal license" shall carry the privileges of a class C retail license and shall be for a period less than one
year.
B. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to purchase or acquire, or to have or possess for the purpose of sale or
distribution, any beer except that which he shall have lawfully purchased from a brewer or wholesaler licensed in
accordance with the Utah alcoholic beverages control act. (Ord. 2014-05, 4-1-2014, eff. 4-24-2014)
5.16.050: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
All applications for licenses authorized by this chapter shall be verified and filed with the council and shall state the
applicant's name in full, and that he has complied with the requirements and possesses the qualifications specified in
the Utah alcoholic beverages control act, and if the applicant is a partnership, the names and addresses of all
partners, and if a corporation, the names and addresses of all officers and directors, and must be subscribed by the
applicant who must state under oath that the facts stated therein are true. (Ord. 2014-05, 4-1-2014, eff. 4-24-2014)
5.16.060: QUALIFICATIONS OF LICENSEE:
No person shall be granted a retail license unless he shall be qualified as provided in the Utah alcoholic beverages
control act and under the provisions thereof. (Ord. 2014-05, 4-1-2014, eff. 4-24-2014)
5.16.070: REFUSAL OF LICENSE:
No license shall be issued if the applicant or licensee shall not possess all the qualifications required by the Utah
alcoholic beverages control act, or fails to comply with the provisions of this code, or the rules, regulations and orders
of the board of health of the city. (Ord. 2014-05, 4-1-2014, eff. 4-24-2014)
5.16.080: PERMIT FROM BOARD OF HEALTH REQUIRED:
No license shall be issued until the applicant therefor shall have first produced from the board of health a permit
therefor, which permit shall show that the premises to be licensed are in a sanitary condition and that the equipment
used in the storage or distribution, or sale of such beer, complies with all health regulations of the city and of the state.
(Ord. 2014-05, 4-1-2014, eff. 4-24-2014)
5.16.090: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
Licenses issued under this chapter shall not be transferable, and upon revocation thereof by the council, the fee paid
by the licensee to the city for the license shall be forfeited to the city. (Ord. 2014-05, 4-1-2014, eff. 4-24-2014)
5.16.100: FEES:
A. Applications provided for in this chapter shall be accompanied by an application fee and an annual license fee
based upon the classification of the license in an amount set by resolution of the city council.
B. All licenses issued under this chapter shall expire on January 1 of each year except seasonal licenses or unless
sooner canceled. Failure to meet the renewal requirements shall result in automatic forfeiture of the license
effective of the date the existing license expires. (Ord. 2014-05, 4-1-2014, eff. 4-24-2014)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 102/571
5.16.110: LICENSE RESTRICTIONS:
A. No person shall sell beer at any public dance or to any person intoxicated, or under the influence of an intoxicating
beverage. No license shall be granted to sell beer in any dance hall, theater, or in the proximity of any church or
school. No person shall sell beer to any person under the age of twenty one (21) years, and it shall be unlawful to
sell beer between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. It shall be unlawful to
advertise the sale of beer except in accordance with regulations of the Utah alcoholic beverage control
commission.
B. No licensee shall violate the terms of the license issued, nor unless he shall be so licensed shall he sell bottled or
draft beer for consumption on the premises, or permit any beer to be consumed on the premises. (Ord. 2014-05, 4-
1-2014, eff. 4-24-2014)
5.16.120: BEER CONSUMPTION ON PREMISES PROHIBITED:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to consume beer on any premises licensed under this section or to have on the
premises any open vessel or container containing beer unless the establishment is the holder of a class B or class
C retail license.
B. It shall be unlawful for any licensee hereunder, his agent or employee, to allow the consumption of beer or similar
beverage on any premises licensed hereunder, or to allow any vessel or container containing beer or similar
beverage to remain open on the premises unless the establishment is the holder of a class B or class C retail
license. (Ord. 2014-05, 4-1-2014, eff. 4-24-2014)
5.16.130: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
No license shall be issued, and any license issued shall be revoked if the applicant or licensee shall not possess, or
shall cease to possess, all of the qualifications required by the Utah alcoholic beverages control act, or fails to comply
with the provisions of this code or rules, regulations and orders of the board of health, relating to health matters. (Ord.
2014-05, 4-1-2014, eff. 4-24-2014)
5.16.140: INSPECTION:
All licensed premises shall be subject to inspection by any officer, agent or peace officer of the city or the Utah
alcoholic beverage control commission, or the state board of health, and every licensee shall at the request of the
board of health of the city furnish to it samples of beer which he shall have for sale. (Ord. 2014-05, 4-1-2014, eff. 4-24-
2014)
5.16.150: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision in this chapter, and any person convicted of violating any
provision of any ordinance contained herein shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars
($1,000.00), or by imprisonment for a period not longer than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 2014-05, 4-1-2014, eff. 4-24-2014)
Chapter 5.20
BILLPOSTING AND HANDBILLS
5.20.010: LITTERING PUBLIC THOROUGHFARES PROHIBITED:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 103/571
It shall be unlawful for any person to scatter or throw upon the public thoroughfares any handbills, posters,
advertisements or papers. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to authorize any person to obstruct the public
thoroughfares or create any nuisance therein. These provisions shall not interfere or prevent the posting of notices
required by law to be posted. (1986 Code)
5.20.020: POSTING ON FENCES, TELEGRAPH AND TELEPHONE POLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to post, paint, tack or otherwise attach any notice or other advertising matter to any
fence, wall or building or other property until first obtaining the consent of the owner of such property. It shall be
unlawful for any person to post, paint, tack or otherwise attach any notices or advertising matter to any telegraph,
telephone, electric or other such poles. (1986 Code)
Chapter 5.24
BILLIARD AND POOL HALLS
5.24.010: SUNDAY RESTRICTIONS:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to permit the use of any public billiard or pool table on the first day of the week,
commonly called Sunday.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to permit the use of any public bowling alley or nine (9) or ten (10) pin alley on
Sunday where such alley is operated in the same room or in connection with any room containing pool, billiard or
card tables, or paraphernalia for the playing of any other games. (1986 Code)
5.24.020: MINORS IN POOL HALLS:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any pool or billiard hall in this city where games of cards are permitted
to be played or "beer", as defined in this title, is kept, sold or consumed, without first making a regulation and
enforcing the same and keeping posted in a conspicuous place, terms of such regulation which shall read "No
person under twenty-one (21) years of age permitted in these premises".
B. It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of or employed in such pool or billiard hall to permit any person under
the age of twenty one (21) years of age to enter upon or remain in any of such premises, or for any person under
the age of twenty one (21) years to enter upon or remain in said premises for any purpose except to make
deliveries or carry messages to the proprietor thereof and depart therefrom immediately.
C. Pool and billiard halls may be kept open to minors over the age of sixteen (16) years where no "beer", as herein
defined, is kept or consumed, or card playing is permitted, or devices of any character which may be used for
gambling are kept. In all such places regulations shall be maintained and enforced which shall read: "No person
under the age of sixteen (16) years allowed in these premises", and notice thereof posted in a conspicuous place
at all times.
D. It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to permit the consumption of beer, any gaming, card playing, or
disorderly conduct in, upon or adjacent to such premises, or to permit any person under the influence of liquor or
under the age of sixteen (16) years to enter upon or remain in such places. (1986 Code)
5.24.030: CLOSING HOURS:
It shall be unlawful for the owner, keeper, manager of, or employee in, any public billiard hall or pool hall in this city, to
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 104/571
allow or permit the billiard or pool hall to be or remain open for business between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00)
midnight of any day and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. of the following day. (1986 Code)
Chapter 5.28
CIGARETTE MACHINES
5.28.010: PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person within the city, with or without a retail dealer's license, to locate, install, keep,
maintain or use, or to permit the location, installation, keeping, or use upon his or its premises of any vending
automatic coin operated or coin controlled machine or other mechanical device used or intended to be used for the
sale or distribution or dispensing of cigarettes; provided, however, that nothing in this chapter shall be construed to
prohibit or to prevent any such person from locating, installing, maintaining, and using such automatic coin operated
cigarette vending machines in his back room, side rooms, or behind his counter or in other places where same may
not be operated by the public, without first getting permission of the owner of the premises. (1986 Code)
Chapter 5.32
DRY CLEANING
5.32.010: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter the following term shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to it:
AUTOMATIC DRY CLEANING MACHINES: Includes and means any device or apparatus for the cleaning of clothes
or fabrics, and designated to be used or operated by any person but the owner, or an employee of the owner thereof,
which machine or device makes use of or contains perchlorethylene or any other chemical solvent or substance which
may cause harm to human beings by reason of inhalation or contact. (1986 Code)
5.32.020: LICENSE REQUIRED; PERMIT:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to install any automatic dry cleaning machine without first having secured a
permit therefor. Applications for such permit shall contain full information as to the mechanical equipment of such
machine and provisions for ventilation for both the machine and the room in which the machine will be located.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of maintaining any such machine for use by the public
upon payment of a fee, without having first secured a license therefor. The annual fee for such license shall be ten
dollars ($10.00) plus five dollars ($5.00) for each unit in addition to five (5), maintained in any one establishment.
(1986 Code)
5.32.030: INSTALLATION REGULATIONS:
A. Each machine shall be completely enclosed by a cabinet and shall be vented with an intake at the top and the
outlet at or near the bottom of such machine. Groups of machines may be entirely enclosed or supported on all
open sides by an enclosure topped with a hood vented as provided for each individual machine.
B. The exhaust system must maintain a minimum flow of one hundred (100) cubic feet per minute fact velocity through
the loading floor whenever the door is open.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 105/571
C. The discharge stack for the machines and for the room in which the machines are located shall extend at least two
feet (2') above the level of any window which can be opened located within fifty feet (50') of the outlet of the stack,
and shall be at least fifty feet (50') away from any fresh air intake leading to any premises.
D. The machines must be so constructed as to prevent the loading door from being opened during the normal cycle of
operation. Each machine shall be equipped with a transparent door or port to allow visual examination of the status
of the cleaning cycle.
E. Any connection of such machine with the water supply system must be equipped with an air gap or vacuum breaker
in the line upstream from the condenser; with no control valves downstream from such gap or breaker. Wastewater
shall be discharged through an air gap.
F. The room in which such machine is installed shall be ventilated so that there shall be a minimum flow of air per
machine from the area to which the public is admitted of at least five hundred (500) cubic feet per machine per
minute in a room where there are no more than eight (8) machines installed; three hundred seventy five (375)
cubic feet per minute where there are no more than sixteen (16) machines installed; and three hundred sixty (360)
cubic feet per minute where there are more than seventeen (17) machines installed. For this purpose each
cleaning cell shall be considered as one machine.
G. Each machine must be so designated and constructed as to prevent the leakage of liquids, gas or vapors. (1986
Code)
5.32.040: OPERATION REGULATIONS:
A. No automatic dry cleaning machine shall be operated unless all the equipment described in section 5.32.030 of this
chapter is properly installed and in good operating working condition.
B. No establishment for which a license is required under the provisions of this chapter shall be open for business, and
it shall be unlawful to admit the public or customers into the room where such machines are located, unless there
is on duty in the establishment at all times a competent person in charge of the establishment and in charge of the
operation of such machines. There shall be warning signs posted in places of easy observation warning of the
dangers in the event leakage of liquids, gas or vapor occurs. It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any
residue containing solvent to flow into the sewer system. Tightly covered metal containers may be used for
temporary storage of such wastes outside of the building. Such containers shall bear labels indicating the contents
and dangers involved in handling, and shall be locked if in an unenclosed place.
C. At least one legible sign shall be maintained in a place available to customers giving the name, address and phone
number of the owner of the establishment, and of the service department or agency responsible to the proper
maintenance of the machines. (1986 Code)
5.32.050: INSPECTIONS:
It shall be the duty of the mayor to cause such inspections to be made as are necessary to see to the enforcement of
the provisions of this chapter. (1986 Code)
5.32.060: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to install, operate or maintain any automatic dry cleaning machine except in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter, or without complying with all of the provisions of this code pertaining to
the installation and operation of such machines herein contained; or in violation of any other provisions of this code
relating thereto. (1986 Code)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 106/571
Chapter 5.36
HOTELS AND MOTELS
5.36.010: DEFINITIONS:
Every building maintained or advertised as a public lodging house or where more than six (6) rooms are provided for
sleeping accommodations shall be known as a hotel. (1986 Code)
5.36.020: FIRE PROTECTION EQUIPMENT:
The fire chief, or other officer designated by the council, shall survey each hotel and motel and specify suitable fire
detecting devices or extinguishing appliances which shall be provided. (1986 Code)
5.36.030: MAINTENANCE OF EQUIPMENT:
Fire protective or extinguishing systems or appliances which have been installed in compliance with any permit or
order, or according to any provisions of this code, shall be maintained in operative condition at all times and it shall be
unlawful for any owner or occupant to reduce the effectiveness of the protection so required. (1986 Code)
5.36.040: INSPECTION:
It shall be the duty of the fire chief and the health officer, or other officers so designated by the council, to make
periodic and regular inspections of every hotel and to make regular reports thereon to the council concerning
regulations imposed by this code. (1986 Code)
5.36.050: HOTEL REGISTER:
A. A register shall be maintained at every hotel and each guest shall be required to register his name and home
address. The date of arrival and departure shall be clearly indicated and the register shall be maintained for a
period of at least one year following registration. The register shall be open for inspection to any authorized person.
B. Any person, be he the owner, proprietor, clerk or any other person, having regular or temporary charge of any hotel,
motel, boardinghouse or rooming house, who shall violate any provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor. (1986 Code)
5.36.060: BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED:
Before construction of a motel is started, an application for a permit for such construction shall be submitted to the
planning/zoning secretary. The planning/zoning secretary shall present such application to the governing body for its
approval. Only after approval of the governing body shall a permit for construction of a motel be issued. (1986 Code)
5.36.070: SERVICE STATION RESTRICTIONS:
Automobile service stations shall be located no closer than fifty feet (50') to any motel. (1986 Code)
5.36.080: PARKING SPACE ON PREMISES:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 107/571
Each unit of a motel or tourist court shall be provided with an assigned parking space entirely on the premises. (1986
Code)
5.36.090: MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS:
The minimum space for each unit shall be twelve feet by twenty feet (12' x 20') and shall contain one full bath, toilet
facilities, dressing compartment and sleeping room. (1986 Code)
5.36.100: EXISTING STANDARDS:
The plumbing, heating and ventilation components shall meet all local fire, plumbing and building code requirements.
(1986 Code)
5.36.110: APPLICATION TO INCLUDE PLAN:
Each application for a motel or tourist court shall be submitted with a complete plan, including the plot plan and
adjacent buildings, parking arrangement and driveways, unit sizes, plumbing and heating layout, accessory uses,
materials to be used, front and rear elevations and architectural design. (1986 Code)
5.36.120: GUESTS REQUIRED TO REGISTER:
Every operator of a motel shall maintain a register in which each guest shall register his name, home address and
license number of the vehicle in which he is traveling. The date of his arrival and departure shall also be recorded.
Such register shall be available to any authorized person inspecting the motel and shall be preserved for a period of
not less than one year. (1986 Code)
Chapter 5.40
JUNK SHOPS, PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND STORES
5.40.010: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section
unless the context indicates otherwise:
JUNK SHOP: Includes any enterprise engaged in the processing of junk, waste, discarded or salvaged materials,
machinery or equipment including automobile wrecking and dismantling.
PAWNBROKER: Includes every person who makes a business of lending money on the security of personal property
deposited in his keeping.
SECONDHAND STORE: Includes every person who deals in the purchase and sale of goods of any type that has
been used or previously sold at retail one or more times. (1986 Code)
5.40.020: LICENSE APPLICATION:
Application for a license to be issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be made to the utility billing clerk and
shall contain a description of the location of the applicant together with a statement concerning the type of business
contemplated. The governing body may provide regulations requiring such other information as it may deem
advisable. (1986 Code)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 108/571
5.40.030: LICENSE:
Upon receipt of proper application and the payment of a fee of ten dollars ($10.00), the utility billing clerk may issue a
license for a junk shop, and upon payment of a fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00), the utility billing clerk may issue a
license for a pawnbroker or secondhand store, subject to all of the provisions of this chapter. (1986 Code)
5.40.040: PROHIBITED PURCHASES:
No person licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall make any purchase from any minor without first obtaining
approval from their parents or legal guardians. (1986 Code)
5.40.050: INSPECTION:
The chief of police or other designated official shall be permitted at any reasonable time to inspect any property
contained on the premises of any person licensed under this chapter. (1986 Code)
5.40.060: RECORDS:
Any person licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall maintain a written record of all business transactions,
including the time of purchase and description of any article and the name and address of the person from whom such
art was purchased. This record shall be in the English language and shall be available at any reasonable time for
inspection by the chief of police or other designated official. (1986 Code)
Chapter 5.44
NURSING HOMES
5.44.010: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given
in this section:
AGED: Any person sixty five (65) years of age or over.
APPLICANT: A person that submits to the health department an application for a license or the renewal of a license to
conduct, operate or maintain a nursing home under the provisions of this chapter.
NURSING HOME: Any nursing home, convalescent home, institution, home place or facility for the accommodation,
care, hospitalization, treatment or boarding of one or more aged, sick, infirm convalescent, invalid, mentally ill,
feebleminded, incompetent, decrepit, blind, disabled, injured, infected or chronically ill person, drug addict,
dipsomaniac, or inebriate, for which accommodation, care, treatment, boarding or hospitalization, a charge is made or
compensation is required or expected, whether by fee or gift; provided, however, that the accommodation, care,
treatment, hospitalization or boarding in a household or family, for compensation or otherwise of a person related by
blood to the head of such household, or family, or to his spouse, within and including the fourth degree of
consanguinity within the law of this state, shall not be deemed to constitute a nursing home within the meaning of this
chapter; provided further, that the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any nursing home, hospital, clinic,
treatment center, institution or other facility operated or maintained by or under the jurisdiction of the state, any agency
or political subdivision of the state, or by any other public entity, or operated or maintained pursuant to state license or
permit or state supervision.
PATIENT: Any person accommodated, cared for, treated, hospitalized, or boarded in any nursing home. (1986 Code)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 109/571
5.44.020: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, operate or maintain or permit to be conducted, operated or maintained,
or to participate in the conduct, maintenance or operation of a nursing home within the city unless the city health
department has issued a valid license therefor which is in full force and effect. (1986 Code)
5.44.030: APPLICATION FOR A LICENSE:
Application for a license under this chapter shall be made to the health department in such form and manner as it may
prescribe. The application shall include such information and data respecting the nursing home for which the license is
requested as the health department may prescribe, including a description of the facility and service and a statement
of the personnel and program that are to be used therefor. (1986 Code)
5.44.040: INVESTIGATION:
Upon receipt of an application for a license under this chapter, the health department shall cause an investigation to
be made of the activities, services and facilities of the applicant, including the character, reputation, health and
qualifications of the applicant and members of the applicant's staff and of the applicant's financial responsibility. The
applicant shall afford the representatives of the health department reasonable opportunity to inspect the applicant's
nursing home for which the license is requested, its books and records and to interview the applicant's agents and
employees and any patient within the care or custody of the applicant in such nursing home. (1986 Code)
5.44.050: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
Upon completion of such investigation the health department shall issue a city license to the applicant for the nursing
home when it finds and determines that the applicant is adequately qualified and equipped to conduct, operate and
maintain the nursing home for which the license is to be issued; that such nursing home conforms to the requirements
of this chapter; that it will be operated and maintained in such manner as to be conducive to the benefit and welfare of
the patients in such nursing home; that the applicant's financial responsibility is such as to give reasonable assurance
of the continued operation and maintenance of such facility; and that the applicant and the applicant's staff are of good
character and reputation. (1986 Code)
5.44.060: LICENSE; TERMS:
A. Number Of Patients: The license when issued shall designate the maximum number of patients to be
accommodated in the nursing home to which it applies and this number shall at no time be exceeded.
B. Expiration: Each license, whether an original or a renewal license, shall expire at the end of one year from the date
of its issuance, which date of expiration shall be stated upon its face, unless sooner revoked or surrendered.
C. Form And Transferability: The licenses shall be issued on forms prescribed by the health department. Licenses
shall not be transferable either as to place or person.
D. Provisional License: The health department may issue a provisional license to any applicant for any period not to
exceed six (6) months if the applicant is temporarily unable to comply with all the requirements of this chapter.
Such provisional license may be renewed but only for one additional period, not exceeding six (6) months,
provided, that applicant has made reasonable efforts to comply with such requirements.
E. Delays: In the event of delay on the part of the health department to take final action upon an application for a
license within ninety (90) days after submittal, it shall be lawful for the applicant to engage in the operation of the
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 110/571
nursing home for which the license has been applied for until the health department has taken final action on the
application and has notified the applicant thereof.
F. Fees: There shall be collected by the health department before the issuance of any license or renewal license an
annual fee of ten dollars ($10.00) plus an additional fee of five dollars ($5.00) for each of the patients specified in
the license, which fees shall be deposited with the treasurer. (1986 Code)
5.44.070: REFUSAL OF LICENSE:
The health department shall deny a license for a nursing home if it shall appear to its satisfaction that the applicant, or
if the applicant is a corporation, any officer or person who is to be in charge of such nursing home, has been convicted
of a felony, or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, or has inadequate training or experience in the care of
patients of the nursing home. (1986 Code)
5.44.080: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The health department shall have the power and is authorized to promulgate such rules and regulations for the
operation of nursing homes in the city which it finds necessary or proper to carry out the intent of this chapter. (1986
Code)
5.44.090: RECORDS; REPORTS:
A. Every licensee under this chapter shall provide and maintain in such nursing home a register in bound book form
setting forth the following facts concerning each patient received, cared for, or accommodated in such nursing
home:
1. Name;
2. Last previous address;
3. Age;
4. Date of admission;
5. Next of kin;
6. Name and address of the person responsible for the care and maintenance;
7. Name of patient's attending physician;
8. All written or verbal orders of the patient's attending physician and the date on which such orders were given;
9. Date of discharge or death;
10. Cause of death;
11. Disposition of personal effects at death;
12. The amount and disposition of any money or other valuables deposited with the licensee to the credit of the
patient.
B. All entries required in this section shall be made within twenty four (24) hours from the time of admission, or from
the time of occurrence of the event required to be recorded. Every licensee shall keep and maintain such other
records and make such reports to the health department as it may reasonably require upon such forms as it may
prescribe. (1986 Code)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 111/571
5.44.100: RECORD OF EMPLOYEES:
A. Every licensee shall maintain a record setting forth the following facts concerning each nurse, attendant or other
employee in such nursing home:
1. Name;
2. Age;
3. Date employment began in the nursing home;
4. Present and last previous address;
5. Name and address of employers during the preceding three (3) month period;
6. Position and duties;
7. If employed as a nurse, date of state registration;
8. Date employment terminated;
9. Reason for termination.
B. A copy of such record shall be delivered to the health department at its office in the city not later than seventy two
(72) hours following the employment of any such person. (1986 Code)
5.44.110: INSPECTION OF RECORDS:
All records required to be kept under the terms of this chapter by the licensee shall be open to inspection by the health
department at all reasonable hours. It shall be unlawful to make any false entries in the records. In addition to the
penalties provided in this code, falsification of such records or the omission of information required thereon shall be
cause for revocation of the license. (1986 Code)
5.44.120: INSPECTIONS; REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
A. It shall be the duty of the health department to inspect nursing homes for which licenses have been issued under
this chapter as often as it shall be necessary for the adequate control and supervision of the same, and the health
department shall have the right to enter all such homes at any reasonable time for the purpose of making
necessary investigations and inspections, and shall be charged with the responsibility of enforcing and
administering the provisions of this chapter. Every nursing home shall at all reasonable times be open for
inspection by the fire chief and the building department of the city as well as the health department.
B. In case of any failure by a licensee to comply with the requirements of this chapter or any rules and regulations
promulgated pursuant hereto, the health department shall notify the licensee to correct the noncompliance, breach,
default or illegal condition within such number of days as is reasonable in the light of the conditions to be remedied.
In the event of failure, or upon refusal of the licensee, to comply with the health department's instructions, the
health department shall revoke the license; provided, however, that upon a showing of hardship or other
circumstances warranting such action, the health department shall have the authority to grant an extension of time
for compliance with the health department's instructions. (1986 Code)
5.44.130: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
No license for a nursing home shall be issued under this chapter unless it is determined that the provisions of this
code applicable to such nursing home are being observed and complied with, including the provisions relating to
health, sanitation, safety, fire, buildings, housing, electrical and other provisions relating thereto. (1986 Code)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 112/571
5.44.140: ZONING RESTRICTIONS:
No license shall be issued for a nursing home if the location thereof shall be in violation of the zoning provisions of this
code, unless such nursing home was being operated in such a locality as a nursing home prior to the enactment of the
zoning provisions. (1986 Code)
5.44.150: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
A. The health department may revoke or suspend any license for a nursing home if it is determined that the nursing
home is being operated or maintained in violation of the requirements of this chapter or of the regulations
promulgated pursuant to this chapter or for any of the following causes:
1. Fraud or misrepresentation in obtaining the license;
2. Maltreating or abusing any patient of such nursing home;
3. Using practices inimical to the physical, mental or moral well being of any patient;
4. Conducting the nursing home in a manner constituting a breach of the public peace or a menace to the public
health, safety, morals or welfare.
B. Such revocation or suspension of the license shall be in addition to any other penalty that may be provided by law.
(1986 Code)
Chapter 5.48
PRIVATE JUVENILE INSTITUTIONS
5.48.010: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings
given in this section:
ADULT: Any person eighteen (18) years of age or older.
APPLICANT: Any person, firm, corporation, or business entity that submits to the city an application for a license or the
renewal of a license to conduct, operate, or maintain a private school, private boarding school, private foster family
care home, or private juvenile detention home or center under the provisions of this chapter.
CHILD: Any person less than eighteen (18) years of age.
DELINQUENT CHILD: Includes: a) a child who has violated any state law or any ordinance or regulation of a
subdivision of the state, b) a child who by reason of being wayward or habitually disobedient is uncontrolled by his
parent, guardian, or custodian, c) a child who is habitually truant from school or home, and d) a child who so deports
himself as to injure or endanger the morals or health of himself or others.
DEPENDENT CHILD: Includes: a) a child who is homeless or destitute or without proper support or care through no
fault of his parent or guardian, b) a child who lacks proper care by reason of the mental or physical condition of the
parent, guardian or custodian, and c) a child whose custody is in question or dispute.
INSTITUTION: Any building, public or private, under the control of an individual or business entity and used as a home
or place of detention, correction, control or supervision for delinquent, neglected, dependent or problem children.
NEGLECTED CHILD: Includes: a) a child who is abandoned by his parent, guardian or custodian, b) a child who lacks
proper parental care by reason of the fault of habits of the parent, guardian or custodian, c) a child whose parent,
guardian or custodian neglects or refuses to provide proper or necessary subsistence, education, medical or surgical
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 113/571
care or other care necessary for his health, morals or well being, d) a child whose parent, guardian or custodian
neglects or refuses to provide the special care made necessary by his mental condition, e) a child who is found in a
disreputable place or who associates with vagrant, vicious or immoral persons, and f) a child who engages in an
occupation or is in a situation dangerous to life or limb or injurious to the health or morals of himself or others.
PATRON: Any person accommodated, cared for, treated, boarded, instructed, hospitalized or detained in any private
school, private boarding school, private foster family care home or private detention facility or institution.
PRIVATE BOARDING SCHOOL, PRIVATE FOSTER CARE HOME, AND PRIVATE DETENTION HOME OR
CENTER: Any home, institution, home place or facility, for the day and night care, accommodation, treatment,
detention, control, supervision or teaching of one or more children or adults, including delinquent, abandoned,
neglected, dependent and problem children and those afflicted with drug addiction, drug or behavior problems, for
which accommodation, care, treatment, control, supervision, teaching, boarding, or instruction a charge is made or
compensation is required or expected, whether by fee or gift; provided, however, that the accommodation, care,
treatment, detention, control, supervision, teaching or instruction or boarding in a household or family, for
compensation or otherwise, for a person related by blood to the head of such household or family or to his spouse
within and including the fourth degree of consanguinity within the laws of the state of Utah, shall not be deemed to
constitute a private boarding school, foster family care home, or detention and control institution or facility within the
meaning of this chapter; and provided further, that the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any private boarding
school, foster family care home, or detention or control facility, clinic, treatment center, institution or other facility
operated or maintained by or under the direct jurisdiction and supervision of the state, any agency or political
subdivision thereof, or by any other public entity on a nonprofit basis. (1986 Code)
5.48.020: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, operate, or maintain or permit to be conducted, operated or maintained,
or to participate in the conduct, maintenance or operation of a private boarding school, private school, private foster
family care home, or private detention or control facility or institution within the city unless the city has issued a valid
license therefor which is in full force and effect. (1986 Code)
5.48.030: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Application for a license under this chapter shall be made to Mapleton City in such form and manner as it may
prescribe. The application shall include such information and data respecting the private school, private boarding
school, private foster family care home or private detention or control facility or institution for which the license is
requested as the city may prescribe, including a full and complete description of the facility, its purposes, and service,
and a statement of the personnel and program that are to be used therefor. (1986 Code)
5.48.040: INVESTIGATION:
Upon receipt of an application for a license under this chapter, the city recorder, in conjunction with the city health
department and police department, shall cause an investigation to be made of the activities, services and facilities of
the applicant, including the character, reputation, health and qualifications of the applicant and members of the
applicant's staff and of the applicant's financial and moral responsibility. The applicant shall afford the representatives
of the city reasonable opportunity to inspect the applicant's home, facility or institution for which the license is
requested, its books and records and to interview the applicant's agents, and employees and any patron, student or
person within the care or custody of the applicant in such home, school, facility or institution. (1986 Code)
5.48.050: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
Upon completion of such investigation, the city recorder shall issue a city license to the applicant for the school, home,
facility or institution when he finds and determines that the applicant is adequately qualified, staffed and equipped to
conduct, operate, and maintain a licensed and accredited private school, private boarding school, private foster family
care home, or private detention and control facility or institution for which the license is sought; that the school, home,
facility or institution conforms to the requirements of this chapter; that it will be operated and maintained in such
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 114/571
manner as to be conducive to the benefit, welfare and well being of the patrons, students or persons in such school,
home, facility or institution; that the applicant's financial and moral responsibility is such as to give reasonable
assurance of the continued and proper operation and maintenance of such school, home or facility; and that the
applicant and applicant's staff are of good character and reputation and properly qualified by license and accreditation
required by state law for any similar public institution, school, home or facility. (1986 Code)
5.48.060: LICENSE TERMS:
A. Number Of Patrons: The license, when issued, shall designate the maximum number of patrons, students, or
persons to be accommodated, instructed, detained, and maintained in the school, home, facility, or institution to
which it applies and this number shall at no time be exceeded.
B. Expiration: Each license, whether an original or a renewal license, shall expire at the end of one year from the date
of its issuance, which date of expiration shall be stated upon its face, unless sooner revoked or surrendered.
C. Form And Transferability: The licenses shall be issued on forms prescribed by the city. Licenses shall not be
transferable either as to place or person.
D. Provisional License: The city may issue a provisional license to any applicant for any period not to exceed six (6)
months if the applicant is temporarily unable to comply with all the requirements of this chapter. Such provisional
license may be renewed, but only for one additional period, not exceeding six (6) months, provided the applicant
has made reasonable effort to comply with such requirements.
E. Delays: In the event of delay on the part of the city to take final action upon an application for a license within ninety
(90) days after submittal, it shall be lawful for the applicant to engage in the operation of the home, school, facility,
or institution for which the license has been applied for until the city has taken final action on the application and
has notified the applicant thereof.
F. Fees: There shall be collected by the city recorder before the issuance of any license or renewal license an annual
fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) plus an additional fee of five dollars ($5.00) for each of the patrons, students, or persons
specified or authorized in the license, which fees shall be deposited with the city treasurer. (1986 Code)
5.48.070: REFUSAL OF LICENSE:
The city shall deny a license for a private school, private boarding school, private foster family care home, or private
detention or control facility or institution if it shall appear to its satisfaction that the applicant, or if the applicant is a
corporation or other business entity, any officer or person who is to be in charge thereof, has been convicted of a
felony, or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, or has had inadequate training, or experience, or is not duly and
regularly licensed or accredited for the conduct of such business or pursuit where such license or accreditation is
required of similar individuals and institutions engaged in a similar public business or pursuit. (1986 Code)
5.48.080: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The police department and health department of the city shall have the power and they are authorized to promulgate
such rules and regulations for the operation of the schools, boarding schools, foster family care homes and detention
or control facilities in the city which they find necessary or proper to carry out the intent of this chapter and to maintain
good order and sanitary conditions therein. (1986 Code)
5.48.090: RECORDS AND REPORTS:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 115/571
A. Every licensee under this chapter shall provide and maintain in such school, home, facility or institution a register in
bound book form setting forth the following facts concerning each patron, student, child or adult received, cared for,
detained, controlled, supervised, accommodated or instructed in such home, school or facility:
1. Name;
2. Last previous address;
3. Age;
4. Date of admission;
5. Next of kin;
6. Name and address of person responsible for the care and maintenance;
7. Name of patron's, student's or person's attending physician;
8. All written or verbal orders of the attending physician of such patron, student, or person and the date on which
such orders were given;
9. Date of discharge or death;
10. Cause of death, if deceased;
11. Disposition of personal effects at death;
12. The amount and disposition of any money or other valuables deposited with the licensee to the credit of the
patron, student or person.
B. All entries required under this section shall be made within twenty four (24) hours from the time of admission, or
from the time of occurrence of the event required to be recorded. Every licensee shall keep and maintain such
other records and make such other and additional reports to the health department and police department as either
such department may reasonably require upon such forms as either may prescribe and the licensee shall
immediately report to the police department of the city the escape, absence or unlawful act of any patron, student,
or person housed and accommodated, taught, detained, controlled or supervised in such home, school, facility or
institution. (1986 Code)
5.48.100: RECORD OF EMPLOYEES:
A. Every licensee shall maintain a record setting forth the following facts concerning each teacher, nurse, counselor,
doctor, attendant or other employee in such home, facility, school or institution:
1. Name;
2. Age;
3. Date employment began in the school, home or facility;
4. Present and last previous address;
5. Name and address of employers during the preceding three (3) month period;
6. Position and duties;
7. If employed as a teacher, doctor, nurse or counselor, the date of state registration, license, qualification or
accreditation;
8. Date employment terminated;
9. Reason for termination.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 116/571
B. A copy of such record shall be delivered to the city recorder at his office in the city not later than seventy two (72)
hours next following the employment or termination of employment of any such person, as the case may be. (1986
Code)
5.48.110: INSPECTION OF RECORDS:
All records required to be kept under the terms of this chapter by the licensee shall be open to inspection by the board
of health and/or police department of the city at all reasonable hours. It shall be unlawful to make any false entries in
the records. In addition to the penalties provided in this code, falsification of such records or the omission of
information required thereon shall be cause for revocation of the license. (1986 Code)
5.48.120: INSPECTIONS; REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
A. It shall be the duty of the board of health and the police department to inspect the schools, boarding schools, foster
family care homes or detention or control facilities for which licenses have been issued under this chapter as often
as it shall be deemed necessary for the adequate and proper control and supervision of the same, and each such
department shall have the right to enter all such homes, schools, facilities or institutions at any reasonable time for
the purpose of making necessary investigations and inspections, and shall be charged with the responsibility of
enforcing and administering the provisions of this chapter. Every school, home, facility or institution shall, at all
reasonable times, be open for inspection by the fire chief and the building department of the city as well as the
health and police departments.
B. In case of any failure by a licensee to comply with the requirements of this chapter, or with any rules and
regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, the health department, fire department, police department or building
inspector shall notify the licensee to correct the noncompliance, breach, default or illegal condition within such
number of days as is reasonable in the light of the conditions to be remedied. In the event of failure, or upon
refusal of the licensee to comply with the instructions of such department, the city shall revoke the license;
provided, however, that upon a showing of hardship or other circumstances warranting such action, the city shall
have the authority to grant an extension of time for compliance with the instructions of any affected department.
(1986 Code)
5.48.130: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
No license for a school, home, facility or institution contemplated in this chapter shall be issued hereunder unless it is
determined that the provisions of this code applicable to such school, home, facility or institution are being observed
and complied with, including the provisions relating to health, sanitation, safety, fire, buildings, housing, electrical,
personnel and other provisions relating thereto. (1986 Code)
5.48.140: ZONING RESTRICTIONS:
No license shall be issued for a school, boarding school, foster care home, detention or control facility or institution if
the location thereof shall be in violation of the zoning provisions of this code, unless such school, home, facility or
institution was being operated in such a locality in such manner and capacity prior to the enactment of the zoning
provisions. (1986 Code)
5.48.150: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
A. The city may revoke or suspend any license for a private school, private boarding school, private foster care home
or private detention or control facility or institution if it is determined that such school, home, facility or institution is
being operated or maintained in violation of the requirements of this chapter or of the regulations promulgated
pursuant to this chapter or for any of the following causes:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 117/571
1. Fraud or misrepresentation in obtaining the license;
2. Maltreating or abusing any student, patron or person accommodated in such school, home, facility or institution;
3. Using practices inimical to the physical, mental or moral well being of any patron, student or person;
4. Conducting the school, home, facility or institution in a manner constituting or conducive to a breach of the public
peace or a menace to the public health, safety, morals or welfare.
B. Such revocation or suspension of the license shall be in addition to any other penalty that may be provided by law
and upon such revocation or suspension, part or portion of any license fee theretofore paid shall be refunded or
refundable to the applicant. (1986 Code)
Chapter 5.52
SELF-SERVICE LAUNDRIES
5.52.010: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter the following term shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to it:
SELF-SERVICE LAUNDRY: Any establishment in which coin operated facilities are available for washing clothes or
for drying clothes, or both, and which is open and available to the general public for use. (1986 Code)
5.52.020: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish or operate any self-service laundry in the city without first having
secured a license therefor from the utility billing clerk. (1986 Code)
5.52.030: INSTALLATION OF EQUIPMENT:
Installation of all equipment in self-service laundries shall conform with all of the provisions of this code relating
thereto. (1986 Code)
Chapter 5.56
TRAILER COURTS
5.56.010: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section
unless the context indicates otherwise:
DEPENDENT TRAILER COACH: One which does not have a water closet and bathtub or shower.
INDEPENDENT TRAILER COACH: One that has a water closet and a bathtub or shower.
SERVICE BUILDING: A building housing communal toilet, laundry and other sanitary facilities necessary for the health
and convenience of the trailer occupants.
TRAILER COACH: A vehicle with or without means of self-propulsion, licensable as a conveyance on public streets or
highways and which is constructed to permit occupancy as a dwelling or sleeping place for one or more persons.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 118/571
TRAILER COACH SPACE: A plot of ground within a trailer court designated for the accommodation of one trailer
coach.
TRAILER COURT: Any plot of ground upon which two (2) or more occupied trailer coaches are located. (1986 Code)
5.56.020: APPLICATION; TRAILER COURT:
A. Applications for a trailer court license shall be filed with and issued by the utility billing clerk. Applications shall be in
writing signed by the applicant and shall contain the following:
1. The name and address of the applicant;
2. The location and legal description of the trailer court;
3. Such further information as may be requested by the governing body to enable it to determine if the proposed
location will comply with the legal requirements, including a sketch or plot plan designating numbered trailer
spaces;
4. No change or alteration in the plot plan shall be made without first making a written application for such change
or alteration to the governing body and receiving a written permit therefrom.
B. The governing body shall investigate the location and if it is found to be in compliance with all provisions of this
chapter and all other applicable chapters or statutes, application may be approved. (1986 Code)
5.56.030: TRAILER COURT LICENSE:
Any person who maintains or operates a trailer court must first obtain a license from the utility billing clerk, which
license must be approved by the governing body of the municipality. The fee for such trailer court shall be twenty five
dollars ($25.00) per year or portion thereof, minimum, plus two dollars ($2.00) per trailer space. (1986 Code)
5.56.040: REGISTER:
It shall be the duty of the licensee to keep a register containing a record of all trailer coaches occupying space within
the court. The register shall contain the following information:
A. Name and address of each occupant in each trailer coach;
B. Make, model and year of all automobiles and trailer coaches;
C. License numbers and owner of each trailer coach and automobile by which it is towed;
D. The state issuing such licenses;
E. The date of arrival and departure of each trailer coach and the number or other identification of the space or spaces
occupied. The court shall keep the register available for inspection at all times by law enforcement officers, public
health officials whose duties necessitate acquisition of the information contained in the register. The register
records shall not be destroyed until after a period of three (3) years following the date of registration. (1986 Code)
5.56.050: DOMESTIC ANIMALS:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 119/571
No domestic animals or house pets shall be allowed to run at large or commit any nuisances within the limits of a
trailer court. (1986 Code)
5.56.060: LICENSE TRANSFER:
All licenses issued under this chapter for a trailer court and trailer coach shall be personal to the licensee and be
nontransferable without the written consent of the governing body first being obtained. (1986 Code)
5.56.070: APPLICATION; TRAILER COACH:
Applications for a trailer coach license shall be filed with and issued by the utility billing clerk. Application shall be in
writing signed by the applicant and shall contain the following:
A. The name and address of the applicant;
B. The location and description where trailer coach is to be parked;
C. Such further information as may be requested by the governing body. (1986 Code)
5.56.080: TRAILER COACH LICENSE FEE:
A trailer coach fee shall be charged each applicant, which fee shall be three dollars ($3.00) and shall be paid in
advance to the utility billing clerk. (1986 Code)
5.56.090: LOCATION OF TRAILER COACHES:
The use of trailer coach as trailers or otherwise occupied by one or more persons except in an approved public or
private trailer court shall be considered as a public nuisance unless the yards surrounding it agree with the
requirements for a dwelling as established by the zoning title. (1986 Code)
5.56.100: TRAILER COACH PARKING:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy a trailer coach or for any person who is the owner, renter or lessee of
any property within the municipality to erect or give consent for the placement and occupancy of any trailer house
within the municipality for more than twenty four (24) hours, except in an approved public or private trailer court.
B. It shall be unlawful to park a trailer coach, whether occupied or not, on any public thoroughfare or public place other
than an approved trailer court for more than six (6) hours.
C. Trailer coaches may be parked on private property and occupied by a person for a period of time only as provided
in title 18 of this code. (1986 Code)
5.56.110: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
Placement and use of trailer coaches occupied by any person on other than approved public or private courts must be
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 120/571
so arranged as not to interfere with the rights and privileges of adjacent property owners, each occupied trailer coach
being considered as a separate dwelling house under the laws of the zoning title. (1986 Code)
5.56.120: REVOCATION:
The governing body may revoke or suspend any license issued in this chapter when such licensee shall have been
found guilty of a violation of this chapter or any part of this code. (1986 Code)
5.56.130: POSTING OF LICENSE:
A license issued under this chapter shall be conspicuously posted on the individual trailer coach not located within a
trailer court or in the office of or on the premises of the trailer court. (1986 Code)
Chapter 5.60
BURGLAR ALARM REGULATIONS
5.60.010: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter certain words and phrases used herein are defined as follows:
ALARM AGENT: Any person who is employed by an alarm business, either directly or indirectly, whose duties include
any of the following: selling, maintaining, leasing, monitoring, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or
installing in or on any building, place or premises any alarm system.
ALARM BUSINESS: Any person, firm or corporation engaged in or causing the selling, leasing, monitoring,
maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing of any alarm system in or on any building,
place or premises.
ALARM SYSTEM: Any device designed for the detection of an unauthorized entry on premises or for alerting others of
the commission of an unlawful act, or a combination thereof, which, when actuated, emits a sound or transmits a
signal or message.
ALARM USER: Any person using an alarm system whether as a subscribed or proprietor.
AUDIBLE ALARM: A device designed for the detection of an unauthorized entry on premises, which, when actuated,
generates an audible sound on the premises.
DISPATCH AGENCY: The police department or county sheriff's office with which Mapleton City contracts for police
dispatching services.
FALSE ALARM: An alarm signal necessitating response by the police department where an emergency situation does
not exist.
HUMAN ERROR CAUSED ALARM: A false alarm resulting from either intentional or accidental acts of a person, in
contradistinction to false alarms resulting from electronic or mechanical failure of the equipment. The user shall be
responsible to disclose the reason for the false alarm.
PROPRIETOR ALARM: An alarm system or audible alarm which is not serviced by an alarm business.
SUBSCRIBER: A person contracting with an alarm business for the leasing, servicing or maintaining of an alarm
system.
SYSTEM CAUSED FALSE ALARM: A false alarm resulting from electronic or mechanical failure of the equipment.
(Ord. 94-15)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 121/571
5.60.020: LICENSES; PERMITS:
A. Alarm Business License: No person, firm or corporation shall engage in, conduct or carry on an alarm business
without first having obtained from the city and the police department a license to do so.
B. Alarm Subscriber And User Permit: No person shall install or use an alarm system within the city as a subscriber or
alarm user without first having obtained a permit to do so from the city building inspector. A permit must be
obtained for each installation.
C. Alarm Agents: Every person engaged in the business of repairing, servicing, altering, replacing, removing or
installing a burglar alarm system shall carry on his person, at all times, while so engaged, a valid identification card
and shall display said card to any police officer on request, which identification card shall be in the form prescribed
by the chief of police and may be obtained from him upon proof of payment of the required fee to the city license
bureau. Upon revocation of the license under which said identification card is issued, or termination of employment
of any person holding such card from the business described herein, the identification card shall be returned to the
chief of police. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry on his person, use, display or have in his possession any
such identification card containing any false or fictitious information, or possess such card when he is not
employed by any person having a license under this chapter, or himself hold such a license.
D. Exemptions: The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to audible alarms affixed to automobiles. (Ord.
94-15)
5.60.030: FEES:
A. Alarm Business License: An annual fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be payable in advance.
B. Alarm Subscriber And User Permits: An annual fee of two dollars ($2.00) shall be payable in advance.
C. Installation And Monthly Fees: Notwithstanding any contrary provision of this chapter, a person, firm or corporation
may apply for, and the chief of police of Mapleton and the dispatching agency may grant, a permit to install and
connect at the dispatching agency intrusion burglar alarm monitors for users of an intrusion burglar alarm system.
A fee as determined by the dispatching agency for each such user of such monitoring services and rental space
shall be paid to the dispatching agency in advance at each quarterly period of each year by the permittee.
D. Additional Costs: The chief of police of Mapleton and the dispatching agency jointly shall have the right to deny any
application for installment or to remove or to cause the removal of any monitoring device which in his sole
discretion interferes with the normal operations of efficiency of the police department or dispatching agency. Such
removal will extend to any unlawful equipment that is attached without authorization. In addition to the foregoing
fees, the permittee shall pay the actual costs as determined by the city of such installation, and if any monitor is
subsequently disconnected, the costs of the removal of each such intrusion burglar alarm monitor. The permittee
shall bear the cost of any maintenance. The permittee shall give to the Mapleton police department and the
dispatching agency at least fifteen (15) days' prior written notice whenever it intends to discontinue service to any
user and to remove the installed monitor for such user. (Ord. 94-15)
5.60.040: REQUIREMENTS AND DUTIES:
A. Alarm System Standards: The chief of police of Mapleton may prescribe minimum standards for the construction
and maintenance and require inspection and approval of all alarm systems, proprietor alarms and audible alarms
installed within the city. All devices shall meet or exceed such standards before licenses or permits may be issued,
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 122/571
B. False Alarm Reports Required: A report shall be filed with the Mapleton police chief for each and every false alarm,
setting forth the cause of the alarm and remedial action taken. Where the alarm system is serviced by an alarm
business, the report shall be made by such alarm business. Where a proprietor alarm is involved the report shall
be made by the permittee. Where more than one false alarm is emitted from one alarm system in any three (3)
calendar month period, a report shall be made by the subscriber or user of the alarm system. Such report shall
contain the following information. All false alarm reports shall be delivered within three (3) days after the
occurrence of the false alarm to the Mapleton police chief:
FALSE ALARM REPORT
(1) Date of false alarm
(2) Approximate time set off (a.m.) (p.m.)
(3) Was the business open? (Yes) (No)
(4) Was this a malfunction of the alarm? (Yes) (No)
(5) Was this an employee error? (Yes) (No)
(6) If employee, name of employee
(7) Have employees received instruction on the proper way to set or turn off alarm? (Yes) (No)
(8) Person giving the instruction
(9) Was the alarm being serviced at time of signal? (Yes) (No)
(10) Was the department notified prior to the service of the alarm? (Yes) (No)
(11) Were other employees present? (Yes) (No)
(12) What business installed the alarm?
(13) How long has the alarm been installed?
(14) When was it last serviced?
(15) Do you have a service contract?
(16) What is the power source of the alarm?
(17) If after closing hours, how long did it take for you to arrive after being notified?
(18) If the cause was other than disclosed by (4), (5) or (9), state the cause of the false alarm:
C. Audible Alarm Requirements: Every person maintaining an audible alarm, which does not contain a mechanical
means to effect an automatic turnoff of the alarm within fifteen (15) minutes after it is first activated, shall post a
notice containing the names and telephone numbers of persons to be notified to render repairs for service during
any hour of the day or night. Such notice shall be posted near the alarm in such a position as to be legible from the
ground level adjacent to the building.
D. Automatic Turnoff Device: All audible alarms installed within the city after January 1, 1995, shall be equipped with
mechanical means to effect an automatic turnoff and reset. Any existing alarm of this type shall be equipped with
an automatic turnoff device by not later than January 1, 1995.
E. Service Response: Every person, firm or corporation operating under a license or permit issued pursuant to this
chapter shall have and keep available at all hours of each day at least one user representative who shall respond
within thirty (30) minutes to emergency service calls from any member of the city police and shall render such
emergency service as may be reasonably requested by said officer.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 123/571
F. Subscribers To Conform To And Abide By Rules Of Alarm Business: Subscribers to conform to and abide by rules of
alarm business. Every alarm subscriber who shall have an alarm system installed, monitored or maintained by an
alarm business licensed under this chapter shall conform to and abide by the rules of operation and use as set
forth by the alarm business for the proper use, operation and upkeep of their alarm system.
G. Alarm System Inspection: Each alarm system shall be inspected annually. A report of such inspection shall be
submitted to the chief of police by the alarm business servicing or maintaining such alarm system. Where a
proprietor alarm is involved the report shall be made by the permittee. The inspection report shall be submitted
concurrent with the application for renewal of license or permit or within sixty (60) days of alarm system installation.
(Ord. 94-15)
5.60.050: APPLICATIONS AND ISSUANCE:
A. Contents Of Application: Each applicant for a permit shall make application to the planning and zoning department
and to the police department and file therewith a statement concerning the proposed application showing the
general description, the names, addresses and phone numbers of the responsible parties. The application shall
also make claim that all safety procedures are taken relative to false alarms and a procedure for testing the system
shall be included in the application.
B. Issuing Authority: The issuing authority shall be the city secretary.
C. Approving Authority: The approving authority shall be the police chief and building inspector.
D. Investigations: All applications for an alarm business and alarm agents shall require the fingerprints of the
applicants. The police chief shall conduct an investigation of the applicant to determine his police record, charter,
reputation and moral integrity; provided, however, the police chief, at his discretion, may dispense with the
investigation upon being furnished with an authenticated copy of a current permit issued by another governmental
agency located in the county. The permit shall be denied if the police record, character, reputation or moral integrity
of the applicant is determined to be inimical to the safety or general welfare of the community or if the applicant
falsifies any information in the permit application.
E. Procedure: Permits shall be issued to the person owning, using or possessing the alarm system or proprietor alarm.
The alarm business shall procure and process applications for its subscribers. The subscriber shall forward the
completed application to the alarm business servicing the alarm system, and the permit fee shall be collected from
the subscriber by the alarm business and transmitted together with the application forthwith to the city. The alarm
business shall collect each subsequent annual permit fee from every such subscriber and transmit it, along with a
complete list of its subscribers, to the city. Where a proprietor alarm is in operation and not serviced by an alarm
business, the application for the permit and payment of the permit fee shall be made directly to the city by the
owner or user. (Ord. 94-15)
5.60.060: SUSPENSION, REVOCATION AND FINES:
A. Police Chief Empowered: The police chief is empowered to suspend, revoke or fine any person or "alarm user" as
defined in section 5.60.010 of this chapter.
B. Grounds For Revocation, Suspension Or Fining: The following shall constitute grounds for the revocation,
suspension or fining of any permittee hereunder:
1. The violation of, or failure to comply with, any of the provisions of this chapter;
2. Where the character or moral integrity of the permit holder or his employees is determined to be inimical to the
public safety, health or general welfare of the community;
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 124/571
3. Any alarm system or proprietor alarm which activates excessive false alarms and thereby constitutes a public
nuisance.
C. Excessive False Alarms: The police chief may fine a person or alarm user for excessive false alarms. It shall be
deemed to be excessive when a person or alarm user has more than one human error caused false alarm per
three (3) calendar months.
D. Second Report: Upon receiving the second system caused false alarm report from any user, the chief of police shall
summon a representative of the user for the purpose of discussing the problem. If the problem cannot be rectified
to the satisfaction of the chief of police, the system will be disconnected.
E. Fines: Fines shall be as follows:
1. The fine for the second human error caused false alarm shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00);
2. The fine for the third human error caused false alarm shall be fifty dollars ($50.00);
3. The fine for the fourth and any subsequent human error caused false alarm shall be seventy five dollars ($75.00)
and automatic removal of the alarm from the police alarm monitoring system. Failure to remove an audible alarm
after the first day following the fourth human error caused false alarm will subject the person or alarm user to an
inspection fee, to be determined by the police chief.
F. Fines To Be Paid: Fines are to be paid at the city violation department.
G. Disconnection: Upon failure to pay any fine assessed within thirty (30) days of notice, the system will be
disconnected.
H. Appeals: Requests for reinstatement of suspended or revoked permits or appeal from any fine shall be made to the
mayor. (Ord. 94-15)
5.60.070: EXEMPTIONS:
This section shall not apply to fire alarm systems, unless such systems are tied in also to the dispatching agency.
(Ord. 94-15)
5.60.080: PENALTIES; ENFORCEMENT AND SEVERABILITY:
A. Penalties: Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a class B
misdemeanor.
B. Enforcement: The conviction or punishment for violations of the provisions of this chapter, or for failing to secure a
permit as required by this chapter, shall not relieve such person from paying the permit fee due and unpaid at the
time of such conviction nor in the alternative shall the payment of any permit fee prevent criminal prosecution for
the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. All remedies shall be cumulative, and the use of one or more
remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy of the purpose of enforcing the provisions of the
chapter. The amount of any permit fee shall be deemed a debt to the city. An action may be commenced in the
name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of any delinquent permit fee. All permit fees
shall be deemed delinquent thirty (30) days after they are due and payable.
C. Alternative: As an alternative or additional penalty, the city, on the advice of the police chief, may declare any alarm
system a public nuisance and as such, shall request or cause its abatement.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 125/571
D. Severability: If any provision of this chapter as herein enacted or hereafter amended, or the application thereof to
any person or circumstance, is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining provisions or applications of this chapter.
(Ord. 94-15)
Chapter 5.64
RESIDENTIAL SOLICITATION
5.64.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect city residents from unreasonable intrusions upon residential privacy,
consumer fraud, and deceptive, high pressure, factually unbalanced, or otherwise unfair consumer sales practices, in
a manner consistent with the constitutional rights of residential commercial solicitors to communicate their messages
to willing residential listeners. (Ord. 2008-10, 6-4-2008, eff. 7-1-2008)
5.64.020: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
APPLICANT: A person or organization that applies for a certificate of registration.
APPLICATION: The form provided by the city to apply for a certificate of registration or the process of applying for a
certificate of registration.
CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION: The written authorization to engage in commercial solicitation from the public
safety department of Mapleton City.
HOME SOLICITATION SALE: A sale of goods or services in which the seller or a person acting for him initiates
contact and engages in a face to face solicitation of the sale at a residence of the resident, other than a public forum,
and the resident's agreement or offer to purchase is there given to the solicitor or a person acting for him. Home
solicitation sale shall not include a sale made between parties at a business establishment at a fixed location where
goods or services are offered or exhibited for sale, or a sale made within a residence to a third person invited therein
by the resident where such sale was not initiated by unsolicited contact by a nonresident of the residence.
REGISTERED SOLICITOR: Any person registered pursuant to this chapter who has obtained a valid certificate of
registration (or "certificate") from the police department of Mapleton City.
RESIDENCE OR RESIDENTIAL: Means and refers to any: a) living unit contained within any building or structure that
is occupied by any person as a dwelling in conformity with the zoning laws of Mapleton City, together with the lot or
other real property on which such residence is located; b) any apartment, hospital room, nursing home room, assisted
living home room, group home, or other similar location; and c) any building or structure that houses the residence
together with lot or other real property on which such building or structure is located, other than a public forum.
RESIDENT: Any person living in a residence.
SOLICIT, SOLICITED, SOLICITING OR SOLICITATION: Any of the following activities engaged in with a resident at
his or her place of residence:
A. Seeking to obtain orders for the sale or exchange of services, goods, wares, merchandise or perishables of any
kind, for any kind of remuneration or consideration, regardless of whether advance payment is sought;
B. Seeking to obtain prospective customers to apply for or to purchase insurance, financial services, subscriptions
to publications, or publications;
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 126/571
C. Seeking to obtain contributions of money, services, or anything of value for the benefit of any person,
association, organization, corporation, or program;
D. Seeking to obtain orders or prospective customers for goods or services; and
E. Seeking to obtain appointments or other opportunities to engage in any of the activities listed in subsections A
through D of this definition.
SOLICITOR: A person engaged in soliciting residents at their residences. (Ord. 2008-10, 6-4-2008, eff. 7-1-2008)
5.64.030: UNREGISTERED SOLICITATION PROHIBITED:
A. All persons desiring to engage in soliciting within Mapleton City who are not exempt under section 5.64.040 of this
chapter shall, prior to the commencement of solicitation, obtain from the city a certificate of registration. The
executed original of this certificate of registration shall be maintained by the city, and a legible copy shall be worn
by the registered solicitor at all times while soliciting in the city and shall be produced for inspection upon the
request of any resident being solicited or any Mapleton City police officer.
B. Unless a registered solicitor and wearing a certificate of registration or exempt from registration under the
provisions of this chapter, a person who is present in or at a residence within Mapleton City for the purpose of
engaging in solicitation is hereby declared to be committing a nuisance and is punishable as set forth in this
chapter. (Ord. 2008-10, 6-4-2008, eff. 7-1-2008)
5.64.040: EXEMPTIONS FROM REGISTRATION:
A. The following activities are exempt from the registration requirements of section 5.64.050 of this chapter:
1. Invited Solicitation: Solicitation which occurs as the result of a resident's prior and express invitation to the
solicitor to come onto such resident's property. An invited solicitation shall not include the circumstance where
the resident invites back a solicitor who initiated the contact with the resident at the residence, other than a
public forum. A resident's failure to post a "No Soliciting" notice in accordance with section 5.64.070 of this
chapter shall not be construed as an exemption from registration under this section, as an invitation to
solicitation by such resident, or as an expression of such resident's desire to hear or receive solicitations.
2. Noncommercial Solicitation: Solicitation which occurs as an incident to political, religious, or other
noncommercial door to door canvassing, pamphleteering, or other dissemination of ideas.
3. State Regulated Charitable Solicitation: Solicitation on behalf of: a) a charitable organization as defined by Utah
Code Annotated section 13-22-2(1), or b) an organization listed in Utah Code Annotated section 13-22-8(1);
provided that: 1) with respect to solicitation on behalf of a charitable organization as defined by section 13-22-
2(1), the solicitor claiming this exemption or the charitable organization has provided written verification of the
organization's charitable status to the Mapleton City registration officer prior to the commencement of solicitation
within the city; 2) with respect to solicitation on behalf of an organization or entity described in Utah Code
Annotated section 13-22-8(1)(g), the principal or other person authorized by the school or the applicable school
district shall provide written notice to the city that the school or school district has approved the solicitation prior
to the commencement of solicitation with the city; and 3) any solicitor relying on this exemption shall carry with
him while soliciting photo identification showing the nature of his affiliation with the charitable or other
organization exempt from registration under this subsection on whose behalf he is soliciting.
4. De Minimis Solicitation: Solicitation involving the sale, exchange, or contribution of money, services, goods, or
other consideration valued at less than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
B. Any solicitor claiming an exemption under this section shall bear the burden of proving the facts forming the basis
for his claim of eligibility for, or the applicability of, the exemption claimed. (Ord. 2008-10, 6-4-2008, eff. 7-1-2008)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 127/571
5.64.050: APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION; REVIEW, ISSUANCE, DENIAL:
A. Information And Documents Required: The Mapleton City registration officer shall provide a standard form for use
for application for registration of solicitors to include the information set forth herein. (The form will be posted and is
available on the city's website at www.mapleton.org.) The applicant shall state upon oath or affirmation that the
information is truthfully provided to the best of the knowledge and belief of the applicant. The applicant shall supply
the following information upon or with the application for registration:
1. The applicant's true, correct and legal name, including any former names or aliases used within the last ten (10)
years;
2. The name of any organization(s) for which applicant will be soliciting;
3. The applicant's home and business address, and the address where the applicant can be contacted locally;
4. The names and addresses of applicant's directors, officers, and managers, if any;
5. Proof that either the applicant, or the organization(s) for which applicant will be soliciting, has registered with the
Utah state department of commerce;
6. A special events sales tax number for either the applicant, or for the organization(s) for which the applicant will
be soliciting;
7. The purpose for which soliciting will be done;
8. Whether the applicant is a person against whom a judgment based upon fraud, deceit, misrepresentation, false
statements, or dishonesty has been entered within five (5) years of the date of application;
9. Whether the applicant has, within five (5) years of the date of application, been enjoined by any court, or is the
subject of an administrative order issued in this or another state, if the injunction or order includes a finding or
admission of fraud, material misrepresentation, or if the injunction or order was based on a finding of lack of
integrity or truthfulness;
10. Whether the applicant has been convicted of any felony, or a misdemeanor involving fraud, deceit,
misrepresentation, false statements, or dishonesty, within five (5) years of the date of application;
11. Whether the applicant has been criminally convicted of violating any of Utah Code Annotated section 76-5-401,
76-5-401.1, 76-5-401.2, 76-5-402, 76-5-402.1, 76-5-402.2, 76-5-402.3, 76-5-403, 76-5-403.1, 76-5-404, 76-5-
404.1, 76-5-405, 76-5-412, 76-5-413, 76-5a-3, 76-9-702, 76-9-702.5, or 76-9-702.7, or the corresponding laws of
another state, or is otherwise subject to registration as a sex offender under Utah law or the corresponding law
of another state;
12. Whether the applicant has been denied a certificate of registration under this chapter, as amended, within the
year preceding the date of application, and whether the applicant has corrected the deficiency on which the
previous application was based;
13. Whether the applicant has had a certificate of registration under this chapter, as amended, revoked within the
year preceding the date of application, and whether the applicant has corrected the reason for which the
certificate of registration was revoked;
14. Whether an applicant's certificate of registration has been revoked within the year preceding the date of
application for violation of the nontransferability provision of this chapter, as amended;
15. Whether the applicant has been convicted of a violation of this chapter, as amended, within one year preceding
the date of application;
16. The findings of a background check on the applicant conducted by the Utah bureau of criminal investigations
("BCI") within the last one hundred eighty (180) days. The applicant may apply for this service at the BCI offices
at 3888 West 5400 South, Salt Lake City, or at such other location as the BCI shall provide from time to time.
The application shall not be deemed complete until the applicant has delivered the findings of the BCI
background check to the license officer, and receipt of the background check by the registration officer shall be a
condition precedent to issuance of a certificate of registration;
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 128/571
17. An acknowledgment that solicitation will not commence until the solicitor is in full compliance with this chapter.
B. Incorrect Or Incomplete Information: If any information contained in the application for registration becomes
incorrect or incomplete after the certificate of registration has issued, the applicant or registered solicitor shall,
within thirty (30) days after the information becomes incorrect or incomplete, correct the application or file the
complete information required herein.
C. Fees: The applicant shall pay application and processing fees as set by the city from time to time; provided,
however, that the total of any such fees shall not exceed reasonable administrative costs incurred by the city to
process an application and maintain the related records.
D. Grounds For Denial: A certificate of registration shall not be issued in any of the following circumstances:
1. When the applicant has falsified information on the application;
2. When the applicant is a person against whom a judgment based upon fraud, deceit, misrepresentation, false
statements, or dishonesty has been entered within five (5) years of the date of application;
3. When the applicant has, within the past five (5) years, been enjoined by any court, or is the subject of an
administrative order issued in this or another state, if the injunction or order includes a finding or admission of
fraud, material misrepresentation, or if the injunction or order was based on a finding of lack of integrity or
truthfulness;
4. When the applicant has been convicted of any felony, or a misdemeanor involving fraud, deceit,
misrepresentation, false statements, or dishonesty, within five (5) years of the date of application;
5. When the applicant has been criminally convicted of violating any of Utah Code Annotated section 76-5-401, 76-
5-401.1, 76-5-401.2, 76-5-402, 76-5-402.1, 76-5-402.2, 76-5-402.3, 76-5-403, 76-5-403.1, 76-5-404, 76-5-404.1,
76-5-405, 76-5-412, 76-5-413, 76-5a-3, 76-9-702, 76-9-702.5, or 76-9-702.7, or the corresponding laws of
another state; or is otherwise subject to registration as a sex offender under Utah law or the corresponding law
of another state;
6. When the applicant has been denied a certificate of registration under this chapter, as amended, within the year
preceding the date of application, unless the applicant has corrected the deficiency on which the previous
application was based;
7. When the applicant has had a certificate of registration under this chapter, as amended, revoked within the year
preceding the date of application, unless the applicant has corrected the reason for which the certificate was
revoked;
8. When an applicant's certificate of registration has been revoked within the year preceding the date of application
for violation of the nontransferability provision of this chapter, as amended;
9. When the applicant has failed to supply any of the documents or information listed in subsection A of this
section, or has failed to pay any of the fees set by the city in accordance with this chapter;
10. When the applicant has been convicted of a violation of this chapter, as amended, within one year preceding
the date of application.
E. Proof Of Identification Required: Initial proof of identification can be faxed to the city at 801-489-5666, or e-mailed
to the city at www.mapleton.org, along with the completed application form, provided that in person identification is
verified with one of the following, prior to or at the time of the issuance of the certificate of registration. No
certificate of registration shall be issued to any applicant until the applicant submits one of the following to establish
proof of identification:
1. A valid driver's license issued by any state;
2. A valid United States uniformed service identification card;
3. A valid passport issued by the United States;
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 129/571
4. Any other official document issued by the United States or any state thereof which contains the name and
photograph of the applicant.
F. Registration Complete Upon Completion Of Application: Registration shall be deemed complete when the license
officer has received all of the information and documents listed in subsection A of this section and the applicant
has paid the applicable fee. The certificate of registration shall be issued within five (5) business days following the
applicant's completion of registration, unless one of the circumstances listed in subsection D of this section applies.
In the event that the license officer determines that one or more of the circumstances listed in subsection D of this
section applies, the license officer shall notify the applicant in writing within five (5) business days following the
applicant's completion of registration that the application has been denied and the reason(s) therefor.
G. Form Of Certificate And Badge:
1. Each certificate of registration issued by the registration officer shall be numbered, shall list the name of the
individual solicitor and of any organization on whose behalf the registered solicitor is authorized to solicit, the
date on which the certificate of registration expires, and shall be dated and signed by the registration officer or
his or her authorized designee.
2. Each registered solicitor shall wear a badge prominently on his or her person, consisting of a copy of the
certificate of registration issued by the city, a one and one-half inch by one inch (11/2" x 1") (approximate)
photograph of the solicitor that was taken within one year preceding the issuance of the certificate of registration
to be supplied by the solicitor, and the name and address of any entity with which the solicitor is associated.
Such badge shall be worn at all times while the solicitor is engaged in soliciting.
3. All badges are and remain the property of the city.
4. By issuing a certificate of registration, the city does not guarantee the accuracy of any representation contained
in the application for registration or the certificate of registration, nor does it warrant that any statement made by
the registered solicitor is truthful. The city makes no certification as to the worthiness of any organization, its
products or services, on whose behalf a solicitation is made nor as to the moral character of the registered
solicitor.
5. The following statement shall appear on each certificate of registration:
THE CITY OF MAPLETON MAKES NO CERTIFICATION AS TO THE WORTHINESS OF ANY
ORGANIZATION, ITS PRODUCTS OR SERVICES, ON WHOSE BEHALF A SOLICITATION IS MADE NOR AS
TO THE MORAL CHARACTER OF THE REGISTERED SOLICITOR.
H. Renewal: A certificate of registration shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance. Any
registered solicitor in good standing may have his or her certificate of registration renewed for an additional period
of not to exceed one year upon request within thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the certificate of registration
and payment of a renewal fee as set by the city from time to time; provided, however, that the total of any such fee
shall not exceed reasonable administrative costs incurred by the city to process the certificate of registration
renewal and maintain the related records. A registered solicitor is not in good standing if he satisfies one or more
grounds for denial or revocation within the meaning of this chapter. An applicant desiring to obtain a certificate of
registration upon expiration of any renewal period shall make a new application in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter.
I. Nontransferability: Certificates of registration shall be issued only in the name of the applicant and the firm,
corporation or association on whose behalf the applicant is authorized to solicit. The certificate of registration is
nontransferable in all respects. It shall constitute a violation of this chapter for a solicitor whose certificate of
registration authorizes soliciting on behalf of a person or firm named in a certificate of registration to solicit on
behalf of any other person or firm, organization, or association or for any purpose other than that specified in the
application. Any certificate of registration used by a person other than the person to whom it was originally issued
is void, and the city is authorized to confiscate and immediately cancel any such certificate of registration.
J. Certificate Registry: The registration officer shall maintain and make available for public inspection a record of every
application received together with any information pertaining thereto, all certificates of registration issued, and all
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 130/571
pending and denied applications, with the exception of any portion of the application received and any information
pertaining thereto that qualifies as private or protected within the meaning of the government records access and
management act, Utah Code Annotated section 63G-2-101 et seq. Each application shall be numbered in
consecutive order and each certificate of registration issued shall be assigned a number exclusive to the registered
solicitor. Each certificate of registration renewed shall be identified with the duplicate number of the application
upon which it was initially issued. The registration officer shall furnish to the chief of police or the director of public
safety a listing of all certificates of registration issued and renewed and such chief or director shall maintain such
listing for public inspection and for identification.
K. Revocation Of Certificate: Any certificate of registration issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be
revoked by the registration officer if, following issuance of the certificate of registration, the registration officer
determines that the registered solicitor was convicted of a violation of this chapter or committed an act or became
subject to a condition that would disqualify him or her from receiving a certificate of registration under subsection D
of this section. Notice of revocation shall be immediately given to the registered solicitor by personal service or
certified mail to the address listed on the application and, if applicable, to the organization for which the registered
solicitor was soliciting. The notice shall set forth the factual basis for the revocation and, if applicable, the specific
provision(s) of subsection D of this section that identifies and defines the disqualifying conduct. Immediately upon
the giving of such notice, the certificate of registration shall become void and shall remain so until the revocation is
rescinded. Upon receiving notice of revocation of any certificate of registration, the registered solicitor shall
forthwith return the related badge to the city.
L. Appeal: An applicant whose registration is denied by the license officer or a registered solicitor whose certificate of
registration is revoked by the license officer shall have the right to appeal such denial or revocation to the council
(or its designee) at a meeting to be held no later than twenty (20) business days following the city's receipt of the
applicant's notice of appeal. The notice of appeal shall be in writing and shall be delivered either in person upon
written receipt or by certified U.S. mail to the Mapleton City recorder, 125 West 400 North, Mapleton, UT 84663,
with a copy to the registration officer, 125 West 400 North, Mapleton, UT 84663, within ten (10) business days of
the applicant's or registered solicitor's receipt of the decision from which the appeal is taken. Such notice of appeal
shall identify the applicant or registered solicitor, set forth the decision of the registration officer that is being
appealed, and state the grounds for appeal. Within ten (10) business days of the meeting at which the applicant's
or registered solicitor's appeal is heard, the city council (or its designee) shall issue a decision either affirming or
reversing the actions of the registration officer in denying an applicant's registration or revoking the registered
solicitor's certificate of registration. (Ord. 2008-10, 6-4-2008, eff. 7-1-2008)
5.64.060: DECEPTIVE SOLICITING PRACTICES PROHIBITED:
A. No solicitor shall make any materially false or fraudulent statement in the course of soliciting. No solicitor shall fail to
state a material fact necessary to make statements, in the context of the circumstances under which they are
made, not misleading.
B. A solicitor shall immediately disclose to the resident at the beginning of any face to face solicitation, either verbally
or by means of a writing to be handed to the resident: 1) the name of the solicitor; 2) the name and address of the
entity with whom the solicitor is associated or for which the solicitor is soliciting; and 3) the purpose of the solicitor's
contact with the resident.
C. No solicitor shall use a fictitious name, an alias, or any name other than his or her legal name.
D. No solicitor shall represent directly or by implication that the city endorses the solicitation, or that the granting of a
certificate of registration implies endorsement by the city of the solicitor or his or her product or service. (Ord. 2008-
10, 6-4-2008, eff. 7-1-2008)
5.64.070: "NO SOLICITING" NOTICES:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 131/571
A. Any resident may give notice of his or her unwillingness to listen to solicitations or receive solicitors by displaying at
his or her residence a placard or sign no smaller than sixteen (16) square inches stating "No Soliciting", "No
Solicitors", "No Trespassing" or words of similar import. Such placard or sign shall be posted on or near the main
entrance door or on or near the property line adjacent to the sidewalk leading to the residence.
B. The display of a "No Soliciting" or similar sign or placard at the door of the residence or at the entrance to the
building or structure that houses the residence shall constitute notice to any solicitor that the resident is unwilling to
listen to solicitations. (Ord. 2008-10, 6-4-2008, eff. 7-1-2008)
5.64.080: CERTAIN SOLICITATIONS PROHIBITED:
A. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any solicitor to attempt to solicit at a residence at or on which has been
posted a "No Soliciting" sign or placard in accordance with section 5.64.070 of this chapter. All solicitors are under
the legal obligation to affirmatively check each residence for any such sign or placard. If such sign or placard is
posted, a solicitor shall desist from any efforts to solicit at the residence and shall immediately depart therefrom.
B. It is a violation of this chapter for any solicitor to knock on the door, ring the doorbell, or in any other manner attempt
to attract the attention of an occupant of a residence that bears a "No Soliciting" or similar sign or placard. It is a
violation of this chapter for any solicitor through ruse, deception, or concealment of a purpose to solicit, to take
action calculated to secure an audience with the occupant of a residence that has posted a "No Soliciting" or
similar sign or placard.
C. It is a violation of this chapter for any solicitor who is at any time asked by the resident to leave, to fail to
immediately and peacefully depart. (Ord. 2008-10, 6-4-2008, eff. 7-1-2008)
5.64.090: TIME OF DAY:
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether a registered solicitor or not, to solicit any person at a residence before
eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. or after nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. Mountain Time on business days, or before nine o'clock
(9:00) A.M. or after nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. Mountain Time, on Saturdays, Sundays, or legal holidays as set forth in
Utah Code Annotated section 63G-1-301, unless the solicitor has express prior permission from the resident to do so.
(Ord. 2008-10, 6-4-2008, eff. 7-1-2008)
5.64.100: RIGHT TO RESIDENTIAL SOLICITATION SALE:
In any residential solicitation sale, unless the buyer requests the seller to provide goods or services without delay in an
emergency, the solicitor shall present to the resident and obtain resident's signature to a written statement which
informs the resident of his or her unconditional right to cancel the sale on or before the third business day after the
date of sale. Any documents memorializing the sale shall accurately set forth the date of the sale. Such notice of
"buyer's right to cancel" shall be in the form required by Utah Code Annotated section 70C-5-103, or a current or
amended version thereof or any state or federal law modifying or amending such provision. (Ord. 2008-10, 6-4-2008,
eff. 7-1-2008)
5.64.110: PENALTIES:
Any person who engages in soliciting without complying with the requirements of this chapter or violates any other
terms or provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not to
exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or a jail sentence of not to exceed six (6) months. (Ord. 2008-10, 6-4-
2008, eff. 7-1-2008)
5.64.120: PRIVATE RIGHT OF ACTION:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 132/571
A resident who has suffered injury or damage as the result of violation of this chapter shall have the right to bring a
civil action for damages against the violator in any court of competent jurisdiction within the state of Utah. (Ord. 2008-
10, 6-4-2008, eff. 7-1-2008)
Title 6
ANIMALS
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2020-06 - SLAUGHTER OF ANY ANIMAL . Go to new
ordinance.
Chapter 6.04
ANIMALS
6.04.010: ABANDONING SICK OR DISEASED ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon or turn out at large any sick, diseased or disabled animal, but such
animal shall, when rendered worthless by reason of sickness or other disability, be by the owner thereof killed and
disposed of as provided by this chapter for the disposition of dead animals within the city limits. It shall be the duty of
the police officers to kill and dispose of any animals found running at large within the city limits which are worthless
from sickness, disease, or other disability. (1986 Code)
6.04.020: DEAD ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal or fowl that shall die or be killed within the limits of the city, to fail to
remove or bury the carcass of such animal within ten (10) hours after its death; provided, that no horse, cow, ox, or
other animal shall be buried within the closely inhabited portion of the city. (1986 Code)
6.04.030: ANIMALS IN STREET:
It shall be unlawful for any person being the owner or having the charge of any horse, cow or other animal, to stake
the same out or knowingly or intentionally turn the same loose upon the streets, alleys or public grounds of the city;
and every person being the owner of, or having the charge of any such animals, who shall knowingly and intentionally
allow the same to be at large and graze upon the streets, alleys or public grounds of the city is guilty of a
misdemeanor. (1986 Code)
6.04.040: POISONING ANIMALS:
Every person who wilfully, unlawfully and maliciously administers any poison to any animal, the property of another, or
maliciously exposes any poisonous substance with intent that the same shall be taken or swallowed by any such
animal is guilty of a misdemeanor. (1986 Code)
6.04.050: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
Every person who, within the limits of the city, maliciously kills, maims or wounds any animal, the property of another,
or who maliciously or cruelly beats, tortures, or injures any animal, whether belonging to himself or another is guilty of
a misdemeanor. (1986 Code)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 133/571
6.04.060: ANIMALS AT LARGE:
A. Definitions: For purposes of this regulation, the following definitions shall apply:
ANIMALS AT LARGE: Any animal, whether or not licensed, not under restraint.
UNDER RESTRAINT: Any animal under immediate control of its owner or person having charge, care, custody, or
control. Except that a dog shall not be considered under control of the owner unless on a leash or lead, confined
within a vehicle, or confined within the real property limits of the owner.
B. Animals At Large Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any animal or fowl to be at large at any time within the
corporate limits of the city. The owner or custodian of any animal which is at large shall be in violation of this
section, and be held strictly liable, regardless of the precautions taken to prevent the escape of the animal and
regardless of lack of knowledge of the offense at the time it occurs. Any violation of this section shall be a class B
misdemeanor. (Ord. 2012-06, 9-18-2012, eff. 10-26-2012)
6.04.070: HERDING ON STREETS:
Every person who drives any herd of sheep consisting of one hundred (100) or more, or any herd or band of horses,
cattle or other animals of twenty five (25) or more, over or upon any public streets of the City, except by permission
and according to the direction of the Director of Public Safety, first had and obtained, is guilty of a misdemeanor. (1986
Code; amd. Ord. 2018-06, 6-6-2018, eff. 6-28-2018)
6.04.080: DAMAGE BY TRESPASSING ANIMALS; IMPOUNDING:
If any cattle, horses, asses, mules, sheep, goats or swine shall trespass or do damage upon the premises of any
person, the party aggrieved, whether he is the owner or the occupant of the premises, may recover damages by an
action at law against the owner of the trespassing animals, or by restraining and impounding the animals in the
manner provided in this chapter. (1986 Code)
6.04.090: APPRAISEMENT OF DAMAGES:
The owner or occupant of any property may restrain all animals trespassing or doing damage thereon. He shall, within
twenty four (24) hours thereafter, deliver the animals to the poundkeeper, together with a certificate of the
appraisement of the damage done by the animals. The appraisement must be made by some disinterested male
citizen, a freeholder, over twenty one (21) years of age. It must state the amount of damage, the time when committed,
the name of the person damaged, the name of the owner of the animals, if known, and if not known it must state the
fact, together with a description of the animals, including all visible marks and brands. If the animals appear to be
owned by different parties, an appraisement and a separate certificate thereof shall be made by the lot or group of
animals which appear to belong to each of the different owners. In such cases the owners shall be notified separately,
and each lot or group of animals shall be advertised and sold separately in the same manner as though the damage
had been done by different animals at different times. (1986 Code)
6.04.100: OWNER OF TRESPASSING ANIMAL TO BE NOTIFIED:
The person distraining the animals must, if the owner of the same is known to him and if he resides within ten (10)
miles of the place of the trespass, immediately deliver to the owner, or leave at his place of residence if he cannot be
found, a copy of the certificate of appraisement; but if the owner does not live within ten (10) miles of the place of
trespass, the party distraining the animals may, at his option, deliver a copy of the certificate to the owner in person, or
deposit the same in the nearest Post Office in a registered letter addressed to the owner. He shall be entitled to
charge ten cents ($0.10) a mile one way for the first ten (10) miles necessarily traveled in delivering the certificate, and
five cents ($0.05) for each additional mile, to be taxed as costs against the animals. (1986 Code)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 134/571
6.04.110: WHEN DAMAGES CANNOT BE RECOVERED:
If the party distraining any animals shall fail to deliver them or the certificate of appraisement to owners of the animals,
if known, a copy of the certificate of appraisement within twenty four (24) hours after he receives the same, or to
deposit the same in the Post Office, as provided in this chapter, he shall not be entitled to recover damages under the
provisions of this chapter. (1986 Code)
6.04.120: WHEN OWNER UNKNOWN; DUTY OF POUNDKEEPER:
Whenever any animals are delivered to the poundkeeper, and the certificate of appraisement is filed with him as
provided in this chapter and the certificate states that the owner is unknown, the poundkeeper shall immediately
examine all brand books or brand sheets in his possession, and if the owner is ascertained thereby, or if the owner is
already known to the poundkeeper, he shall, if the owner lives within ten (10) miles, immediately deliver a copy of the
certificate of appraisement to the owner, or leave the same at his residence if he cannot be found; if the owner lives
more than ten (10) miles away, the poundkeeper may, at his option, deliver the copy personally to the owner or deposit
the same in the nearest Post Office in a registered letter addressed to the owner. He shall, however, serve the copy in
one of the ways provided in this chapter; provided, that whenever personal service of a copy of any paper is required
by this chapter, service by agent shall be deemed sufficient. (1986 Code)
6.04.130: TRESPASSING ANIMALS; NOTICE OF SALE:
As soon as any such animals are delivered to the poundkeeper, he shall immediately proceed to advertise the same
as hereinafter provided, except when the owner is known and he has been notified in which case he shall hold the
animals forty eight (48) hours before advertising the same. He shall advertise in a newspaper published in the County
having general circulation in the County, by publishing a notice in at least one issue of the paper, and by posting
notices in three (3) of the most public places in the City, one of which shall be at or near the Post Office, and shall
deliver a copy of the same to the County Clerk, or send the same by deputy or by registered mail. The Clerk shall
preserve the notice and post a copy thereof. The notice herein provided for shall state the time when the damage was
done and amount thereof, the name of the party damaged, a description of the animals, including all visible marks and
brands and the day, hour and place at which the animals will be sold, which shall be not less than ten (10) or more
than twenty (20) days from the time of posting the notices; said notices may be substantially in the following form:
SALE OF ANIMALS FOR DAMAGE
In Mapleton City, State of Utah, County of Utah.
I have in my possession the following described animals, which, if not claimed and taken away will be sold at public
auction to the highest cash bidder at the City Pound in this City, on the day of 20 , at the hour of .
(Description of Animals)
Said animals are held by me to secure the payment of $ damages done by said animals upon the premises of on
the day of , 20 .
City Poundkeeper of Mapleton City
(1986 Code)
6.04.140: OWNER MAY CLAIM ANIMALS; DISPUTED APPRAISALS:
The owner of any trespassing animals taken up under the provisions of this chapter may, at any time before the sale
thereof claim and take such animals away upon paying the amount of damages set forth in the certificate of
appraisement and the accrued costs, and if such animals are included in a lot or group of animals belonging to other
parties, against which the damages and costs are assessed as a whole, he shall pay his proportion of the total amount
of damages and costs assessed against such animals, according to the number of animals he owns when compared
with the number of the entire lot or group. If he deems the appraisal too high, he may choose another appraiser having
the qualifications provided in this chapter, who with the first shall make a new appraisal, and if they cannot agree they
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 135/571
shall choose a third and the three (3) shall proceed to make another appraisal, and the decision of the majority shall
be final. (1986 Code)
6.04.150: TRESPASSING ANIMALS; SALE:
If the animals are not claimed and taken away by the owner, the poundkeeper shall, at the time and place set forth in
the notice of sale, proceed to sell the animals one at a time, to the highest cash bidder. If the owner of any lot of
animals to be sold is known, the poundkeeper shall sell only enough of the animals to pay the damages and costs,
and the remainder may be turned over to the owner at any time thereafter; but if the owner is not known, the pound
master shall proceed to sell all of the animals so advertised for sale. He shall execute and deliver a bill of sale therefor.
(1986 Code)
6.04.160: REDEMPTION AFTER SALE:
The owner of any trespassing animals sold under the provisions of this chapter may, at any time within ninety (90)
days of the date of the sale, redeem such animals from the purchaser or assignee having the same in his possession,
upon paying to the purchaser or assignee the sum for which the animals were originally sold together with ten percent
(10%) additional, and a reasonable compensation for the care and keeping of the same. If the purchaser or assignee
refuses to give the animals to the owner providing his title to the same and on his tendering the amount due as
provided in this chapter, the owner may maintain an action at law to recover the same; provided, that the purchaser or
any assignee who has disposed of the animals shall not be liable to the owner of any amount. If no redemption of such
animals is made within ninety (90) days after the date of the sale, then the sale shall be absolute and shall vest the
title to the animals in the purchaser or his assignee. Any person selling or disposing of an animal within ninety (90)
days of the sale thereof, under the provisions of this chapter, shall notify the purchaser of the amount paid for the
animal at that time, and if he fails to do so he shall be liable for any loss that may accrue to the purchaser by reason of
the animal being redeemed for a less amount than he paid therefor. (1986 Code)
6.04.170: RESIDUE OF PROCEEDS:
If any strays or trespassing animals sold under the provisions of this chapter shall, within a period of six (6) months
immediately ensuing after the date of the sale thereof, be claimed and proved to be the property of any person, it shall
be the duty of the treasurer at the expiration of such time to pay the money received for such animals to the owner
thereof less the amount of damages and the expense of taking, keeping and selling the same; but in the event that the
animals are not claimed as aforesaid, then such money shall become the property of the city; provided, that in case
there is a contest between two (2) or more persons claiming to be the owners of such animals, the treasurer shall pay
residue to the party who shall establish by action his right to the same. (1986 Code)
6.04.180: RECORD OF TRESPASSING ANIMALS:
The poundkeeper shall keep an accurate record of all trespassing animals received by him, which shall contain the
names of the injured party and the owners of the animals, the amount of the damages claimed, and all other matters
necessary to a complete account of the transaction. Such records shall be open for inspection at all reasonable hours.
(1986 Code)
6.04.190: INTERFERENCE WITH POUNDKEEPER:
It shall be unlawful for any person to take his own animal or that of any other person out of the custody of a person
holding the same for damages done by it, or out of the city pound, by stealth, by fraud or by force; and it shall be
unlawful for any person to interrupt or hinder anyone while in the discharge of his duty under the provisions of this
chapter. (1986 Code)
6.04.200: MALICIOUS IMPOUNDING:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 136/571
It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously or mischievously secret or impound the animal of another; or to
maliciously or mischievously aid or abet therein. (1986 Code)
6.04.210: UNLAWFUL SALES:
The owner of any animals unlawfully impounded or sold may maintain an action to recover the same and damages for
the detention thereof. (1986 Code)
6.04.220: BILLS FOR DAMAGES; FILING:
The poundkeeper shall receive and file all bills of damages duly presented, and enter the amounts in his books, which
shall be open to the inspection of the public. He shall not deliver any animals to the owner until all costs and damages
are paid. (1986 Code)
6.04.230: PROCEEDS OF SALE:
The net proceeds of the sale of all animals, as provided in this chapter, shall be paid into the treasury subject to the
order of the owners of the animals, if applied for within six (6) months from the date of sale. If not applied for within
that time, the treasurer shall turn the amount into the general fund. (1986 Code)
6.04.240: ADVERTISING BILLS:
All bills for advertising shall be certified to by the poundkeeper, and if correct, shall be ordered paid by the council.
(1986 Code)
6.04.250: UNLAWFUL DETENTION OF ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person other than the poundkeeper, to take up an animal under the provisions of this
chapter, and retain it more than eighteen (18) hours. (1986 Code)
6.04.260: PAYMENTS TO TREASURER:
It shall be the duty of the poundkeeper to turn into the treasury on or before the fifth day of each month all net
proceeds of money received by him by virtue of his office, during the preceding month. (1986 Code)
6.04.270: SERVICE OF STALLIONS:
Every person who shall openly or in public view let to service any jack, stallion, bull or other animal or who shall
indecently exhibit any of said animals, is guilty of a misdemeanor. (1986 Code)
6.04.280: FEEDING WILD ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to feed or bait wild animals within the city limits unless authorized as part of the
city's urban deer control plan. (Ord. 2016-02, 5-18-2016. eff. 6-16-2016)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 137/571
Chapter 6.08
ANIMAL OWNERSHIP REGULATIONS
6.08.010: RESERVED:
6.08.020: ENFORCEMENT:
A. The police department, each officer or agent thereof, who are assigned to duties which include the enforcement of
animal regulations are responsible for enforcing the provisions of this chapter.
B. Each of the individuals referred to in subsection A of this section shall have the power to make arrests for violations
of this chapter and issue citations for said violations. (1986 Code)
6.08.030: POWER AND AUTHORITY OF ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER:
In the performance of his duties, the animal control officer is vested with power of a Mapleton City police officer. The
animal control officer shall be duly sworn in and issued a badge. (1986 Code)
6.08.040: INVESTIGATIONS:
The police department animal control officer, and any peace officer may enter upon privately owned land to investigate
reports of vicious animals, rabies or other contagious animal diseases and to investigate violations of this chapter.
(1986 Code)
6.08.050: COMPLAINTS:
Upon receiving a complaint from an identified person, alleging a violation of this chapter, and receiving the name and
address of the owner of the animal, if known, an investigation to determine whether a violation exists shall be made. If
the investigation discloses a violation of this chapter, prosecution may be initiated against the owner. (1986 Code)
6.08.060: FRESH PURSUIT:
During the enforcement of any provision of this chapter, any peace officer, animal control officer or agent, may enter
the premises of any person to take possession of a registered or unregistered, fierce, dangerous or vicious animal
when in fresh pursuit of such animal at the time said animal goes onto private property. (1986 Code)
6.08.070: HINDERING AND/OR OBSTRUCTING ENFORCEMENT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, molest, hinder or prevent the animal control officer from performing
his duties. Any person who shall hinder, delay, interfere with or obstruct the animal control officer while engaging in
capturing, securing or taking to the animal shelter any animal or animals to be impounded, or who shall break open or
in any manner directly or indirectly aid, counsel, or advise the breaking open of any animal shelter or ambulance,
wagon or other vehicle used for the collecting or conveying of any animal to the shelter shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor. (1986 Code)
6.08.080: PUBLIC NUISANCE:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 138/571
The introduction, possession or maintenance of any animal, or the allowing of any animal to be in violation of this
chapter is, in addition to being a misdemeanor, declared to be a public nuisance. The police department, animal
control officer, or any peace officer, is authorized, directed and empowered to summarily abate any such public
nuisance by any means reasonably necessary, including, but not limited to, the destruction of the animal or animals
involved. (1986 Code)
6.08.090: CONDITIONS OF OWNERSHIP:
Animal owners or keepers shall comply with the following conditions of animal ownership, and the department may
require as a condition of licensing such owners or keepers to sign a contract agreeing to comply with such conditions:
A. Animal shall be restrained or confined as required by law;
B. Animal shall be humanely treated at all times;
C. Licenses and permits shall be obtained as required by law;
D. Animal premises shall be kept sanitary and shall not constitute a fly breeding reservoir, a source of offensive odors
or of human or animal disease;
E. Animals and animal premises shall not be permitted to disturb the peace or constitute a public nuisance or hazard.
(1986 Code)
6.08.100: RESTRAINT OF DOGS BY OWNER:
A. Dog owners shall at all times keep their dog on a leash or within an enclosed area on their own property or the
private property of another with the permission of the owner so as to prevent them from being at large or stray,
from biting or harassing any person engaged in a lawful act, from interfering with the use of public property or with
the use of another person's private property and from being in violation of this chapter. The owner or person
charged with responsibility for a dog found running at large shall be strictly liable for any violation(s) committed by
the dog, regardless of whether or not the person knows the dog is running at large.
B. However, dogs may be at large while participating in field trials and obedience classes organized and sanctioned by
recognized dog clubs, while assisting their owner or trainer in legal hunting or in herding livestock, while assisting a
peace officer engaged in law enforcement duties, or while being trained for the above purposes on private land
with permission of the landowner, as such dogs are under direct and effective sound-gesture control within sight of
such individuals to assure that they do not violate any other provisions of law. (1986 Code)
6.08.110: COMMITTING NUISANCE:
No person shall allow a dog in his custody to defecate or urinate on public property or any improved private property
other than that of the owner or person having control of the dog to curb such a dog in order to carry out the intent of
this section. An unsighted person while relying on a guide dog shall be exempt from this section. If a violation of the
above occurs, such a person shall immediately remove any feces to a proper receptacle. (1986 Code)
6.08.120: FEMALE DOG IN SEASON:
A dog owner shall securely confine the female dogs while the same are in season within an enclosure in a manner
that will prevent the attraction of male dogs to the immediate vicinity. (1986 Code)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 139/571
6.08.130: DISTURBANCE OF THE PEACE PROHIBITED:
No person shall own or harbor an animal in such a manner that the peace and quiet of the public is unreasonably
disturbed. The written affirmation by two (2) persons having separate residences that violation of subsections
6.08.090D and E, section 6.08.100, 6.08.110 or 6.08.140 of this chapter disturbs the peace and quiet of said persons
shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. The keeping or maintenance, or the permitting to be kept or
maintained, on any premises owned, occupied or controlled by any person of any animal or fowl which by any frequent
or long continued noise shall cause unreasonable annoyance or discomfort to any person of normal sensitivity in the
vicinity shall constitute a violation of this section; provided, however, that nothing contained in this section shall be
construed to apply to reasonable noises emanating from legally operated dog or cat hospitals, humane societies,
pounds, farm and/or agricultural facilities, or areas where keeping of animals or fowl are permitted. The destruction by
any animal of property other than that which belongs to the owner of the animal shall be prima facie evidence of a
violation of this section. (1986 Code)
6.08.140: ATTACKING DOG:
Any person may kill a dog while it is attacking, chasing or worrying any domestic animal having a commercial value, or
any species of hoofed protected wildlife, while attacking domestic fowls, or while such dog is being pursued thereafter.
(1986 Code)
6.08.150: INHUMANE TREATMENT AND ABANDONMENT:
No person shall treat an animal in a cruel or inhumane manner or willingly or negligently cause or permit any animal to
suffer unnecessary torture or pain. No person shall abandon any domestic animal without care on any public or private
property. (1986 Code)
6.08.160: POSSESSION OF VICIOUS DOG:
The possession of a vicious dog is unlawful unless it is restrained, confined or muzzled so that it cannot bite or attack
any person or animal. Dogs held in violation of this section shall be deemed a public nuisance, and their continued
possession or ownership shall be unlawful. The police department may impound any such dog and dispose of it in a
humane manner, after three (3) working days to allow for legal restraining action by the owner. (1986 Code)
6.08.170: INJURIES AND COMMUNICABLE DISEASES:
No person shall knowingly harbor or keep any dog or other animal with a serious injury or afflicted with mange,
ringworm, distemper or any other contagious disease, unless such a dog or other animal is being treated by a
veterinarian or is being adequately treated in the opinion of the department. (1986 Code)
6.08.180: WILD ANIMALS AND REPTILES EXCLUDING RODENTS:
A. A permit shall be obtained for each such animal or wild animal establishment from the city; provided, however, this
section shall not apply to parks, zoos, pet shops, medical or scientific institutions or other places licensed for the
showing or keeping of wild animals or reptiles.
B. Every individual controlling or maintaining such animals or wild animal establishment shall quarantine the animal for
a period of ninety (90) days. These animals shall be vaccinated for rabies by a licensed veterinarian using a
suitable vaccine for the species as approved by a state veterinarian.
C. All such wild animals or reptiles referred to in subsection B of this section shall be kept under proper confinement
on the premises and shall not be allowed to run at large and shall be maintained on the premises or private
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 140/571
property of the owner in such a manner as to not endanger life or limb of any person lawfully entering such
premises. (1986 Code)
6.08.190: REGISTRATION; LICENSE REQUIRED:
All dogs over four (4) months of age owned, possessed or harbored by any person in the city shall be registered with
the city and a tag shall be issued upon payment of a fee approved by the city. (1986 Code)
6.08.200: EXCEPTIONS TO REGISTRATION AND LICENSE:
The following are exceptions to the registration and licensing requirements:
A. Transient show dogs, dogs whose owners are nonresidents temporarily within the city thirty (30) days or less, or
dogs brought into the city for purposes of participating in any dog show.
B. Dogs maintained in a licensed kennel. Any dog that has not reached the age of four (4) months or any dog kept or
maintained exclusively in a licensed kennel shall not be registered and no fee is required.
C. Seeing eye, hearing and law enforcement dogs. Any dog which has been duly or properly trained to assist the
blind, deaf or law enforcement personnel and currently acting in the capacity. (1986 Code)
6.08.210: PAYMENT OF FEE:
Any person owning, possessing or harboring a dog within the city shall pay a registration fee as approved by the city
for each dog annually. The fee is payable between January 1 and January 31, inclusive. (Ord. 98-18)
6.08.220: DISPLAY OF TAGS AND COLLARS:
A. Every owner shall be required to provide each dog with a collar or harness to which a current year's license tag is
attached.
B. Such collar or harness with the tags attached shall be constantly worn by each dog except for such time that a
particular dog is confined in a commercial kennel or is being exhibited in a dog show. (1986 Code)
6.08.230: TRANSFER:
No license or vaccination tag shall be transferable from one dog to another. (1986 Code)
6.08.240: IMPOUNDMENT; AUTHORITY:
The police department and persons employed for animal regulation purposes shall attempt to capture any animal
found at large in violation of this chapter and may destroy an animal at large if in their judgment, such action is
required for public health and safety. (1986 Code)
6.08.250: NOTICE TO OWNER:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 141/571
Upon receipt of a lost or stray animal bearing a current year's license tag, the department and/or agents shall
immediately telephone or mail to the owner of record at the address indicated on the license form, a notice of the
location of the animal. Compliance with notice requirements of this section shall be deemed met if the department
shall have mailed the notice to the owner of record at his address of record, postage prepaid. (1986 Code)
6.08.260: REDEMPTION BY OWNER:
The owner of an impounded animal may claim it prior to its legal disposition by providing proper identification meeting
all the legal requirements and posting the applicable redemption fees for impoundment, board, medical care and/or
other costs. (1986 Code)
6.08.270: HOLDING PERIOD:
A. Dogs: The department shall hold an impounded, lost, or stray dog for not less than three (3) working days if it was
not wearing a current year's license tag when impounded and for not less than five (5) working days after notice is
given pursuant to this chapter if it was wearing a current year's license tag, so that the owner or custodian may
claim it prior to other dispositions.
B. Cats: The department shall hold an impounded, lost, or stray cat for not less than twenty four (24) hours, if it was
not wearing a collar or any means of identification, and appeared to be abandoned; and for not less than three (3)
working days, if the cat is wearing a collar or tag that would indicate the animal is not abandoned, so that the
owner or custodian may claim it prior to other dispositions. (1986 Code)
6.08.280: DISPOSAL OF UNREDEEMED ANIMALS:
The department may dispose of, humanely, or may transfer to a new owner upon payment of the applicable fee, any
impounded animal not claimed by its owner or custodian within the prescribed holding time. Animals relinquished by
their owners may be humanely destroyed without regard to the prescribed holding time in order to alleviate suffering or
to protect other impounded animals from exposure to a contagious disease. (1986 Code)
6.08.290: ANIMAL DISPOSAL FACILITIES:
The department shall establish a procedure for the humane euthanasia of animals. The department may, at its option,
upon payment of applicable fees, accept any animals for humane disposal. The owner or possessor of such animals
shall set forth facts constituting such ownership and/or possession, certifying that he has the right to request disposal
of such animal and agree to hold the city or agents harmless from any liability for acceptance and disposal of such
animals. The owner or person requesting this disposal of such animal must certify, that to the best of his knowledge,
the animal has not bitten a human being or animal within the period established by this title for isolation of biting
animals and suspected rabid animals. (1986 Code)
6.08.300: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, unless a different penalty has
been provided for. (1986 Code)
Chapter 6.12
RABIES
6.12.010: REPORT OF BITES:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 142/571
All persons bitten and the parents or guardians of minor children bitten by a dog, cat, skunk, fox, bat, coyote, bobcat,
or other animal known to constitute a serious threat of rabies shall notify the police department or county health
department immediately thereafter. Physicians treating such bites shall also be required to make a notification as
stated. (1986 Code)
6.12.015: REPORT OF SUSPECTED RABID ANIMALS:
Any person who observes or has knowledge of an animal which shows symptoms of rabies or which acts in a manner
which would lead to a reasonable suspicion that it may have rabies, shall notify the department or city-county health
department and comply with appropriate laws and regulations regarding suspected cases of rabies as directed by the
department or city-county health department. (1986 Code)
6.12.020: ISOLATION OF BITING OR SUSPECTED RABID ANIMALS:
Upon the reasonable order of the police department or agent, or public health officer a biting or suspected rabid
animal shall be isolated, at the owner's expense, if the animal is owned. The animal will be held in strict confinement
under proper care and under the observation of a licensed veterinarian in an animal shelter, veterinary hospital, or
other adequate facility approved by the veterinarian or health department. (1986 Code)
6.12.030: EXAMINATION OF HEAD:
Any biting or a suspected rabid animal or bat may be humanely euthanized immediately by a veterinarian or health
department, and such animal's undamaged and properly packaged and properly refrigerated head shall be delivered
promptly to an approved medical facility having the capability of performing the fluorescent antibody test to
demonstrate the presence of rabies. (1986 Code)
6.12.040: DOMESTICATED ANIMALS:
The provisions of section 6.12.030 of this chapter notwithstanding, if the biting or suspected rabid animal is of the
domesticated variety that is owned or obviously could have an owner, the animal shall be confined for a period of five
(5) days to allow time for an attempt to locate an owner unless it is deemed by a veterinarian that it is necessary to
sacrifice the animal for the purpose of laboratory examination. (1986 Code)
6.12.050: RELEASE:
Ten (10) days after the day of inflicting of a bite by an animal, the animal may be released to its owner or sold by the
department after a licensed veterinarian has examined the animal and in his opinion found it not to have rabies in the
transmittable state on the day of infliction of the bite. Nonimmunized animals shall be vaccinated for rabies before the
release to owner. (1986 Code)
6.12.060: ANIMALS POSSIBLY EXPOSED TO RABIES:
Any animal of a species subject to rabies which has been bitten by a known rabid animal or bat, or which has been in
intimate contact with such an animal, shall be isolated, at the owner's expense if owned, in strict confinement in a
place and manner approved by the department or public health officer and observed by a licensed veterinarian for a
period of six (6) months or destroyed. (1986 Code)
Title 7
RESERVED
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 143/571
Title 8
HEALTH AND SAFETY
Chapter 8.04
NUISANCES
8.04.010: NUISANCES DEFINED:
A. Whatever is dangerous to human life or health and whatever renders soil, air, water or food impure or
unwholesome, is declared to be a nuisance and to be illegal. It shall be unlawful for any person, either as owner,
agent or occupant, to create or aid in creating or contributing to, or to maintain a nuisance.
B. Every act or thing done or admitted to be done or made, permitted, allowed or continued in violation of the
provisions of any of the sections of this chapter, shall be deemed a nuisance. (1986 Code)
8.04.020: AUTHOR OF NUISANCE:
A. Where a nuisance exists upon property, and is the outgrowth of the usual, natural or necessary use of the property,
the landlord thereof, or his agent, the tenant, or his agent, and all other persons having control of the property on
which such nuisance exists, shall be deemed to be the authors thereof, and shall be equally liable therefor, but
where any such nuisance shall arise from the unusual or necessary use to which such property may be put, or
from business thereon conducted, then the occupants, and all other persons contributing to the contrivance of such
nuisance, shall be deemed the authors thereof.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person so served as provided in this chapter to fail, refuse or neglect to comply with the
notice within the time therein prescribed. (1986 Code)
8.04.030: NOTICE TO ABATE:
In order to better carry out the provisions of this chapter, the City may cause to be served a notice in writing upon the
owner, occupant or agent of any lot, building or premises in or upon which any nuisance may be found, or upon him
who may be the cause of the nuisance, require him to abate the same in such manner as the City may direct, and
within a reasonable time to be fixed in the notice; and failure to give a notice as provided in this section shall not
relieve the author of any nuisance from the obligation to abate the nuisance, or from the penalty provided for the
maintenance thereof. (1986 Code)
8.04.040: DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SAFETY TO ABATE:
In cases of neglect or refusal of any person to abate any nuisance defined in this chapter after notice in writing has
been served upon him, as provided in section 8.04.030 of this chapter, and within the time notice specified, it is made
the duty of the Director of Public Safety to abate and procure the abatement thereof, and the expense of the
abatement shall be collected from the person so offending. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 2018-06, 6-6-2018, eff. 6-28-2018)
8.04.050: CITY INSPECTOR; DUTIES:
It is the duty of the City inspector to ascertain and cause all nuisances declared to be such in this chapter to be
abated, and the City inspector shall have authority in the daytime to enter any house, stable, store, or any building in
order to make a thorough examination of cellars, vaults, sinks or drains; to enter upon all lots and grounds and cause
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 144/571
all stagnant waters to be drained off and pools, sinks, vaults, drains, holes or low grounds to be cleaned, filled up or
otherwise purified, and to cause all noisome substances to be abated or removed. (1986 Code)
8.04.060: CESSPOOLS AND SEPTIC TANKS:
It shall be unlawful to drain, empty or discharge any of the contents of any cesspool, septic tank, house sink, or any
other receptacle receiving human waste into any open ditch, open or closed drains, open or closed irrigation stream,
or onto the surface of the ground. (1986 Code)
8.04.070: UNCLEAN DRAINS; GARBAGE RECEPTACLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit any unclean, stinking, foul, defective or filthy drain, ditch, tank, or
gutter or any leaking or broken slop, garbage or manure box or receptacle of similar character to remain on his
premises. (1986 Code)
8.04.080: REFUSE ACCUMULATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit vegetable, waste, litter, garbage, filth or refuse of any nature or description
detrimental to health, to accumulate within or upon any private alley, yard or area unless the same is temporarily
deposited for removal. (1986 Code)
8.04.090: ACCUMULATIONS OF MANURE:
It shall be unlawful for any person having charge of any stable, stall, shed, apartment or yard in which any animal shall
be kept, or in any place within the city in which manure or liquid discharges of any animal shall accumulate or collect,
to permit the stable, stall, apartment or yard to be kept in any unclean or unsanitary condition. (1986 Code)
8.04.100: SLAUGHTERHOUSES:
It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any slaughterhouse, market, meat shop or other place wherein
animals are slaughtered, kept or sold, to permit the premises or yard connected therewith to remain unclean, or in any
state or condition detrimental to the public health. (1986 Code)
8.04.110: SPOILED FOOD OR OFFENSIVE MATTER:
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, place or conduct into or upon any street, alley, lot or into any aqueduct,
ditch, gutter or canal, any putrid or spoiled meat, fish, hides, or skins of any kind, or filth, offal, dead animals,
vegetables, or any spoiled or offensive matter whatsoever; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to the
spreading of manure upon the land for the purpose of fertilizing the soil. (1986 Code)
8.04.120: FLIES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit, or have upon his premises, whether owned or occupied by him, either one
or more of the following unsanitary, fly producing, disease causing conditions:
A. Manure which is not securely protected from flies;
B. Any privy, vault, cesspool, sink, pit or like place which is not securely protected from flies;
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 145/571
C. Garbage which is not securely protected from flies;
D. Vegetable waste, trash, litter, rags or refuse of any kind, nature or description in which flies may breed or multiply.
(1986 Code)
8.04.130: STINK BOMBS; ITCHING POWDER:
It shall be unlawful for any person to cast, throw, deposit or place any stink ball, fire ball, or bomb, itching or sneezing
powder, from or in any street or public place in the city, or at, upon or within any public conveyance, or upon the floor
or within any restaurant, theater, hall, assembly room or public building, or at, upon, or within any public park. (1986
Code)
8.04.140: SPITTING OR WASHING IN DRINKING FOUNTAINS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to expectorate or spit or to perform any ablutions in, upon, at, or near any public
drinking fountain, or to permit any horse, cattle, dogs, or other animals to come into contact with or drink from the
drinking fountain. (1986 Code)
8.04.150: BUILDING CLOSED TO OCCUPANCY:
Whenever in the opinion of the city inspector with the concurrence of the county board of health any building or
dwelling has, because of its unsanitary condition, become a menace to life or health, or unfit for human habitation, the
city inspector with the consent of the county health board shall have the power to close to occupancy the building or
dwelling and/or cause to be vacated the building or dwelling until the same is put in a clean and sanitary condition as
required by the rules and regulations of the county board of health. It shall further be the duty of the county board of
health to notify the owner, agent or lessee in writing of the action and to adequately post a notice of closure on the
building or structure. (1986 Code)
8.04.160: PERMIT FOR CERTAIN USES:
A. It is unlawful to conduct, maintain, operate or continue in operation any undertaking, business, trade, establishment,
house, plant or place which is or may by its nature become offensive, unwholesome, or nauseous or which creates
or emits or which is of such a nature that it may create or emit offensive, unwholesome, or noisome odors, gases
or vapors in or within the limits of the city without first obtaining a written permit from the council.
B. It is unlawful to operate a business contrary to any provisions or terms of the permit, and the council reserves the
right to revoke the permit when it deems such revocation to be in the best interest of the city. (1986 Code)
Chapter 8.08
GARBAGE
8.08.010: AUTHORITY OF CITY:
The city shall have the power to create garbage collection districts and to provide rules and regulations governing the
disposal and collection of garbage and fixing rates for the collection of the same and to provide penalties for the
violation of such rules and regulations. (1986 Code)
8.08.020: DUMPING GARBAGE OR REFUSE:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 146/571
It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or deposit, or cause or permit to be dumped or deposited, upon or in any
public street, sidewalk or irrigation ditch or watercourse within the city any trash, brush, ashes, tin cans, bottles, rags,
garbage, leaves, manure or other waste or refuse. (1986 Code)
8.08.030: SPILLING REFUSE IN STREETS:
Every person who shall haul or transport through any of the streets, alleys or public grounds of the city any coal,
gravel, stone, offal, manure, rubbish, ashes or stumps in any conveyance so constructed that the coal, stone, gravel,
offal, manure, rubbish, brush, ashes or stumps drop, or in any other manner are strewn, or deposited in any of the
streets, alleys or public grounds, is guilty of a misdemeanor. (1986 Code)
8.08.040: DEPARTMENT OF WASTE REMOVAL:
A. Waste removal of Mapleton City and the office of superintendent of the department shall be managed, operated and
supervised by the superintendent thereof, under the direction of the city council.
B. The waste removal department shall be charged with the responsibility of operating and maintaining a garbage and
waste matter collection, removal and disposal system for the waste matter collection, and removing garbage and
waste matter from the residences and business houses of all persons within the city, and disposing of the garbage
and waste matter in a sanitary manner. (1986 Code)
8.08.050: SUPERINTENDENT:
The city council shall appoint a competent and suitable person to the office of superintendent of the waste removal
department and also shall appoint such other employees as may be required for the operation and maintenance of the
waste removal department, and shall have power to remove such superintendent and employees for cause. (1986
Code)
8.08.060: DUTIES:
The superintendent shall have charge of the waste removal department and all property of the city used by the
department. He shall manage efficiently the system of collection and removal of garbage and waste matters in
accordance with law, and under the direction of the city council. (1986 Code)
8.08.070: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings
given in this section. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future; words
in the plural number include the singular number; and words in the singular number include words in the plural
number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
CITY: The city of Mapleton.
GARBAGE: Includes and means kitchen and table refuse, leavings and offal, and also every accumulation of
putrescible waste of animal and vegetable waste and other matter that attends the preparation, consumption, decay or
dealing in or storage of meats, fish, fowl, birds, fruits and vegetables.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind.
WASTE MATTER: Includes and means crockery, bottles, tin cans, trimmings from lawns and gardens, pasteboard
boxes, rags, paper, cold ashes, sawdust, shavings, packing material, but does not include boards and pieces of
lumber. (1986 Code)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 147/571
8.08.080: DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE AND WASTE; CHARGES:
A. All property in Mapleton City shall be provided with garbage and waste removal service by the city for the hauling
away and disposal of "garbage" and "waste matter" as the same is defined in section 8.08.070 of this chapter and
every person, whether having garbage and waste matter to be collected and disposed of, or not, shall pay the
minimum charge established by a resolution of the city council and such other charges as may be established by
classification of rates based on the type and needs for garbage and waste matter collection all to be established by
resolution of the city council.
B. It shall be unlawful for any owner or his agent or other person having charge of or occupying any property located
within the city to remove or dispose of any garbage or waste matter as defined in this chapter other than in
accordance with the rules and regulations to be established by resolution of the city council. Every person within
the limits of the city that has garbage or waste matter to be collected and disposed of shall be assessed and
charged as stated in this section.
C. Charges are due within fifteen (15) days after billing. Any amount thereof which is not paid within thirty (30) days
shall be subject to a ten percent (10%) penalty. (1986 Code)
8.08.090: OWNERSHIP OF GARBAGE SET OUT FOR COLLECTION:
Ownership of garbage or waste matter set out for collection or disposed of in the city dump shall be vested in
Mapleton City. (1986 Code)
8.08.100: DUMPING OR BURYING IN OTHER THAN SANITARY FILL PROHIBITED:
No person, firm or corporation shall, for any purpose of final disposal thereof, dump, place or bury in any lot, street,
land or in any alley, or in any water or waterway, within the corporate limits of the city, any garbage or waste matter, or
any substance condemned by the superintendent of the waste removal department, or any other deleterious or
offensive substances, and all such substances must be disposed of at the sanitary fill operated by the city. (1986
Code)
8.08.110: TIME LIMIT ON STORAGE OF GARBAGE:
No person owning or occupying any building, lot or premises in the city shall suffer, allow or permit to collect and
remain upon the lot or premises any garbage for a period of more than one week, or any waste matter for a period of
more than four (4) weeks. (1986 Code)
8.08.120: GARBAGE RECEPTACLES; SPECIFICATIONS:
A. Every owner, tenant or occupant of any premises, where garbage is created shall provide upon such premises, in a
suitable place, one or more galvanized metal or other suitable garbage receptacles, with tight fitting galvanized
metal or other acceptable covers, of a capacity not exceeding thirty (30) gallons, for receiving and holding all
garbage created upon such premises between the times of collection and removal. Every owner, tenant, or
occupant of any premises where waste matter is created shall, where necessary, in addition to the garbage
receptacle, provide upon such premises in a suitable place, one or more receptacles, or depositories, acceptable
to the superintendent of the waste removal department, to contain all waste matter which may accumulate upon
such premises between removals. All persons must at all times locate such receptacles at places, so as to be
readily accessible for removing and emptying the same, but they shall not be placed within the limits of any street,
or alley within the corporate limits of the city, or anywhere so as to constitute a nuisance.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 148/571
B. All empty receptacles must be removed from the street as soon as practicable after being emptied, and in every
case must be removed from the streets the same day they are emptied. No such receptacle shall be permitted to
remain on any street longer than may be necessary for the removal of the contents thereof.
C. Paper or plastic bags manufactured for the purpose of garbage disposal of a type, quality and size approved by the
city may be used. (1986 Code)
8.08.130: GARBAGE RECEPTACLES; SANITATION:
All garbage and waste matter receptacles shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition by the owner or person using
the same, and garbage receptacles shall be kept tightly covered at all times except when garbage is being deposited
therein or removed therefrom, and shall at all times be proof against the access by flies to the contents thereof. (1986
Code)
8.08.140: USE OF GARBAGE RECEPTACLES:
All garbage shall be placed in the garbage receptacle required by section 8.08.120 of this chapter. All waste matter
must be placed in the receptacle, or depositories provided for such waste matter, or in the garbage receptacle. (1986
Code)
8.08.150: LIQUID AND BULKY GARBAGE:
A. No liquid garbage shall be deposited with any garbage or waste matter. All kitchen garbage shall be drained of any
moisture and completely wrapped in paper before being placed in the garbage container.
B. Bulky waste matter such as trimmings from lawns or gardens, weeds and cardboard boxes must be bundled so as
not to exceed three feet (3') in length nor thirty (30) pounds in weight. (1986 Code)
8.08.160: HAULER NOT TO PERMIT GARBAGE TO BE UPON STREET:
It is unlawful for any person engaged in hauling garbage or waste matter of any kind upon the streets of the city to
permit, suffer, allow or cause any of said matter to fall into or to remain in the streets. (1986 Code)
8.08.170: CONVEYANCE OF GARBAGE IN PROPER RECEPTACLE:
It is unlawful for any person to convey, transport or haul upon the streets of the city any garbage or waste matter
unless the same is contained in a sanitary receptacle especially constructed for that purpose and tightly covered and
in good condition and adequate to prevent spillage or escape of noxious odors. (1986 Code)
8.08.180: VEHICLES NOT TO REMAIN STANDING ON STREET:
It is unlawful for any person to suffer, permit or allow any vehicle controlled by him and which is loaded with garbage
or other waste materials specified herein to be or remain standing on any public street within the city any longer than
may be necessary for the purpose of loading the same to its destination in accordance with applicable traffic laws.
(1986 Code)
8.08.190: INSPECTION BY SUPERINTENDENT:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 149/571
The superintendent of the waste removal department of the city, or other duly authorized representative, shall visit all
premises within the corporate limits of the city from time to time to examine the sanitary conditions of the premises to
determine whether the provisions of this chapter are being complied with. Upon notification by the superintendent or
his representative, all persons, firms, or corporations shall, within three (3) days after notice, comply with the
provisions of this chapter or be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (1986 Code)
8.08.200: GARBAGE SUITABLE FOR HOG FEED:
Whenever the superintendent of the waste removal department shall determine that the garbage from any premises is
suitable for hog feed, and shall so notify the occupant of such premises, such occupant shall thereafter deposit the
garbage designated as hog feed in a separate garbage container and shall keep such garbage free from any rubbish,
tin cans, glass, coffee grounds, egg shells, paper or other indigestible materials. (1986 Code)
8.08.210: REMOVAL; TIMES PER WEEK:
Removal of garbage or waste matter from the premises shall be made at least once a week from private residences
and as many times per week as the superintendent of the waste removal department of the city may order from all
meat, fish, game and vegetable markets, restaurants, boarding houses, hotels, hospitals, retail stores, wholesale
stores, manufacturing establishments and other like places. (1986 Code)
8.08.220: CLASSIFICATION OF GARBAGE COLLECTION SERVICE:
The city council, by resolution, shall classify and determine which class the garbage collection service furnished any
owner, renter, agent or occupant of any building or portion of apartment thereof, or any structure of whatever type or
nature or any premises shall fall or come within. The city council shall be the sole judge of what unit or classification
the garbage collection service comes within and which is given to the owner, renter, agent or occupant. From time to
time, the city council shall cause a resurvey of the classification to which such person belongs. Upon request for
adjustment of any classification, the city council will investigate the request and if the request is reasonable then they
shall make such adjustments as in their judgment shall be deemed reasonable. The charges and rates based on the
classification made for garbage and waste matter disposal may be established by resolution of the city council. The
charge shall be deemed to be a civil debt owing to the city from the occupant of the property, but nothing in this
section shall relieve the occupant from prosecution for a misdemeanor for any violation of this chapter. (1986 Code)
8.08.230: RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER OF PREMISES:
The owner or his agent, or the occupant, of any premises within the city, shall be responsible for the sanitary condition
of the premises occupied by him, and it shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or allow to be placed or
deposited on his premises any waste matter, except as designated by the terms of this chapter. It shall be unlawful to
place or deposit waste matter on another person's premises. (1986 Code)
8.08.240: RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTION:
The superintendent of the waste removal department, after identifying himself, shall have the power to enter at
reasonable times upon private or public property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to
the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. (1986 Code)
8.08.250: CHARGES TO BE PLACED ON WATER STATEMENT:
The city council shall place the charge on the monthly culinary water statement and upon collection of the same, it
shall be placed in the city treasury in a separate fund to be known as the "waste removal fund" and disbursed by the
city council as it sees fit. (1986 Code)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 150/571
8.08.260: ESTABLISHMENT OF RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The superintendent of the waste removal department, subject to the approval of the city council, shall have the power
to establish rules and regulations consistent with the provisions of this chapter, governing the keeping, collection,
removal and disposal of garbage and waste matter. (1986 Code)
8.08.270: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
If any person shall violate any provision of this chapter, he shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction shall be punished by a fine not exceeding two hundred ninety nine dollars ($299.00), or by imprisonment in
the county jail for a term not exceeding thirty (30) days, or by both fine and imprisonment. (1986 Code)
Chapter 8.12
REMOVAL OF WEEDS AND REFUSE
8.12.010: OFFICE OF INSPECTOR CREATED; APPOINTMENT:
There is created the office of city inspector for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of chapter 11, title 10, Utah
Code Annotated, 1953; and it is further provided that the city inspector shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to
confirmation by the council, his term of office to be the same as the mayor's term. (1986 Code)
8.12.020: DUTIES OF CITY INSPECTOR:
It shall be the duty of the inspector to make careful examination, and investigation of all property in the city as to
whether noxious or injurious weeds, or other deleterious objects or structures are accumulating therein; and upon the
discovery of the same, it shall be the further duty of the inspector to ascertain the names of the owners and description
of the respective premises so affected, and to serve notices in writing upon the owner of the land either personally or
by registered mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the owner or occupant at the last known post office address as
disclosed by the books and records of the county assessor, and to order the owner to eradicate, destroy, or remove
the weeds, deleterious objects or structures within such times as the inspector may designate, which shall not be less
than ten (10) days from date of service of the notice. One notice shall be deemed sufficient on any lot or property for
the entire season of weed growth during the calendar year in which the notice is served. The inspector shall make
proof of service of the notice under oath and file the same in the office of the county treasurer. (1986 Code)
8.12.030: NEGLECT OF PROPERTY OWNERS; REMOVAL BY CITY:
If any owner or occupant of lands described in the notice served by the inspector shall fail or neglect to eradicate, or
destroy and remove, such weeds, garbage, refuse, object or structure upon the premises in accordance with such
notice, it shall be the duty of the inspector, at the expense of the city, to employ necessary assistance and cause such
weeds, garbage, refuse, objects or structures to be removed or destroyed. He shall prepare an itemized statement of
all expenses incurred in the removal and destruction of same and shall mail a copy thereof to the owner demanding
payment within twenty (20) days of the date of mailing. The notice shall be deemed delivered when mailed by
registered mail addressed to the property owner's last known address. In the event the owner fails to make payment of
the amount set forth in the statement to the treasurer within the twenty (20) days, the inspector, on behalf of the city,
may cause suit to be brought in an appropriate court of law or may refer the matter to the county treasurer as provided
in this chapter. In the event collection of the costs are pursued through the courts, the city may sue for and receive
judgment upon all of the costs of removal and destruction together with reasonable attorney fees, interest and court
costs. The city may execute on such judgment in the manner provided by law. In the event that the inspector elects to
refer the matter to the county treasurer for inclusion in the tax notice of the property owner, he shall make, in triplicate,
an itemized statement of all expenses incurred in the removal and destruction of the same and shall deliver the three
(3) copies of the statement to the county treasurer within ten (10) days after the completion of the work of removing
such weeds, garbage, refuse, objects or structures. (1986 Code)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 151/571
8.12.040: COSTS OF REMOVAL; INCLUSION OF TAX NOTICE:
Upon the receipt of the copies of the statements, the county treasurer shall proceed as provided by statute, and the
cost and expense of so removing the weeds, deleterious objects or structures shall be added to the taxes and become
a lien upon the premises and shall be collected all as provided by law. (1986 Code)
Chapter 8.16
ABANDONED CONTAINERS
8.16.010: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave or permit to remain outside of any dwelling, building, or other structure, or
within any unoccupied or abandoned building, structure or dwelling under his control, in a place accessible to children,
any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other container which has a door or lid, snaplock or
other locking device which may not be released from the inside, without first removing said door or lid, snaplock or
other locking device. (1986 Code)
Chapter 8.20
PLASTIC BAGS OR COVERINGS
8.20.010: DEFINITIONS:
The words "plastic coverings", "plastic bags" or "plastic package", when used in this chapter, mean any covering,
package or bag made of plastic material sufficiently thin and pliable to respond to static electricity created by contact
with the human body to the extent that it clings to the human skin or body. (1986 Code)
8.20.020: WARNING REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession, or to deliver as a cover or wrapper, any plastic bag that is
of sufficient size to fit over a child's head, or any bag which, when open has an opening larger than twenty five (25)
square inches or a capacity of more than one hundred twenty five (125) cubic inches, unless there is at all times
clearly printed on such bag or covering, or on a paper attached to such bag or covering, words in letters at least onequarter
inch (1/4") high as follows:
WARNING: To avoid danger of suffocation keep this bag (or covering) away from babies and children. Do not use in
cribs, beds, carriages or play pens. This is not a toy.
(1986 Code)
8.20.030: CERTAIN BAGS A NUISANCE:
Any plastic bag, covering or package not carrying or accompanied by the printed warning as provided in section
8.20.020 of this chapter is declared a nuisance. (1986 Code)
Chapter 8.24
FOOD STANDARDS
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 152/571
8.24.010: STANDARD OF WHOLESOME FOOD DEFINED; SALE OF UNWHOLESOME FOOD
PROHIBITED:
The standards of quality, purity and strength of food, liquors and drinks that have been or shall hereafter be adopted
by the United States department of agriculture are declared to be the standards of purity and strength of food, liquors
and drinks of the city, and said standards of quality, purity and strength of food, liquors and drinks adopted by the
United States department of agriculture are made a part of this chapter, except where otherwise specified. It shall be
unlawful for any person to bring or cause to be brought within the limits of the city, or offer or hold for sale, or sell, or
have in possession for sale either at wholesale or retail in any private or public market, or other place in the city, any
meat, fowl or fish that died by disease or accident, or any article of food intended for human consumption, except such
as is healthy, fresh, sound, wholesome and safe for human food. (1986 Code)
8.24.020: UNWHOLESOME FOOD OR DRINK AND SANITARY CONDITION OF RESTAURANTS,
HOTELS OR OTHER PUBLIC PLACES:
It shall be unlawful for the manager or keeper of any hotel, restaurant, boarding house, or other public place where
food or drink is sold, or for any clerk, agent or servant therein to offer or keep for food or drink, or to be eaten or drunk,
any deleterious or unwholesome substance; and whenever it is determined by the inspector that filthy or unsanitary
conditions exist, or are permitted to exist in the operation of any hotel, restaurant, or boardinghouse, or other public
place where food or drink products are manufactured, stored, deposited, sold or offered for sale for any purpose
whatever, the proprietor or proprietors, owner or owners of such restaurant, hotel, bakery, confectionery, or any person
or persons owning or operating any plant where food or drink products are manufactured, stored, deposited, sold or
offered for sale, shall be first notified and warned by the inspector to place such restaurant, hotel, bakery,
confectionery or ice cream plant or any other place where food or drink products are manufactured, stored, deposited,
sold or offered for sale, in a sanitary condition within a reasonable length of time; and any person or persons owning
or operating such restaurant, hotel, bakery, confectionery or ice cream plant, or any place where any food or drink
products are manufactured, stored, deposited, sold or offered for sale, failing to obey such notice and warning shall be
guilty of a violation of this chapter. (1986 Code)
8.24.030: MEAT OF CERTAIN ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to bring into the city for sale, or to sell, or offer for sale the meat of any cattle,
sheep, swine or game, which when killed, were within four (4) weeks of parturition. (1986 Code)
8.24.040: SALE OF CALF, PIG OR LAMB UNDER CERTAIN AGE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to bring, or cause to be brought within the limits of the city, or to offer or hold for sale
as food within the city, any calf, pig or lamb, or the meat thereof, which at the date of killing, being a calf, was less than
eight (8) weeks old, or being a lamb, was when killed less than eight (8) weeks old, or being a pig, was when killed
less than five (5) weeks old. (1986 Code)
8.24.050: UNWHOLESOME MEAT TO BE DESTROYED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to expose for sale or sell in any market, house, shop, or elsewhere, any tainted,
putrid or unwholesome meat or provisions; and it shall be and is made the duty of the inspector forthwith to seize and
confiscate all such meat and provisions. (1986 Code)
8.24.060: CONDEMNED MEAT NOT TO BE SOLD:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, hold for sale, or offer for sale, any cattle, sheep, swine, fish, fowl, game or
poultry, or the meat thereof, which has been condemned by a government inspector or by an inspector of the board of
health. (1986 Code)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 153/571
8.24.070: MEAT MARKETS:
It shall be unlawful to use any building, room or place as a meat market, unless the same is provided with a
refrigerator of sufficient capacity to handle all meats and meat products held for sale, the same to be maintained at a
temperature of not more than forty five degrees Fahrenheit (45°F). Such places shall be provided with suitable racks
and receptacles for meats, and all utensils, hooks, hangers, racks and dishes shall be kept in a sanitary condition.
(1986 Code)
8.24.080: STORAGE ROOMS TO BE CLEAN:
It shall be unlawful for any person having or holding for sale the meat of any cattle, sheep, swine, fish, game, fowl or
poultry to fail to keep the place in which such meat is stored or offered for sale in a clean and wholesome condition,
free from noxious odors. (1986 Code)
8.24.090: MEAT AND PRODUCTS TO BE COVERED:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to keep for sale, offer for sale, or display inside or outside any
building any meat, meat food products, or any other article of food intended for human consumption, except citrus
fruits, fruits or vegetables the rind or skin of which must be removed before eating, unless it is covered so as to protect
it from dust, dirt, flies and other forms of contamination. Articles of food displayed outside of buildings must be kept on
platforms not less than eighteen inches (18") high. (1986 Code)
8.24.100: REFRIGERATORS AND ICE BOXES TO BE SANITARY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep the carcass or meat of any cattle, sheep, swine, fish, fowl, game or poultry
in any refrigerator or ice box, unless such refrigerator or ice box is properly ventilated and maintained in a sanitary
condition. (1986 Code)
8.24.110: PERSONS HANDLING MEATS TO HAVE CLEAN HANDS AND CLOTHING:
It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the handling or preparation of meats or food products to fail to keep his
hands and clothing in a sanitary condition. (1986 Code)
8.24.120: STAMP OF USDA INSPECTION TO BE ON MEAT SOLD:
It is unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, ship or bring to the city, with intent to sell, or have in his possession
with intent to sell any meat or meat food products which do not bear the official stamp of government inspection. (1986
Code)
8.24.130: REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS ADOPTED:
The regulations governing meat inspection in the United States, as established by the United States department of
agriculture, and the regulations of the department of agriculture of the state of Utah, are declared to be the governing
code and method of passing or rejecting or condemning the meats described in this chapter, in making inspections as
required by this chapter, and the standards for determining whether the applicant is entitled to a permit and license as
required by this chapter. The rules and regulations adopted by the United States department of agriculture and the
department of agriculture of the state of Utah, are made a part of this chapter except where otherwise particularly
specified. (1986 Code)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 154/571
Chapter 8.28
FIREWORKS
8.28.010: SALE OR USE UNLAWFUL:
A. It is unlawful for any person, firm, partnership or corporation to offer for sale, expose for sale, sell, possess, or use,
or explode any toy cannon in which explosives are used; firecrackers; torpedoes; sky rockets, Roman candles,
bombs, or other fireworks of like construction; or any fireworks containing any explosive compound commonly used
and sold as fireworks except for those defined in Utah Code Annotated 11-3-2, subsections (2) to (5).
B. For the purpose of this section, "fireworks" means any composition or device manufactured or used for the purpose
of producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation, but does not
include model rockets, toy pistol caps, emergency signal flares, snakes or glow worms, party poppers, wire
sparklers under thirty six inches (36") in length, or matches. This section should not be construed to prohibit the
same. (1986 Code)
Chapter 8.32
MISCELLANEOUS FIRE REGULATIONS
8.32.010: AUTHORITY TO REMOVE PROPERTY; LIMITATIONS:
When a fire is in progress, the fire chief, or in his absence, the officer in charge, in case of urgent public necessity may
order any telegraph, telephone, electric light wire or poles, in close proximity thereto, to be torn down or otherwise
disposed of, and he may likewise order any building in close proximity thereto to be torn down or otherwise disposed
of for the purpose of checking the conflagration, but neither the fire chief nor any other officer or member of the fire
department shall unnecessarily or recklessly destroy or injure any building or other property. (1986 Code)
8.32.020: DEPARTMENT MAY BLOCKADE:
Whenever a fire shall occur it shall be lawful for the chief, or the officer in command, to blockade any street, alley,
sidewalk or other place if in his judgment it is necessary to secure the efficient working of the men, hose, engines, or
hook and ladder apparatus under his command, and to protect the hose of the department from injury. It shall be
unlawful for any person to break through the blockade. (1986 Code)
8.32.030: LIMITS AT FIRE:
The marshal, in conjunction with the fire officer in charge, may prescribe the limits in the vicinity of the fire within which
no person, except members of the department, marshal and police, or those admitted by order of the officer in charge,
shall be permitted to come. (1986 Code)
8.32.040: DISOBEDIENCE OF BYSTANDERS:
The marshal, chief, foreman, or any officer in charge of the department may require the aid of every citizen, inhabitant
or bystander in drawing any engine, cart or other fire apparatus to the fire and, upon the refusal or neglect of any such
person to immediately comply with such requirement, the offender shall, upon conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of
a misdemeanor. All officers authorized to command the aid or assistance of any citizen, inhabitant or bystander are
authorized likewise to arrest such citizen, inhabitant or bystander for refusal to obey any reasonable directions for the
extinguishing of fire or the protection of property. (1986 Code)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 155/571
8.32.050: UNLAWFUL INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICERS:
Any person who shall wilfully hinder any officer or foreman in the charge of his duty at a fire, or in any manner injure,
deface or destroy any engine, hose or other fire apparatus belonging to the city or who shall interfere with any fire
company or person, or who shall wilfully break or injure any water pipe, or in any way interfere with the water or its
source of supply, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (1986 Code)
8.32.060: USE OF WATER BY FIRE DEPARTMENT:
The fire chief or other officer in charge, shall have the right to use water from any source for the purpose of
extinguishing fires or for saving property in danger of being destroyed thereby. (1986 Code)
8.32.070: PLACES OF ASSEMBLAGE; CHIEF TO PRESCRIBE RULES:
It shall be the duty of the fire chief, subject to the approval of the council, to make such rules and regulations as may
be necessary for the prevention of fire in theaters, schools, churches and other places of assemblage or public
amusement. Such rules and regulations shall be printed and posted in conspicuous places as designated by the fire
chief, and it shall be unlawful for any person to remove, obstruct or deface the same. It shall be the duty and
responsibility of the owner, manager, agent or person having control of such building to cause and bring about
compliance with all such rules and regulations. (1986 Code)
8.32.080: ACCUMULATION OF COMBUSTIBLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit the accumulation of empty boxes, waste, or other inflammable substance
on any premises within the city limits or carry on any business in or about any premises in such a manner as to
endanger such premises or building or other buildings or premises to danger by fire or explosion. (1986 Code)
8.32.090: DANGEROUS AND DEFECTIVE STRUCTURES:
Whenever, in the judgment of the fire chief, any building or structure, or any portion thereof, or any appurtenances or
fixtures thereto, or any chimney, smokestack, stove, oven, furnace or wiring or thing connected with such building or
premises is deemed defective or unsafe, and such defect or unsafe condition is such as to create a danger from fire;
or whenever the owner or occupant of such building or structure or part thereof keeps or stores any explosive,
combustible or inflammable material, waste or rubbish of any description in such manner that the same creates a
danger from fire, the fire chief or his deputies shall give the owner, or person having control of such building or
structure not exceeding five (5) days' notice of required changes, alteration, or repairs necessary to render the same
safe to life and property from fire, and any person refusing or neglecting to comply with such notice shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor. (1986 Code)
8.32.100: UNOCCUPIED BUILDINGS:
Whenever any unoccupied building is not properly secured or enclosed, the fire chief, or his deputies, shall
immediately visit the premises and notify the owner, or person having control of the same, immediately to secure or
enclose the same, and the person so notified as aforesaid shall, within forty eight (48) hours, comply therewith. (1986
Code)
8.32.110: INVESTIGATION AFTER FIRE REPORT:
The chief, or in his absence, his assistants in charge of the fire, shall, after its extinguishment, make a prompt and
thorough investigation of the cause of the fire, the time of breaking out, the amount of loss and insurance, a
description of the affected buildings and premises, and shall secure all other useful information and data available,
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 156/571
and record the same in a record book kept for that purpose in the office of the department and shall report the same to
the council at such times as it may direct. (1986 Code)
Chapter 8.36
OPEN BURNING
8.36.010: ADOPTION OF CODE OF OPEN BURNING REGULATIONS:
A. The code of open burning regulations adopted by the Utah air conservation committee on December 19, 1968,
under authority of title 26-24-5, Utah Code Annotated, 1953, as amended, with all amendments and additions
thereto, is approved and adopted as the open burning regulations of the city, and the same is by this reference
made a part of this chapter to the same extent and effect as though the code were copied in full herein.
B. Three (3) copies of the code shall be filed for use and examination by the public in the office of the city recorder.
(1986 Code)
8.36.020: PERMITS:
Any permits required for permitted open burning under the code of open burning regulations shall be issued by and
procured from the city fire chief before any open fire is built, lighted, maintained or caused to be built, lighted or
maintained by any person. (1986 Code)
8.36.030: WILFULLY OR NEGLIGENTLY CAUSING FIRE:
In addition to any penalty otherwise provided in this chapter, any expense incurred by the city in any way, connected
with any fire wilfully or negligently ignited or caused to be ignited by any person, or wilfully or negligently permitted to
spread, shall be paid by such person and the city may maintain an action to recover the same. (1986 Code)
Chapter 8.40
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
8.40.010: ESTABLISHMENT OF ORGANIZATION:
There is hereby created an emergency management organization for Mapleton, to prevent, minimize, repair, and
alleviate injury or damage resulting from disaster caused by enemy attack, sabotage, or other hostile action, or natural
cause, in accordance with applicable state law. The organization shall consist of the director of public safety, who shall
be the director of the organization, and such additional members as may from time to time be necessary. All additional
members shall be appointed by the mayor, with the approval of the city council, and shall serve at the pleasure of the
mayor. (1986 Code)
8.40.020: DUTIES OF DIRECTOR:
The director shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration, training and operation of the
emergency management organization, subject to the direction and control of the mayor. (1986 Code)
8.40.030: FUNCTIONS OF ORGANIZATION:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 157/571
The emergency management organization shall perform such emergency management functions as shall be
prescribed by the city council and may perform such emergency management functions and participate in such
emergency management programs as are prescribed or instituted by local, state, or national emergency management
organizations as approved by the Mapleton City council. (1986 Code)
8.40.040: AGREEMENT WITH OTHER MUNICIPALITIES:
The director may negotiate mutual aid agreements with other municipal corporations or political subdivisions or the
state, but no such agreement shall be effective until it has been approved by the city council, and the state division of
emergency management, or other applicable state agency. (1986 Code)
8.40.050: OATH:
No person shall be employed or associated in any capacity in the emergency management organization who
advocated or has advocated a change by force or violence in the constitutional form of government of the United
States, or of the state of Utah or the overthrow of any government in the United States by force or violence, or who
has been convicted of, or is under indictment or information charging any subversive act against the United States.
Each person who is appointed to serve in the emergency management organization of the city shall, before entering
upon duties, take an oath in writing before a person authorized to administer oaths, which shall be substantially as
follows:
I do solemnly swear that I will support and defend the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the
State of Utah against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the same; I take
this obligation freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully discharge
the duties upon which I am about to enter. And I do further swear that I do not advocate, nor have I ever advocated,
nor am I a member, nor have I ever been a member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow
of the government of the United States or of the State of Utah by force or violence; and that during such time as I am a
member of the Emergency Management Organization of Mapleton City, I will not advocate or become a member of
any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this State
of Utah by force or violence.
(1986 Code)
8.40.060: HAZARDOUS MATERIALS; UNLAWFUL ACTS:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to release, discharge, deposit, or cause to be released, discharged, or
deposited any hazardous substance, material or waste upon or into any property or facility within the city or into
any of the airways, watercourses, pipelines, or other means of conduit which may flow into the city.
B. "Hazardous substance, materials, or waste" means any material that, because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical or chemical characteristics, poses a significant present or potential hazard to human or animal health and
safety or to the environment if released into the workplace or environment.
C. "Hazardous substance, materials, or waste" shall also include any substance declared hazardous by the state
department of health in an effort to protect the health and safety of the residents of the city. (1986 Code)
Title 9
PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 158/571
Chapter 9.04
UTAH STATE CRIMINAL LAW PROVISIONS ADOPTED BY
REFERENCE
9.04.010: PROVISIONS OF THE UTAH CRIMINAL CODE ADOPTED:
The Utah criminal code, section 76-1-101 et seq., Utah Code Annotated, 1953, as amended is hereby adopted as a
Mapleton City ordinance. Provided, however, that any provision of the foregoing having a penalty which cannot be
imposed for violation of a city ordinance is not adopted. (1986 Code)
9.04.020: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, drive, walk, lodge, camp or sleep upon the premises of another without the
permission of the owner or lawful occupant thereof, or to take down any fence or to let down any bars or to open any
gate so as to expose any enclosure without the permission of the owner or lawful occupant thereof. (1986 Code)
Chapter 9.08
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC DECENCY
(Rep. by Ord. 2019-05, 4-17-2019, eff. 5-11-2019)
Chapter 9.12
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
9.12.010: LOUDSPEAKERS:
A. It is unlawful for any person to maintain or operate any radio apparatus, sound device or loudspeaker attached
thereto in such a manner that the loudspeaker, amplifier or sound system causes disturbance by projecting sound
directly outside of any building, vehicle or out of doors; provided, that the City Council will or may grant permits to
broadcast any events or happenings of public interest. Any person desiring a permit to broadcast shall notify the
City at least three (3) days in advance showing the place where he proposes to broadcast, the time and probable
duration, and the nature of the broadcast. Upon notification, if the applicant agrees to comply with reasonable time,
place and manner restrictions, the City will approve a broadcast permit.
B. Nothing contained in this section is construed to prevent the operation of a radio apparatus, sound device, amplifier,
or other variety of sound system used in a reasonable manner by any person within a building, vehicle, or
structure; provided, that the radio apparatus, amplifier, or other sound system does not project the sound therefrom
directly outside of any building, vehicle or out of doors, or is in any way fastened to or connected with any outside
wall or window in any building, vehicle or structure so that the sound therefrom is projected outside. (1986 Code)
9.12.020: UNLAWFUL CONGREGATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any persons to congregate about or upon any sidewalk, stairway, doorway, window, or in front
of any business or dwelling house, theater, lecture room, church or elsewhere and by so doing obstruct or interfere
with the free passage of persons entering, leaving or occupying any such building or premises; or by their language,
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 159/571
conversation or conduct to annoy, insult or disturb persons passing along any street or alley, or occupying, residing or
doing business in any house or place. (1986 Code)
9.12.030: VAGRANCY:
(Rep. by Ord. 2019-05, 4-17-2019, eff. 5-11-2019)
9.12.040: DISTURBING THE PEACE:
A. General Prohibitions: It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously or wilfully disturb the peace or quiet of
another by loud or unusual noise or by tumultuous conduct or by threatening or yelling in a manner likely to incite
another to violence.
B. Specific Violations: It shall be unlawful for any person to cause noise that constitutes a public disturbance after
once being requested to stop making the noise. It shall be unlawful for any person in possession of real property to
allow to originate from the property noise that constitutes a public disturbance after once being requested to stop
permitting the noise. For purposes of this section, public disturbance shall be any sound which unreasonably
disturbs or interferes with peace, comfort or repose of owners or possessors of real property. Between the hours of
ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M., activities which by their nature and by the time of day are
deemed to unreasonably disturb or interfere with the peace, comfort or repose of owners or possessors of real
property include, but are not limited to, the following sound sources:
1. Loading Operations: Loading, unloading, opening or otherwise handling boxes, crates, containers, garbage
containers or other objects.
2. Construction Work: Operating, or causing to be operated, any equipment used in construction, repair, alteration
or demolition work on buildings, structures or streets.
3. Commercial Power Equipment: Operating, or permitting to be operated, any power equipment.
4. Garbage Collection: The collection of garbage, waste or refuse.
5. Amplified Sound: The use of amplified music, stereo or sound systems which can be heard beyond the premises
where such sound is generated.
6. Sports, Dances And Entertainment: Sports, dances or other entertainment activities in or adjacent to a
Residential Zone between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. Sunday through
Thursday and eleven thirty o'clock (11:30) P.M. Friday and Saturday nights through seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
Saturday and Sunday mornings.
C. Exemptions:
1. The restrictions set forth in the preceding two (2) subsections do not apply in case of actual emergencies which
place persons or property in jeopardy.
2. Applications for a temporary permit for relief from the foregoing restrictions on the basis of undue hardship may
be made to the City. The applicant must explain why no other reasonable alternative is available. Any permit
granted by the City Manager or his or her authorized representative shall contain all conditions upon which the
permit has been granted, including, but not limited to, the effective dates, any time restrictions, location, and any
other reasonable requirements to minimize adverse affects upon the surrounding neighborhood.
3. The foregoing prohibitions do not apply to snow removal activities.
D. Penalty: Disturbing the peace is a Class C misdemeanor if the offense continues after a request by a person to
desist. Otherwise it is an infraction. Class C misdemeanors and infractions shall be punishable as set forth in
section 76-3-301, Utah Code Annotated (1953, as amended). (Ord. 94-06; amd. Ord. 2001-31, 9-5-2001)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 160/571
Chapter 9.16
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PROPERTY
9.16.010: TREES1:
A. It is unlawful for any person to plant, prune, spray, remove, destroy or injure in any way, any tree or shrub on any
public street in the city, without first securing a permit from the city to do so. The permit shall state specifically the
work to be done and will be void after thirty (30) days.
B. No person shall damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant, dig in, or otherwise disturb grass areas,
or in any other way injure or impair the natural beauty or usefulness of any public area. (1986 Code)
Chapter 9.18
PARK USE REGULATIONS
9.18.010: NUISANCES PROHIBITED:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to scratch, cut, injure or deface any of the buildings, fences,
structures, or foul any of the fountains, or any other improvements, or to cut or injure flowers, flower beds, trees or
shrubs within the parks, or for the owner of any dog to allow the same to run at large within the parks.
B. It shall be unlawful to do any of the following in a City park:
1. To play or practice golf;
2. To shoot or otherwise propel arrows; or
3. To engage in any activity that threatens the safety or well being of other persons. (Ord. 2018-09, 8-1-2018, eff.
8-23-2018)
9.18.020: USE OF PARKS BY PERMISSION; COMMERCIAL SALES PROHIBITED:
A. Any person, group or organization desiring to use a park or any portion thereof on an exclusive basis, or any
person, group or any organization desiring to use the park equipment for public gathering to the exclusion of other
persons or for the purpose of holding meetings, either public or private in nature, shall do so only after obtaining a
reservation permit from the City and upon payment of an appropriate fee for the privilege of reserving the area for a
given period of time.
B. It shall be unlawful to sell anything in a City park or to engage in any commercial activity in a City park, whether for
profit or otherwise, without the prior consent of the City. (Ord. 2018-09, 8-1-2018, eff. 8-23-2018)
9.18.030: CURFEW HOURS:
All City parks shall be closed between eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. the following morning.
No person or persons shall be permitted in said parks either on foot, or horseback or on any type of vehicle during
said hours except for the express purpose of traveling directly through the park. (Ord. 2018-09, 8-1-2018, eff. 8-23-
2018)
9.18.040: VEHICULAR AND ANIMAL TRAFFIC:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 161/571
It shall be unlawful to drive any vehicle or animal or to allow any vehicle or animal to proceed on or over any garden,
lawn, sidewalk, or any other portion of a public park unless the park is designed for vehicular or animal traffic. It shall
be presumed for the purposes of this chapter that in any area in use at the time as a picnic or recreational area or
otherwise in use by pedestrian traffic, that the same is prohibited for use by vehicular or animal traffic. This section
shall not be construed to prohibit the presence of dogs and cats and similar other small animals while under the
control of owners from being allowed upon such public property unless such are vicious and show such by their
general nature. (Ord. 2018-09, 8-1-2018, eff. 8-23-2018)
9.18.050: LITTERING PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to cause or allow any foreign material, papers, bottles, rags or discarded articles of any substantial
kind or nature to be left in a City park. (Ord. 2018-09, 8-1-2018, eff. 8-23-2018)
9.18.060: POSSESSION OR CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES:
It shall be unlawful to possess or consume beer, liquor, or any other alcoholic beverage within a City park. (Ord. 2018-
09, 8-1-2018, eff. 8-23-2018)
9.18.070: USE OF RADIOS AND RECORDERS:
A. It shall be unlawful to operate, play or cause to be operated or played in a City park or in a motor vehicle located in
a City park or parked on a road adjacent to a City park, any radio, television, phonograph, stereo, tape player, disk
player, or other similar device which produces or amplifies sound in such a manner as to be audible beyond the
boundaries of the park or at a distance of more than fifty feet (50') from such radio, television, phonograph, stereo,
tape player, disk player, sound amplifier or similar device.
B. Subsection A of this section shall not apply if the device described in subsection A of this section and the volume of
sound therefrom are specifically authorized by the City in conjunction with a scheduled activity. (Ord. 2018-09, 8-1-
2018, eff. 8-23-2018)
9.18.080: TOBACCO USE:
A. No tobacco product of any kind, including e-cigarettes, or any other lighted smoking equipment, or any variation
thereof, is permitted to be used within parks and recreation facilities. (Ord. 2018-09, 8-1-2018, eff. 8-23-2018)
Chapter 9.20
OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST MINORS
9.20.010: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; SUPPLYING TO MINORS:
Alcoholic beverages shall not be sold, given away or otherwise supplied to any person under the age of twenty one
(21) years, but this shall not apply to the supplying of liquor to such persons for medicinal purposes only by the parent
or guardian of such person or by a physician. (Ord. 94-4)
9.20.020: TOBACCO OR NARCOTICS; PURCHASE BY MINORS:
Any person under the age of nineteen (19) years who buys, accepts or has in his possession any cigar, cigarette or
tobacco in any form is guilty of a class C misdemeanor, or may be classified as a delinquent child. Anyone under the
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 162/571
age of twenty one (21) possessing a narcotic or any controlled substance under the Utah controlled substances act1 is
guilty of a misdemeanor so long as the conduct prohibited is not a felony or a class A misdemeanor. (Ord. 94-4)
9.20.030: TOBACCO OR NARCOTICS; SALE TO MINORS:
Any person who sells, gives or furnishes any cigar, cigarette or tobacco in any form, or any other narcotic, or
controlled substance under the Utah controlled substances act2 to any person under the age of twenty one (21) is
guilty of a class C misdemeanor so long as the conduct prohibited is not a felony or a class A misdemeanor. (Ord. 94-
4)
9.20.040: CURFEW HOURS:
A. Purpose: The governing body of Mapleton City finds, due to a seemingly ever increasing incidence of violence and
other crime among juveniles in Utah County, being both drug related and gang related, that such crimes may be
significantly inhibited and reduced by the enactment and enforcement of local law establishing a curfew prohibiting
juveniles from remaining idly and purposelessly on the public streets late at night.
B. Definitions:
CARE AND CUSTODY: The legal authority of a parent or guardian to supervise or otherwise be responsible for a
minor, or the express authority given from such parent or legal guardian of a minor to a responsible adult to
supervise or otherwise be responsible for the activities and care of the minor.
EMERGENCY ERRAND: Any errand or travel undertaken to directly and immediately seek to prevent or reduce
the consequences of an illness or injury, criminal or potential criminal activity, or fire or other accident and shall
include the seeking of aid and assistance from medical or emergency response personnel or the purchase of
medications.
MINOR: Any unmarried, unemancipated person who is not a member of the armed forces of the United States and
who is under the age of sixteen (16) years for the purposes of subsection C of this section, or who is under the age
of eighteen (18) years for the purpose of subsection D of this section.
PUBLIC PLACES: Any place open to the public, whether privately owned, including, but not limited to, parking lots
and the interiors and exteriors of commercial establishments such as restaurants, stores or places of
entertainment.
C. Sixteen Year Old Curfew: It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of sixteen (16) years to remain or loiter
upon any of the sidewalks, streets, alleys or public places in Mapleton City between the hours of eleven o'clock
(11:00) P.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. the following morning.
D. Eighteen Year Old Curfew: It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years to remain or loiter
upon any of the sidewalks, streets, alleys or public places in Mapleton City, between the hours of eleven o'clock
(11:00) P.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. the following morning, Sunday through Thursday, and between the hours
of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. Saturday and Sunday.
E. Parental Liability: It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person having care and custody of any minor
to knowingly allow or permit the minor to violate the provisions of this chapter.
F. Exceptions: The provision of this chapter shall not apply to any circumstance in which the minor is:
1. Accompanied by a parent, guardian, or other responsible adult having care and custody of such minor;
2. Engaged in a legitimate trade, employment or occupation which requires the minor's presence in or on the
sidewalks, streets, alleys or public places while working at or traveling to or from such employment;
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 163/571
3. Engaged on an emergency errand directed by the minor's parent, guardian or other responsible person having
care and custody;
4. In a motor vehicle engaged in normal interstate travel beginning in, traveling through, or ending in Utah County;
5. Attending or engaged in traveling between the minor's home or place of residence and a place where any
religious, municipal, social, entertainment, sporting, political, library, or school function is occurring; or
6. Within the boundaries of the minor's place of residence.
G. Enforcement:
1. Any minor who is in violation of the provisions of this chapter is subject to arrest and citation.
2. Upon arrest, the minor shall be returned to the custody of the parent, guardian or other person charged with the
care and custody of the minor.
3. It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person charged with the care and custody of a minor, who is
in violation of this chapter, to knowingly refuse to appear and take custody of said minor after being ordered to
do so by a peace officer.
4. Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a class B misdemeanor. (Ord. 94-4)
Chapter 9.24
WEAPONS
9.24.010: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter:
ARCHERY EQUIPMENT: Target and archery bows exceeding twenty five (25) pounds' draw weight.
FIREARMS: Any BB gun or pistol, any air gun or pistol, any shotgun, rifle, pistol, crossbow and any archery
equipment. (Ord. 2014-10, 8-19-2014, eff. 9-14-2014)
9.24.020: DISCHARGING FIREARMS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a firearm within the city limits of Mapleton City except under the
following conditions:
A. Any duly sworn peace officer or division of wildlife resources personnel in the performance of his duty.
B. Livestock owners are allowed to kill depreciating animals as long as they are in compliance with other city or state
codes or rules.
C. Any individual that has received a permit from an appropriate state agency to take wild animals that are causing
damage to agricultural or greenbelt property. Under this exception only the use of "archery equipment" as defined
in section 9.24.010 of this chapter may be used.
D. A resident has the right to use force in defense of life and property in compliance with the state statutes governing
that defense.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 164/571
E. The discharge of appropriate firearms will be allowed on approved firearms ranges and facilities, with prior approval
of the city council.
F. It is unlawful for shotguns to be discharged within six hundred feet (600') of any dwelling, house, barn, poultry yard,
corral, feeding pen, stockyard or any enclosures where domestic animals are kept or fed, unless the written
permission of the person in lawful possession of such building or enclosure is first had and obtained. Where it is
permitted to discharge a shotgun, the size shot is restricted to no larger than BB size. (Ord. 2014-10, 8-19-2014,
eff. 9-14-2014)
9.24.030: FLIPPERS AND SLINGSHOTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any flipper or slingshot within the city. (1986 Code)
Chapter 9.28
ALCOHOL
9.28.010: DRINKING IN PUBLIC:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drink intoxicating liquor or to have in his possession any opened bottle or vessel
containing intoxicating liquor, in or on any street, alley, motor vehicle, sidewalk, beer parlor or public place. The word
"liquor" shall have the same definition as given in section 32-1-3, Utah Code Annotated, 1953. (1986 Code)
Chapter 9.30
PROVISIONS ADOPTED
9.30.010: PROVISIONS OF THE UTAH CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE ADOPTED:
The Utah code of criminal procedure, section 77-1-1 et seq., Utah Code Annotated, 1953, as amended, is hereby
adopted as a Mapleton City ordinance. (1986 Code)
9.30.020: CONTRIBUTING TO THE DELINQUENCY OF A MINOR:
It shall be unlawful to do any act prohibited by section 78-3a-19 Utah Code Annotated, 1953. (1986 Code)
9.30.030: PROVISIONS OF THE UTAH CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES ACT ADOPTED:
The Utah controlled substances act, section 58-37-1 et seq., Utah Code Annotated, 1953, as amended is hereby
adopted as a Mapleton City ordinance. Provided, however, that any provision of the foregoing having a penalty which
cannot be imposed for violation of a city ordinance is not adopted. (1986 Code)
9.30.040: PROVISIONS OF THE UTAH DRUG PARAPHERNALIA ACT ADOPTED:
The Utah drug paraphernalia act, section 58-37a-1 et seq., Utah Code Annotated, 1953, as amended is hereby
adopted as a Mapleton City ordinance. Provided, however, that any provision of the foregoing having a penalty which
cannot be imposed for violation of a city ordinance is not adopted. (1986 Code)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 165/571
9.30.050: PROVISIONS OF THE IMITATION CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES ACT ADOPTED:
The imitation controlled substances act, section 58-37b-1 et seq., Utah Code Annotated, 1953, as amended is hereby
adopted as a Mapleton City ordinance. Provided, however, that any provision of the foregoing having a penalty which
cannot be imposed for violation of a city ordinance is not adopted. (1986 Code)
9.30.060: STATE LAW REFERENCES:
Unless otherwise specifically provided, all references in this title to provisions of state law which are adopted by
reference, shall be deemed to refer to provisions thereof which were in effect as state law as of April 1, 1992. (1986
Code)
9.30.070: CITATION FORM FOR PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW ADOPTED AS CITY
ORDINANCES:
Any provision of state law adopted in this title as a city ordinance shall be cited by adding the characters "9/" in front of
the section numbers assigned in the Utah Code Annotated 1953, in the following style: section 76-6-404 Utah Code
Annotated 1953, shall be known as a city ordinance as section 9/76-6-404. (1986 Code)
Chapter 9.32
MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
9.32.010: DRUGS TO BE LABELED:
It shall be unlawful for any person carrying on the business of a dealer in drugs and medicines, or for any person
employed by such person, to fail or neglect to properly label the containers of the drugs in a plain and legible manner,
in the English language. (1986 Code)
9.32.020: EXPECTORATING IN PUBLIC PLACES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to expectorate, or throw cigar stumps, cigarette stumps, or quids of tobacco on the
floor of any public conveyance, or public building or on any paved sidewalk. (1986 Code)
9.32.030: THROWING STONES:
Every person who shall wilfully or carelessly throw any stone, stick, snowball or other missile whereby any person
shall be hit or any window broken or other property injured or destroyed, or in such manner as to render travel upon
the public streets and places of the city dangerous, or in such manner as to frighten or annoy any traveler, is guilty of a
misdemeanor. (1986 Code)
Title 10
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 10.04
TRAFFIC CODE ADOPTED
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 166/571
10.04.010: ADOPTION OF UTAH TRAFFIC RULES AND REGULATIONS:
Adoption of Utah traffic rules and regulations, the Utah traffic rules and regulations effective July 1, 1992, as contained
in the utah criminal and traffic code - 1992 edition are hereby adopted as the Mapleton City traffic rules and
regulations. Where a citation or information is issued under this chapter, it shall be sufficient to use the section number
of the Utah code to designate the section number of this code which has been violated. (1986 Code)
10.04.020: DEFINITIONS:
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY OF THE STATE OF UTAH: The chief of police of Mapleton City or his agents,
unless the context otherwise requires.
LOCAL AUTHORITIES: The city council of Mapleton City.
MAGISTRATE: The appropriate judicial officer of the city, unless the context otherwise requires.
RECORDER: The city recorder.
STATE ROAD COMMISSION: Mapleton City and its department, agencies or agents, unless the context otherwise
requires. (1986 Code)
Chapter 10.05
PARKING
10.05.010: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phases when used in this chapter shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the following
meanings respectively ascribed to them:
MOTOR VEHICLES: Every vehicle which is self-propelled.
TRAILER: Every vehicle or device without motor power designed for carrying persons and/or property, and for being
drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that either none of its weight or part of its weight rests or is carried by
another vehicle.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported on or drawn upon a
highway, excepting devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (Ord. 2001-03,
1-16-2001)
10.05.020: STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED; NO SIGNS REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places:
A. On or over a sidewalk;
B. Within an intersection;
C. Within fifteen feet (15') of the point on a curb closest to a fire hydrant, or if there is no curb, within fifteen feet (15') of
a fire hydrant;
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 167/571
D. On or over any portion of a crosswalk;
E. Within thirty feet (30') of an intersection;
F. Within thirty feet (30') upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic control signal located at the side
of a roadway;
G. Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
H. Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire station;
I. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic;
J. With left side of the vehicle against or adjacent to the right hand curb or right edge of the shoulder of the road.
The provisions of this chapter prohibiting the standing or parking of a vehicles shall apply at all times, or at those
times herein specified, or as indicated on official signs, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid
conflict with other traffic rules and regulations so as to be in compliance with the directions of a police officer or
official traffic control device. (Ord. 1993-34; amd. Ord. 2001-03, 1-16-2001)
10.05.030: COMPLIANCE WITH PAINTED LINES, CURBS AND SIGNS; PARALLEL PARKING:
A. In all places where painted lines, curbs or signs on or near a public street reasonably indicate locations, durations,
or the manner in which vehicles may or may not be parked, it shall be unlawful to park a vehicle in any location or
in any manner contrary to the painted lines, curbs or signs.
B. Unless otherwise directed by painted lines, curbs or signs, if parking is permitted, vehicles shall be parked parallel
to, and within twelve inches (12") of, the curb. If there is no curb, such parking shall be off the traveled part of the
street and parallel to the street on which the vehicle is located. (Ord. 1996-12; amd. Ord. 2001-03, 1-16-2001)
10.05.040: DOUBLE PARKING:
It shall be unlawful to park or leave standing upon any street, any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, behind any
other vehicle parked at an angle to the curb, or at the side of any parked vehicle where such vehicle is parked parallel
with the curb, except that an operator may stop temporarily provided he does not leave his vehicle, during the act of
actually loading or unloading passengers or when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations, or traffic signs, or
directions of a police officer. (Ord. 2001-03, 1-16-2001)
10.05.050: UNATTENDED VEHICLES:
A. The following are hereby declared to be a nuisance and detrimental to the safe and proper regulation of traffic:
1. Any unattended vehicle or trailer stopped, standing, or parked in violation of the provisions of this chapter;
2. Any inoperable vehicle or trailer found upon the streets or alleys of this city or in city rights of way;
3. Any vehicle or trailer left unattended upon any bridge or where such vehicle or trailer constitutes an obstruction
to traffic;
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 168/571
4. Any vehicle or trailer left upon a street which constitutes an obstruction to traffic where the person or persons in
charge of the vehicle or trailer are incapacitated to such an extent as to not be able to provide for its custody or
removal;
5. Any vehicle or trailer left unattended upon a street or alley and so parked illegally as to constitute a hazard or
obstruction to the normal movement of traffic;
6. Any vehicle or trailer left parked on a public highway or street in the same place continuously for seventy two
(72) hours;
7. Any vehicle or trailer, the driver or custodian of which has been taken into custody by the police department
under such circumstances as would leave such vehicle or trailer unattended in a public street, alley, or restricted
parking area;
8. Any vehicle or trailer found being driven or towed on the streets not in lawful condition to be driven or towed.
B. A vehicle or trailer in the public streets in violation of this section may be cited and/or towed from the public streets
at the direction of a police officer. (Ord. 2001-03, 1-16-2001)
10.05.060:
(Rep. by Ord. 2001-03, 1-16-2001)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-16 - STREET PARKING IN WINTER MONTHS.
Go to new ordinance.
10.05.070: STREET PARKING IN WINTER MONTHS:
A person may not park a vehicle or trailer on any street between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. of any day
and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of the following day during the period beginning November 15 of one year, and continuing
until March 15 of the following year. In addition to any citation which may be issued for violation of this section, any
vehicle or trailer parked or left standing in violation of this section may be impounded as provided in this section.
For purposes of impoundment and removal, a police officer may immediately impound and remove any vehicle in
violation of this section which he reasonably believes constitutes a safety hazard to the public or snow removal
equipment. For all vehicles parked in violation of this section, a police officer may, after placing a notice on the vehicle,
impound and remove any vehicle or trailer which reasonably appears to have been unmoved for twenty four (24)
consecutive hours after the posting of the notice on the vehicle. The cost of impoundment and removal shall be
charged to the owner or any person who claims the impounded vehicle. (Ord. 2010-02, 1-5-2010, eff. 2-17-2010)
10.05.090: VEHICLES; REGISTRATION AND PLATES:
Every vehicle at all times, while being parked upon the public highways, streets, alleys, or parking lots of Mapleton
City, shall: a) be properly registered in the name of the owner thereof in accordance with the laws of Utah; b) display in
proper position valid, unexpired license (registration) plate(s), as required by law; and c) when required, current
validation or indicia of registration attached to the rear plate and in a manner complying with the laws of the state of
Utah, and free from defacement, mutilation, and obscuring matter so as to be plainly visible. However, if such vehicle
is not required to be registered in Utah, and the indicia of registration issued by another state, territory, possession or
district of the United States, or of a foreign country, complies with the laws of Utah and substantially complies with the
provisions hereof, such registration shall be considered as compliance with this section. (Ord. 1993-34; amd. Ord.
2001-03, 1-16-2001)
10.05.110: TRUCK ROUTES:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 169/571
A. The following streets are hereby designated as truck routes, and the truck route designations are exclusive. Any
large vehicle or truck as herein defined shall use only those routes specified herein or additional temporary routes
as shall be established by the chief of police, either by written permission upon application to deviate from the truck
route, or by the posting of temporary road signs during the period of temporary or alternate truck routing. Any
vehicle driven on any other streets than those herein designated, which is controlled by these regulations, shall be
deemed in violation of this chapter and the driver thereof shall be guilty of a misdemeanor as defined under the
traffic sections of this code. The following are designated truck routes:
1. State Highway 89.
2. State Highway 147.
3. Other streets as designated by express written permission of the fire chief and police chief, subject to such
necessary regulations as are set forth in the written permission in order to accommodate necessary deviation of
truck traffic from designated truck routes.
B. The above truck routes shall not apply to trucks delivering merchandise to or from local businesses, local
residences, established truck terminals, and maintenance facilities. The above truck routes shall also not apply to
construction trucks delivering to or returning from construction sites where it is not possible to use a designated
truck route. (Ord. 2001-03, 1-16-2001)
10.05.120: PARKING OF TRUCKS:
A. No truck or tractor trailer with a rated capacity of one and one-half (11/2) tons or more, or licensed for more than
eighteen thousand (18,000) pounds' gross weight, shall be allowed to be parked on the public streets in a
residential area for a period of time in excess of two (2) hours except while actually loading or unloading
merchandise.
B. Except as in subsection A of this section, no truck with a rated capacity of one and one-half (11/2) tons or more, or
licensed for in excess of eighteen thousand (18,000) pounds' gross weight, shall be parked on any public street
closer than thirty feet (30') to the entrance or exit or intersection with any private driveway, private street, alley or
public street.
C. For purposes of this section a truck shall be deemed parked, even though it is running, if the vehicle is left standing
for any period in excess of three (3) minutes when the same is not attended by the driver lawfully authorized to
drive said vehicle (except when unloading or loading as provided in subsection A of this section). (Ord. 2001-03, 1-
16-2001)
10.05.130: VACANT LOTS USED AS USED CAR LOTS:
A. It shall be unlawful for the owner of a vehicle or trailer or for any other person to allow such vehicle or trailer to park
on a vacant lot or parking lot owned by another person for the purpose of displaying it for sale without permission
of the lot owner. At no time may there be more than a total of two (2) vehicles or trailers parked on such a lot for
the purpose of displaying the vehicles for sale unless the owner or lessee of the property on which it is parked has
a city business license to engage in the business of selling vehicles or trailers at that location. It shall also be
unlawful for the owner or lessee of such property to allow more than a total of one vehicle or trailer belonging to
another person or persons to be parked on the property for the purpose of displaying them for sale unless the
owner or lessee is duly licensed to engage in the business of selling vehicles or trailers at that location.
B. In addition to a citation being issued, a police officer may immediately impound and remove any vehicle in violation
of this section which the officer reasonably believes constitutes a safety hazard to the public. (Ord. 2001-03, 1-16-
2001)
10.05.140: CLINGING TO VEHICLES:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 170/571
No person shall in any manner attach himself or herself to the outside portion of any vehicle moving upon a roadway.
No operator of a vehicle shall permit a person to do so. (Ord. 2001-03, 1-16-2001)
10.05.150: AUTHORITY TO CLOSE STREETS FOR PUBLIC OR SEMIPUBLIC PURPOSES:
The police chief, after consulting with the traffic engineer and the fire chief, shall, for public or semipublic purposes,
have authority to close or restrict the use of any public street by vehicular or pedestrian traffic for any period not to
exceed twenty four (24) hours. For periods longer than twenty four (24) hours, closure or restriction shall require
approval by the mayor or city administrator instead of the police chief, after consultation with the police chief, engineer
and fire chief, and in either case shall be in writing and shall be effective only according to the terms stated therein.
This section shall not be construed in derogation of other general administrative powers of the city to control use of
city streets. (Ord. 2001-03, 1-16-2001)
10.05.160: PENALTIES:
Violation of any section of this chapter shall be an infraction. Each successive day that the violation occurs, or is not
remedied, shall constitute a separate violation and a separate citation may be issued. (Ord. 2001-03, 1-16-2001)
Chapter 10.06
SPEED LIMITS
10.06.010: SPEED LIMITS ESTABLISHED:
If no special hazard exists, and subject to the state's ability to establish the prima facie speed limits on state highways
within the city of Mapleton, the following speeds are lawful:
A. Twenty (20) miles per hour when passing a school building or its grounds during school recess or while children are
going to or leaving school during opening or closing hours unless a physical barrier prevents access to the highway
or street from the school building or its grounds;
B. Twenty five (25) miles per hour on all streets within the city limits;
C. Thirty (30) miles per hour on 1600 North, 1200 North, Maple Street from Main Street east, 1600 South and 800
West from Maple Street south to 1600 South;
D. Thirty five (35) miles per hour on Main Street from 600 North to the north city limits.
Except as provided in section 41-6-48.5 of the Utah Code Annotated relating to the maximum speed in a school
zone, any speed in excess of the limits prohibited in this section is prima facie evidence that the speed is not
reasonable or prudent and that it is unlawful.
The limits specified in subsections C and D of this section shall become effective when appropriate signs giving
notice are erected upon the streets. (1986 Code)
Chapter 10.08
VEHICULAR TRESPASS
10.08.010: MOTOR VEHICLES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 171/571
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any type of motor vehicle (including, but not limited to, motorcycles, trail
bikes, dune buggies, motor scooters or jeeps) upon the private property of another without first obtaining the written
permission of the person in lawful possession of the property or, if the property is unoccupied, the owner of such
property. (1986 Code)
10.08.020: MOTOR VEHICLES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY; EXCEPTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any type of motor vehicle (including, but not limited to, motorcycles, trail
bikes, dune buggies, motor scooters or jeeps) upon any public property, except a highway or public street or private
street without first obtaining the written permission of the public entity which is in possession of such property, or if the
property is unoccupied, the public entity which owns such property, or as to a private street the owner of the property.
(1986 Code)
10.08.030: POSSESSION OF PERMIT:
Every person who operates any type of motor vehicle upon the private property of another or upon any public property,
except a highway or private street, at all times while so operating such motor vehicle shall maintain in his possession
the written permission required by sections 10.08.010 and 10.08.020 of this chapter, except that, if the document
grants permission to two (2) or more persons, a person named in such document need not have it in his possession
while another person named in the same document, riding in the same group and not more than three hundred feet
(300') from said person, has such document in his possession. (1986 Code)
10.08.040: PRIVATE STREET DEFINED:
As used in this chapter, "private street" means a street over which the general public has an easement to travel and
does not include driveways, paths or other ways over which no one has a right to travel except by license. (1986
Code)
10.08.050: EMERGENCY AND OTHER EXCEPTED VEHICLES AND USES:
This chapter does not prohibit the use of such property by the following:
A. Emergency vehicles;
B. Vehicles of commerce in the course of the conduct of normal business;
C. Vehicles being operated on property devoted to commercial or industrial purposes where such operation is in
conjunction with commercial or industrial use and where such operation is implied or expressly given by the person
in possession of the property;
D. Vehicles operated on property actually used for residential purposes and where such vehicles are there at the
express or implied invitation of the owner or occupant;
E. Vehicles being operated on public or private parking lots where permission to so operate is implied or expressly
given by the person in possession of the lot. (1986 Code)
Chapter 10.12
BICYCLES
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 172/571
10.12.010: APPLICABILITY OF REGULATIONS:
Regulations under this chapter applicable to bicycles will apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any street,
highway, or upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles subject to those exceptions stated in this chapter.
The parent or guardian of any child or ward shall not knowingly permit any child or ward to violate any provisions of
this chapter which is enacted to protect the life, health, safety and property of the citizens of Mapleton City. (1986
Code)
10.12.020: REGISTRATION:
It is recommended by the city council and police department that any person owning a bicycle within the city register
such with the police department before riding upon any street or bicycle path within the city. (1986 Code)
10.12.030: REGISTRATION APPLICATION:
Application for a bicycle registration can be made upon a form provided by the city through the chief of police. (1986
Code)
10.12.040: ISSUANCE OF IDENTIFICATION TAGS:
A. The chief of police upon receiving proper registration is authorized to issue a bicycle identification tag or license of
permanent material, which shall be attached to the bicycle. The effective term of registration will be determined by
the police department as it deems necessary.
B. The chief of police will not issue a registration for any bicycle when he knows or has reasonable grounds to believe
that the applicant is not the owner of or entitled to the possession of the bicycle.
C. The chief of police shall keep a record of the number for each registration, including the date issued, the name and
address of the person to whom issued, and the serial number on the bicycle frame for which issued. (1986 Code)
10.12.050: ATTACHMENT OF IDENTIFICATION TAGS:
A. Upon registration, the chief of police shall issue an identification tag or license with the registration number
assigned to the bicycle, the name of the city, and any other identification the police department deems necessary.
B. The tag, sticker, or license will be firmly attached to the frame of the bicycle in a position as to be plainly visible.
C. No person shall remove a tag, sticker or license from a bicycle after being registered except upon transfer of
ownership or in the event the bicycle is dismantled and no longer used on any street in the city. (1986 Code)
10.12.060: INSPECTION OF BICYCLES:
The chief of police or an officer assigned such responsibility will inspect each bicycle before registering the same and
shall refuse to register any bicycle which he determines is in unsafe mechanical condition. (1986 Code)
10.12.070: RENEWAL OF REGISTRATION:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 173/571
The police department will conduct an annual bicycle registration program and shall determine whether bicycles
already registered should be renewed. (1986 Code)
10.12.080: TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP:
Upon the sale or other transfer of a registered bicycle, the registrar shall report the transfer to the police department
and the registration number will either be canceled or reassigned to the new owner. (1986 Code)
10.12.090: RENTAL AGENCIES:
A rental agency cannot rent or offer to rent any bicycle unless it is registered and the identification number attached
thereto as provided in this chapter, and such bicycle is equipped with proper safety devices required by law. (1986
Code)
10.12.100: BICYCLE DEALERS:
Every person engaged in the business of buying or selling new and/or secondhand bicycles shall make a report to the
chief of police of every bicycle purchased or sold by such dealer, giving the name and address of the person from
whom purchased or to whom sold, a description of the bicycle sold by name of make, the serial number thereof, and
any other identifying numbers or licenses, if any, found thereon. (1986 Code)
Chapter 10.16
RAILROADS
10.16.010: CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS:
All persons constructing railroads within the limits of the city shall, at their own expense, construct and keep in repair
all water ducts, sewer drains, street crossings or receiving basins and all fixtures connected therewith and with the
distribution of water in the city which may be affected by them. The construction, alterations and repairs must be done
under the direction of the proper city official and subject to the approval of the council. (1986 Code)
10.16.020: CAUSING STREET OBSTRUCTIONS:
If at any time after the commencement of the construction of any railroad it shall appear to the council that any part
thereof shall constitute an obstruction or impediment to the ordinary use of any street or place or that it is being
operated contrary to the regulations of the city, the railroad company shall, on notice from the council, provide a
remedy satisfactory to the council; should the company neglect or refuse to obey the directions of such notice, the
council may, upon the expiration of the limit of the notice, cause the obstruction or impediment to be removed and the
street or place restored at the expense of the railroad company. (1986 Code)
10.16.030: SPEED RESTRICTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to run any locomotive, train or cars upon rails within the limits of the city at a speed
in excess of twenty five (25) miles per hour. (1986 Code)
10.16.040: BLOCKING STREET CROSSINGS:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 174/571
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any train, engine or cars to stand in or upon any street, sidewalk or
crossing so as to obstruct the ordinary travel thereon in excess of five (5) minutes, or to operate switch engines or cars
so as to obstruct the free passage over or the ordinary use of the streets. (1986 Code)
Title 11
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Chapter 11.04
SHADE TREES1
11.04.010: PERMITTED TREES IN PARKSTRIPS:
A. See "Mapleton's official trees list", exhibit A attached to resolution 2002-43.
B. All other trees, except those identified in subsection A of this section, are prohibited in the parkstrip, unless
approved by the shade tree commission. (Ord. 2002-11, 8-7-2002)
11.04.020: RECOMMENDATIONS AND ADMINISTRATION BY SHADE TREE COMMISSION:
The shade tree commission shall make recommendations to the city council concerning the use and planting of trees
on public property, together with the recommendation for their care and maintenance. The commission shall annually
recommend updates of the official Mapleton trees list, exhibit A, attached to resolution 2002-43.
The shade tree commission may also make recommendations concerning urban forestry for the benefit of the
residents of the city, which recommendations may be made available in newsletters, pamphlets, or similar media. See
section 2.40.030, "Plans And Recommendations", of this code. (Ord. 2002-11, 8-7-2002)
11.04.030: DISTANCE RESTRICTIONS:
A. No tree may be planted within thirty feet (30') of intersecting sidewalk corners.
B. Must be in accordance with the landscaping ordinance. (Ord. 2002-11, 8-7-2002)
11.04.040: AUTHORITY; PUBLIC PROPERTY:
The city shall have authority to exercise full control over the regulation, planting, care and control of shade and
ornamental trees and shrubbery now growing or which may hereafter be planted in any public street of the city; to
direct the work of planting, pruning, spraying, removing and irrigating the trees and shrubs and the protection thereof
for the public good; to remove any tree, or part thereof, dangerous to public safety, or which has become a nuisance;
to prohibit the planting, pruning, or removal of any tree upon any public street, except by permit from the city; to make
rules and regulations governing the planting, care of, and removal of such trees. (Ord. 2002-11, 8-7-2002)
11.04.050: INJURY TO TREES OR SHRUBS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to injure any tree or shrub growing in any public easement along any public streets
or on any of the public property within the city. (Ord. 2002-11, 8-7-2002)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 175/571
11.04.060: AUTHORITY; PRIVATE PROPERTY:
Mapleton City shall have authority, and it shall be its duty to order the trimming, preservation or removal of trees or
plants upon private property when they shall find such action necessary for public safety or to prevent the spread of
disease or insects to public trees and places. (Ord. 2002-11, 8-7-2002)
11.04.070: VIOLATIONS:
Any person violating section 11.04.010 or 11.04.030 of this chapter shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor. (Ord.
2002-11, 8-7-2002)
Title 12
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
Chapter 12.04
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS GENERALLY
12.04.010: WATER FLOWING UPON STREETS:
Every person who wilfully, carelessly or negligently obstructs, injures or floods any street or sidewalk by the flow or
seepage of water, or who wilfully, carelessly or negligently permits water under his control to escape in any manner so
as to obstruct, injure or flood any street or sidewalk is guilty of a misdemeanor. (1986 Code)
12.04.020: DISCHARGE OF WATER ON SIDEWALKS:
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, occupying or having control of any premises to permit water from the roof
or eaves of any house, building or other structure, or from any other source under the control of such person, to be
discharged and spread upon the surface of any sidewalk. (1986 Code)
12.04.030: MERCHANDISE ON SIDEWALKS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or keep, upon any sidewalk, any goods, wares or merchandise which he
may be receiving or delivering, without leaving a ten foot (10') passageway clear upon the sidewalk; and it shall be
unlawful for any person receiving or delivering such goods, wares or merchandise to permit the same to remain on the
sidewalk for a longer period than one hour. (1986 Code)
12.04.040: DRIVING OR RIDING ON SIDEWALK:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a self-propelled vehicle, or lead, drive or ride any animal upon any sidewalk,
except across a sidewalk at established crossings or to stop any vehicle or animal on a crosswalk so as to impede
public travel. (1986 Code)
12.04.050: OBSTRUCTION OF SIDEWALKS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct any sidewalk or street by playing games thereon, such games as the
game of ball, quoits, marbles, jumping, rolling of hoops, flying of kites, coasting, or to annoy or obstruct the free travel
of any foot passenger or vehicle. (1986 Code)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 176/571
12.04.060: SIDEWALKS TO BE SWEPT:
It shall be unlawful for the owners or occupants of places of business within the city to fail to cause the sidewalk
abutting thereon to be swept or cleaned each morning before the hour of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. (1986 Code)
12.04.070: REMOVAL OF SNOW AND RUBBISH:
It shall be unlawful for any occupant or the owner of any property abutting on any street, within the platted portion of
the city, to neglect or fail to clean and keep clean, of all weeds, ice, snow or rubbish, the sidewalks in front of his
premises. (1986 Code)
12.04.080: BUSINESS IN STREETS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or carry on any business, profession, trade, vocation or avocation on
any street or sidewalk or in or from any vehicle, stand or structure located in or upon the streets or sidewalks of the
city; provided, however, this section shall not prohibit any business or occupation licensed or permitted under the
provisions of this code. (1986 Code)
Chapter 12.08
EXCAVATIONS
12.08.010: DEFINITIONS:
APPLICANT: Any person who makes application for a permit.
BUSINESS: Any place in the city in which there is conducted or carried on principally or exclusively any pursuit or
occupation for the purpose of gaining a livelihood.
CITY: Mapleton City, a municipal corporation of the state of Utah.
EMERGENCY: Any unforeseen circumstances or occurrence, the existence of which constitutes an immediate danger
to persons or property, or which causes interruption of utility or public services.
ENGINEERING REGULATIONS, REGULATIONS, SPECIFICATIONS, AND/OR DESIGN STANDARDS: The latest
version of the engineering regulations, specifications, design standards or criteria published or adopted by the
superintendent of streets.
FAILURE: A work site restoration which fails to meet superintendent of streets specifications, or which results in a
deteriorated or substandard condition within the duration of the warranty period. Failure may be settlement of
surfaces, deterioration of materials, or other surface irregularities. Measurement of failure shall be further defined in
the engineering regulations.
INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER: A person providing to another, for the purpose of providing telecommunication
services to customers, all or part of the necessary system which uses the right of way.
OPERATOR: Any person who provides service over a telecommunications system and directly or through one or more
affiliates owns a controlling interest in such system, or who otherwise controls or is responsible for the operation of
such a system.
PERMITTEE: Any person which has been issued a permit and thereby has agreed to fulfill the requirements of this
chapter.
PERSON: Means and includes any natural person, partnership, firm, association, provider, corporation, company,
organization, or entity of any kind.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 177/571
PIPE DRIVEWAY: A driveway approach which uses a pipe or other means to bridge the gutter.
PRIVATE DRAIN LINE: A pipe installed solely for the transmission of water collected or generated on private property
such as drainage, spring, or storm water, or condensate into the public drainage system.
PROPERTY OWNER: Person or persons who have legal title to property and/or equitable interest in the property, or
the ranking official or agent of a company having legal title to property and/or equitable interest in the property.
PROVIDER: An operator, infrastructure provider, reseller, system lessee, or public utility company.
PUBLIC UTILITY COMPANY: Any company subject to the jurisdiction of the Utah state public service commission, or
any mutual corporation providing gas, electricity, water, telephone, or other utility product or services for use by the
general public.
PUBLIC WAY: Means and includes all public rights of way and easements, public footpaths, walkways and sidewalks,
public streets, public roads, public highways, public alleys, and public drainageways. It does not, however, include
utility easements not within public ways of the city.
RESELLER: Refers to any person that provides service over a system for which a separate charge is made, where
that person does not own or lease the underlying system used for the transmission and does not install any system in
the rights of way.
RESIDENT: The person or persons currently making their home at a particular dwelling.
STORM DRAIN: A dedicated pipe, conduit, waterway, or ditch installed in a right of way or easement for the
transmission of storm and drainage water. This term does not include private drain lines.
SUPERINTENDENT OF STREETS: The superintendent of streets, or his/her authorized representative.
SYSTEM LESSEE: Refers to any person that leases a system or a specific portion of a system to provide services.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM OR SYSTEM: All conduits, manholes, poles, antennas, transceivers, amplifiers
and all other electronic devices, equipment, wire and appurtenances owned, leased, or used by a provider located in
the construction, ownership, operation, use or maintenance of a telecommunications system.
WORK SITE RESTORATION: Means and includes the restoring of the original ground or paved hard surface area to
comply with engineering regulations, and includes, but is not limited to, repair, cleanup, backfilling, compaction, and
stabilization, paving and other work necessary to place the site in acceptable condition following the conclusion of the
work, or the expiration or revocation of the permit. (Ord. 99-05, 2-2-1999)
12.08.020: PERMIT REQUIRED; BASIS FOR ISSUANCE:
Any person desiring to perform work of any kind in a public way within the city, shall make application for a permit. The
decision by the city to issue a permit shall include, among other factors determined by the city, the following:
A. The capacity of the public way to accommodate the facilities or structures proposed to be installed in the public
way;
B. The capacity of the public way to accommodate multiple wire in addition to cables, conduits, pipes or other facilities
or structures of other users of the public way, such as electrical power, telephone, gas, sewer and water;
C. The damage or disruption, if any of public or private facilities, improvements, or landscaping previously existing in
the public way;
D. The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of construction from numerous excavations of the public
way. (Ord. 99-05, 2-2-1999)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 178/571
12.08.030: PERMIT APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
A. Application for a permit shall be filed with the city engineer on a form or forms to be furnished by the city. Property
owners and/or tenants for whom work is being done shall be responsible for obtaining the permits, provided,
however, contractors may obtain the permit in the contractor's name only. (Ord. 99-05, 2-2-1999; amd. Ord. 2013-
04, 2-19-2013, eff. 4-1-2013)
B. No person shall be eligible to apply for or receive permits to do work within the public ways of the city, save and
except the following:
1. Contractors licensed by the state as general contractors;
2. Providers; (Ord. 99-05, 2-2-1999)
3. Property owners installing, replacing, or maintaining less than five hundred (500) square feet or one hundred
(100) linear feet of sidewalk, curb, and gutter, or driveway approach, or other work approved by the city engineer,
upon a portion of the public way adjacent to their residence; or (Ord. 99-05, 2-2-1999; amd. Ord. 2013-04, 2-19-
2013, eff. 4-1-2013)
4. Persons offering a service which requires occupation of the public way, such as scaffold or staging, staging of a
crane, installation or maintenance of electric signs, glass, awnings, and painting or cleaning of buildings or sign
boards or other structures. (Ord. 99-05, 2-2-1999)
C. The city engineer may deny the issuance of permits to contractors, utility companies, or other permit applicants who
have shown by past performance that in the opinion of the city engineer they will not consistently conform to the
engineering regulations, specifications, design standards, or the requirements of this chapter.
D. When necessary, in the judgment of the city engineer, to fully determine the relationship of the work proposed to
existing or proposed facilities within the public ways, or to determine whether the work proposed complies with the
engineering regulations, construction specifications and design standards, the city engineer may require the filing
of engineering plans, specifications and sketches showing the proposed work in sufficient detail to permit
determination of such relationship or compliance, or both, and the application shall be deemed suspended until
such plans and sketches are filed and approved.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person other than city employees working on a city project to commence work upon any
public way until the city engineer has approved the application and until a permit has been issued for such work,
except as specifically approved to the contrary in this chapter. (Ord. 99-05, 2-2-1999; amd. Ord. 2013-04, 2-19-
2013, eff. 4-1-2013)
F. The disapproval or denial of an application by the city engineer may be appealed by the applicant to the planning
commission by filing a written notice of appeal within ten (10) business days of the action of the city engineer. All
appeals shall be set for the next regular planning commission meeting, unless insufficient time exists for public
notice as established by state code. (Ord. 2013-04, 2-19-2013, eff. 4-1-2013)
G. In approving or disapproving work within any public way, or permits therefor, in the inspection of such work; in
reviewing plans, sketches or specifications; and generally in the exercise of the authority conferred upon him/her
by this chapter, the city engineer shall act in such manner as to preserve and protect the public way and the use
thereof, but shall have no authority to govern the actions or inaction of permittees and applicants or other persons
which have no relationship to the use, preservation or protection of the public way. (Ord. 99-05, 2-2-1999; amd.
Ord. 2013-04, 2-19-2013, eff. 4-1-2013)
H. It shall be unlawful for a city, county, state, federal or other government employee to perform routine maintenance
work, not involving excavations without first having obtained a permit therefor. (Ord. 99-05, 2-2-1999)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 179/571
I. A permit is not required from the city engineer for hand digging excavations for installation or repair of sprinkler
systems and landscaping within the nonpaved areas of the public way. However, conformance to all city
specifications is required. (Ord. 99-05, 2-2-1999; amd. Ord. 2013-04, 2-19-2013, eff. 4-1-2013)
12.08.040: EMERGENCY WORK:
A. Any person maintaining pipes, lines, or facilities in the public way may proceed with work upon existing facilities
without a permit when emergency circumstances demand the work to be done immediately; provided a permit
could not reasonably and practicably have been obtained beforehand.
B. In the event that emergency work is commenced on or within any public way of the city during regular business
hours, the superintendent of streets shall be notified within one-half (1/2) hour from the time the work is
commenced. The person commencing and conducting such work shall take all necessary safety precautions for
the protection of the public and the direction and control of traffic, and shall ensure that work is accomplished
according to superintendent of streets regulations, the "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" and other
applicable laws, regulations, or generally recognized practices in the industry.
C. Any person commencing emergency work in the public way during other than business hours without a permit shall
immediately thereafter apply for a permit or give notice during the first hour of the first regular business day on
which city offices are open for business after such work is commenced. A permit for such emergency work may be
issued, which shall be retroactive to the date when the work was begun, at the discretion of the superintendent of
streets. (Ord. 99-05, 2-2-1999)
12.08.050: PERMIT FEES:
A. The city shall charge and the permittee shall pay upon issuance of the permit, fees for costs associated with the
work performed under the permit as outlined in the Mapleton City schedule of fees as it may be amended from time
to time by resolution of the city council. Such costs could include costs for reviewing the project and issuing the
permit, inspections of the project, deterioration of the public way or diminution of the useful life of the public way,
and other costs to the city associated with the work to be done under the permit. All costs shall be assessed in a
nondiscriminatory manner.
B. The city council may waive permit fees or penalties or portion thereof provided for in this chapter, when he/she
determines that such permit fee or penalty pertains to an encroachment on the public way involving a beautification
project which furthers specific goals and objectives set forth in the city's strategic plan, master plans, or other
official documents, including decorative street lighting, building facade lighting, flower and planter boxes, and
landscaping.
C. Additional charges to cover the reasonable cost and expenses of any required engineering review, inspection, and
work site restoration associated with each undertaking may be charged by the city to each permittee, in addition to
the permit fee. (Ord. 99-05, 2-2-1999)
12.08.060: PERMIT; CONTENTS; DURATION AND EXTENSIONS:
A. Each permit application shall state the starting date and estimated completion date. Work shall be completed within
five (5) days from the starting date or as determined by the superintendent of streets. Such determination shall be
based upon factors reasonably related to the work to be performed under the permit. Such factors may include, in
addition to other factors related to the work to be performed, the following:
1. The scope of work to be performed under the permit;
2. Maintaining the safe and effective flow of pedestrian and vehicular traffic on the public way affected by the work;
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 180/571
3. Protecting the existing improvements to the public way impacted by the work;
4. The season of the year during which the work is to be performed as well as the current weather and its impact
on public safety and the use of the public way by the public;
5. Use of the public way for extraordinary events anticipated by the city.
The superintendent of streets shall be notified by the permittee of commencement of the work within twenty four
(24) hours prior to commencing work. The permit shall be valid for the time period specified in the permit.
B. If the work is not completed during such period, prior to the expiration of the permit, the permittee may apply to the
superintendent of streets for an additional permit or an extension, which may be granted by the superintendent of
streets for good cause shown.
C. The length of the extension requested by the permittee shall be subject to the approval of the superintendent of
streets. No extension shall be made that allows work to be completed in the winter period without payment of
winter fees. (Ord. 99-05, 2-2-1999)
12.08.070: PERMIT; NO TRANSFER OR ASSIGNMENT:
Permits shall not be transferable or assignable, and work shall not be performed under a permit in any place other
than that specified in the permit. Nothing herein contained shall prevent a permittee from subcontracting the work to
be performed under a permit; provided, however, that the holder of the permit shall be and remain responsible for the
performance of the work under the permit, and for all bonding, insurance and other requirements of this chapter and
under said permit. (Ord. 99-05, 2-2-1999)
12.08.080: COMPLIANCE WITH SPECIFICATIONS, STANDARDS, TRAFFIC CONTROL
REGULATIONS; SITE PERMITTEE IDENTIFICATION:
A. The work performed in the public way shall conform to the requirements of the engineering regulations, design
standards, construction specifications and traffic control regulations of the city, copies of which shall be available
from the superintendent of streets, kept on file in the office of the city recorder and be open to public inspection
during office hours.
B. Where a job site is left unattended, before completion of the work, signage with minimum two inch (2") high letters
shall be attached to a barricade or otherwise posted at the site, indicating the permittee's name, or company name,
telephone number, and after hours telephone number.
C. All excavations shall be conducted in a manner resulting in a minimum amount of interference or interruption of
street or pedestrian traffic. Inconvenience to residents and businesses fronting on the public way shall be
minimized. Suitable, adequate and sufficient barricades and/or other structures will be available and used where
necessary to prevent accidents involving property or persons. Barricades must be in place until all of the
permittee's equipment is removed from the site and the excavation has been backfilled and proper temporary
gravel surface is in place, except where backfilling and resurfacing is to be done by the city; in which case the
barricades, together with any necessary lights, flares or torches, must remain in place until the backfill work is
actually commenced by the city. From sunset to sunrise, all barricades and excavations must be clearly outlined by
adequate signal lights, torches, etc. The police department and fire department shall be notified at least twenty four
(24) hours in advance of any planned excavation requiring street closure or traffic detour. (Ord. 99-05, 2-2-1999)
12.08.090: OTHER HIGHWAY PERMITS:
A. Holders of permits for work on highways owned or under the jurisdiction of other government entities, but located
within the city limits, shall not be required to obtain permits from the city under the provisions of this chapter, unless
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 181/571
the work extends beyond the back side of the curb, or beyond any other designated jurisdictional boundary. Any
city permit shall not be construed to permit or allow work on a county road or a state highway within the city without
an applicable county or state permit.
B. The superintendent of streets, in his or her discretion, shall have the right and authority to regulate work under
permits issued by other governmental entities with respect to hours and days of work, and measures required to be
taken by the permittee of said governmental entity for the protection of traffic and safety of persons and property.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing in this chapter shall be construed to impose any duty, implied or express,
on the city or its employees, officers, agents or assigns, relative to the protection of traffic and safety of persons or
property, arising out of the issuance of any permit issued by government entities other than the city, or arising out
of any work performed on any public way owned or within the jurisdiction of the city. (Ord. 99-05, 2-2-1999)
12.08.110: RELOCATION OF STRUCTURES IN PUBLIC WAYS:
A. The superintendent of streets may direct any person owning or maintaining facilities or structures in the public way
to alter, modify or relocate such facilities or structures as the superintendent of streets may require as set forth
herein. Sewers, pipes, drains, tunnels, conduits, pipe driveways, vaults, trash receptacles and overhead and
underground gas, electric, telephone, telecommunication and communication facilities shall specifically be subject
to such directives. The person owning or maintaining the facilities or structures shall, at their own cost and expense
and upon reasonable written notice by the city, promptly protect, or promptly alter or relocate such facilities or
structures, or part thereof, as directed by the city. In the event that such person refuses or neglects to conform to
the directive of the city, the city shall have the right to break through, remove, alter or relocate such part of the
facilities or structures without liability to such person. Such person shall pay to the city all costs incurred by the city
in connection with such work performed by the city, including also design, engineering, construction, materials,
insurance, court costs and attorney fees.
B. Any directive by the superintendent of streets shall be based upon the following:
1. The facility or structure was installed, erected or is being maintained contrary to law, or determined by the
superintendent of streets to be structurally unsound or defective;
2. The facility or structure constitutes a nuisance as defined under state statute;
3. The permit under which the facility or structure was installed has expired or has been revoked;
4. The public way is about to be repaired or improved and such facilities or structures may pose a hindrance to
construction; or
5. The grades or lines of the public way are to be altered or changed.
C. Any directive of the superintendent of streets under this section shall be under and consistent with the city's police
power. Unless an emergency condition exists, the superintendent of streets shall make a good faith effort to
consult with the person regarding any condition that may result in a removal or relocation of facilities in the public
way to consider possible avoidance or minimization of removal or relocation requirements and provide the directive
as far enough in advance of the required removal or relocation to allow the person a reasonable opportunity to plan
and minimize cost associated with the required removal or relocation.
D. This obligation does not apply to facilities or structures originally located on private property pursuant to a private
easement, which property was later incorporated into the public way, if that prior private easement grants a
superior vested right.
E. Any person owning or maintaining facilities or structures in the public way who fails to alter, modify or relocate such
facilities or structures upon notice to do so by the superintendent of streets shall be guilty of a class B
misdemeanor. All costs of alteration, modification or relocation shall be borne by the person owning or maintaining
the facilities or structures involved.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 182/571
F. The city may, at any time, in case of fire, disaster or other emergency, as determined by the city in its reasonable
discretion, cut or move any parts of the system and appurtenances on, over or under the public way, in which event
the city shall not be liable therefor to a person. The city shall notify a person in writing prior to, if practicable, but in
any event as soon as possible and in no case later than the next business day following any action taken under
this subsection. (Ord. 99-05, 2-2-1999)
12.08.120: IMPACT OF EXCAVATION ON EXISTING IMPROVEMENTS:
A. If any sidewalk or curb ramp is blocked by excavation work, a temporary sidewalk or curb ramp shall be constructed
or provided. Said temporary improvement shall be safe for travel and convenient for users, and consistent with city
standards for such.
B. Where excavations are made in paved areas, the surface shall be replaced with a temporary gravel surface until
such time as the permanent repairs are completed.
C. 1. At any time a permittee disturbs the yard, residence or the real or personal property of a private property owner
or the city, such permittee shall ensure that such property is returned, replaced and/or restored to a condition that
is comparable to the condition that existed prior to the commencement of the work.
2. The costs associated with the disturbance and the return, replacement and/or restoration shall be borne by the
permittee. Further, a permittee shall reimburse a property owner or the city, for any actual damage caused by the
permittee, its subcontractor, or its independent contractor, in connection with the disturbance of such property.
However, nothing in this subsection shall require the permittee to pay a subscriber or private property owner
when that subscriber or private property owner requests that the permittee remove, replace or relocate
improvements associated with the service provided by the permittee to the property owner and when the
permittee exercises due care in the performance of that service, or when the subscriber or private property
owner provided false information to the permittee on which the permittee relied to its detriment.
D. Examples of types of acts specifically included in this section are the following:
1. Removal of sod, lawn, shrubbery, flowers, trees, driveways, or fence, to install, trench, repair, replace, remove or
locate, equipment, cable or other appurtenances of the permittee;
2. Installation or removal of equipment or other appurtenances of the permittee's system within a private property
owner's property or residence which requires drilling, excavating, plastering, or the like on the part of the
permittee;
3. Temporarily relocating or moving a piece of personal property or a fixture of a private property owner (such as a
motor vehicle, fence, air conditioning, heating unit, or the like) in order to perform some sort of construction,
maintenance or repair by the permittee; or
4. Permanently removing a permittee's equipment or other appurtenances due to the revocation, termination or
nonrenewal of the franchise (if applicable).
E. Existing drainage channels, such as gutters or ditches, shall be kept free of dirt or other debris so that natural flow
will not be interrupted. When it is necessary to block or otherwise interrupt flow of the drainage channel, a method
of rerouting the flow must be submitted for approval by the superintendent of streets prior to the blockage of the
channel.
F. The requirements imposed upon the permittee extend to any subcontractor or independent contractor that the
permittee might employ to perform the tasks pursuant to the permit.
G. The requirements of this section shall not apply to the removal by a permittee, of a permanent structure placed by a
property owner in a public way, unless such property owner has received prior written permission from the city
granting the property owner the right to install a permanent structure on a public way, and such written permission
has been recorded in the office of the county recorder. (Ord. 99-05, 2-2-1999)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 183/571
12.08.130: RESTORATION OF PUBLIC PROPERTY:
A. The permittee shall, at its own expense, restore the surface of any public way to its original condition and replace
any removed or damaged pavement with the same type and depth of pavement as that which is adjoining,
including the gravel base material. All restoration shall conform to the engineering regulations, design standards
and specifications promulgated by the city and shall be accomplished within the time limits set forth in the permit,
unless additional time is granted in writing by the department.
B. At its option, the permittee doing the actual excavation work may request that the city restore the surface to its
original condition. The fee for such resurfacing shall be determined by the superintendent of streets in accordance
with its reasonable costs for such work and shall be charged to the person, firm, or corporation making the
excavation. Payment for said work shall be received by the city prior to the release of the bond. (Ord. 99-05, 2-2-
1999)
12.08.140: INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Before a permit is issued, the applicant shall furnish to the city evidence that such applicant has a comprehensive
general liability and property damage policy that includes contractual liability coverage endorsed with the following
limits and provisions or with such alternative limits and provisions as may be approved by the city:
1. A minimum of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single limit per occurrence for bodily injury, personal
injury, and property damage and not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) in the aggregate. The general
aggregate limit shall apply separately to the permit, or the general aggregate limit shall be two (2) times the
required occurrence limit. The coverage shall be in the nature of broad form commercial general liability
coverage. The mayor or his designee may increase or decrease minimum insurance limits, depending on the
potential liability of any project.
2. All policies shall include the city, its employees, officers, officials, agents, volunteers and assigns, as insureds.
Any reference to Mapleton City shall include the city, its employees, officers, officials, agents, volunteers and
assigns.
3. The coverage shall be primary insurance as respects the city, its employees, officers, officials, agents,
volunteers, and assigns. Any insurance or self-insurance maintained by the city, its employees, officers, officials,
agents, volunteers, and assigns shall be in excess of the permittee's insurance and shall not contribute to or with
it.
4. Any failure to comply with reporting provisions of the policy shall not effect coverage provided to the city, its
employees, officers, officials, agents, volunteers, and assigns.
5. Coverage shall state that the permittee's insurance shall apply separately to each insured against whom claim is
made or suit is brought, except with respect to the limits of the insurer's liability.
6. Underwriters shall have no right of recovery or subrogation against the city, it being the intent of the parties that
the insurance policy so affected shall protect both parties and be primary coverage for any and all losses
covered by the described insurance.
7. The insurance companies issuing the policy or policies shall have no recourse against the city for payment of
any premiums due or for any assessments under any form of any policy.
8. Each insurance policy shall be endorsed to state that the coverage shall not be suspended, voided, canceled, or
reduced in coverage or in limits, except after thirty (30) days' prior written notice by certified mail, return receipt
requested, sent to the city.
9. Each policy shall be endorsed to indemnify, save harmless and defend the city and its officers and employees
against any claim or loss, damage or expense sustained on account of damages to persons or property
occurring by reason of permit work done by the permittees, his/her subcontractor or agent, whether or not the
work has been completed and whether or not the right of way has been opened to public travel.
10. Each policy shall be endorsed to indemnify, hold harmless and defend the city, and its officers and employees
against any claim or loss, damage or expense sustained by any person occurring by reason of doing any work
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 184/571
pursuant to the permit including, but not limited to, falling objects or failure to maintain proper barricades and/or
lights as required from the time work begins until the work is completed and right of way is opened for public use.
B. Insurance is to be placed with insurers with an AM Best rating of no less than an A carrier, with a rating of "A7" or
higher.
C. The permittee shall furnish the city with certificates of insurance and original endorsements affecting coverage
required by the permit. The certificates and endorsements for each insurance policy are to be signed by a person
authorized by that insurer to bind coverage on its behalf. The city expressly reserves the right to require complete,
certified copies of all required insurance policies at any time. Consequently, the permittee shall be prepared to
provide such copies prior to the issuance of the permit.
D. If any of the required policies are, or at any time become, unsatisfactory to the city as to form or substance, or if a
company issuing any such policy is, or at any time becomes, unsatisfactory to the city, the permittee shall promptly
obtain a new policy, submit the same to the city for approval, and thereafter submit verification of coverage as
required by the city. Upon failure to furnish, deliver and maintain such insurance as provided herein, the city may
declare the permit to be in default and pursue any and all remedies the city may have at law or in equity, including
those actions outlined in this chapter.
E. The permittee shall include all subcontractors as insured under its policies or shall furnish separate certificates and
endorsements for each subcontractor. All coverages for subcontractors shall be subject to all of the requirements
stated herein.
F. Any deductibles or self-insured retentions shall be declared to and approved by the city. At the option of the city,
either the insurer shall reduce or eliminate such deductibles or self-insured retentions as respects the city, its
employees, officers, officials, agents, volunteers or assigns, or the permittee shall procure a bond, in a form
acceptable to the city, guaranteeing payment of losses and related investigations, claim administration, and
defense expenses.
G. A property owner performing work adjacent to his/her residence may submit proof of a current valid homeowner's
insurance policy providing liability coverage for damages caused by the anticipated work, in lieu of the insurance
requirements of this section.
H. A provider may be relieved of the obligation of submitting certificates of insurance under the following
circumstances:
1. If such company shall submit satisfactory evidence in advance that:
a. It is insured in the amounts set forth in this chapter, or has complied with state requirements to become selfinsured.
Public utilities may submit annually evidence of insurance coverage in lieu of individual submissions
for each permit; and
b. Said coverage provides to the city the same scope of coverage that would otherwise be provided by a
separate policy as required by this chapter; or
2. The work to be performed under the permit issued to the applicant is to be performed by the city, in which case
insurance or other risk transfer issues shall be negotiated between the city and the applicant by separate
agreement. (Ord. 99-05, 2-2-1999)
12.08.150: BOND; WHEN REQUIRED, CONDITIONS, WARRANTY:
A. Except as noted in this chapter, each applicant, before being issued a permit, shall provide the city with an
acceptable security (this may include a corporate surety bond, cash bond or letter of credit, as determined by the
city) in the amount of one hundred thirty percent (130%) of the city's estimate of costs, to guarantee faithful
performance of the work authorized by a permit granted pursuant to this chapter. The amount of the security
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 185/571
required may be increased or decreased at the discretion of the superintendent of streets whenever it appears that
the amount and cost of the work to be performed, and not satisfactorily completed, may vary from the amount of
security otherwise required under this chapter. The form of the security and the entity issuing the security shall be
subject to the approval of the city attorney.
B. Public utilities franchised by the city shall not be required to file any security if such requirement is expressly waived
in the franchise documents.
C. The security required by this section shall be conditioned as follows:
1. That the permittee shall fully comply with the requirements of the city ordinances and regulations, specifications
and standards promulgated by the city relative to work in the public way, and respond to the city in damages for
failure to conform therewith;
2. That after work is commenced, the permittee shall proceed with diligence and expedition and shall promptly
complete such work and restore the public way to construction specifications, so as not to obstruct the public
place or travel thereon more than is reasonably necessary;
3. That the permittee shall guarantee the materials and workmanship for a period of two (2) years from completion
of such work, with reasonable wear and tear excepted; and
4. That unless authorized by the superintendent of streets on the permit, all paving, resurfacing or replacement of
street facilities on major or collector streets shall be done in conformance with the regulations contained herein
within three (3) calendar days, and within seven (7) calendar days from the time the excavation commences on
all other streets, except as provided for during excavation in winter or during weather conditions which do not
allow paving according to engineering regulations. In winter, a temporary patch must be provided. In all
excavations, restoration or pavement surfaces shall be made immediately after backfilling is completed or
concrete is cured. If work is expected to exceed the above duration, the permittee shall submit a detailed
construction schedule for approval. The schedule will address means and methods to minimize traffic disruption
and complete the construction as soon as reasonably possible. (Ord. 99-05, 2-2-1999)
12.08.160: HOLD HARMLESS AGREEMENT; LIMITATIONS ON CITY LIABILITY:
A. The permittee agrees to save the city, its officers, employees and agents harmless from any and all costs, damages
and liabilities which may accrue or be claimed to accrue by reason of any work performed under the permit. The
issuance and acceptance of any permit under this chapter shall constitute such an agreement by the permittee to
this section.
B. This chapter shall neither be construed as imposing upon the city, its officers, employees and agents, any liability or
responsibility for damages to any person injured by or by reason of the performance of any work within the public
way, or under a permit issued pursuant to this chapter; nor shall the city, its officers, officials, employees, agents,
volunteers or assigns thereof be deemed to have assumed any such liability or responsibility by reason of
inspection authorized hereunder, the issuance of any permit, or the approval of any work. (Ord. 99-05, 2-2-1999)
12.08.170: WORK WITHOUT PERMIT; PENALTY:
A. A stop order may be issued by the superintendent of streets directed to any person or persons doing or causing any
work to be done in the public way without a permit. The abutting property owner shall be responsible for causing
work to be done.
B. Any person found to be doing work in the public way without having obtained a permit, as provided in this chapter,
shall be required to pay a permit fee equal to two (2) times the normal permit fee plus all costs to the city, including
legal fees incurred in discovering, investigating and stopping any work performed without a permit. For
replacement work, where a fee is not normally charged, the normal permit fee for new construction shall apply.
(Ord. 99-05, 2-2-1999)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 186/571
12.08.180: FAILURE TO COMPLY; DEFAULT IN PERFORMANCE:
A. Any permit may be revoked or suspended and a stop order issued by the superintendent of streets, after notice to
the permittee for:
1. Violation of any condition of the permit, the security, or of any provision of this chapter;
2. Violation of any provision of any other ordinance of the city or law relating to the work; or
3. Existence of any condition or the doing of any act which does constitute, may constitute, or cause a condition
endangering life or property.
B. A suspension or revocation by the superintendent of streets, and a stop order, shall take effect immediately upon
entry thereof by the superintendent of streets and notice to the person performing the work in the public way.
Notice to the person performing the work shall be accomplished when the superintendent of streets has posted a
stop work order at the location of the work and written notice has been mailed, return receipt requested, to the
address indicated by the permittee on the permit.
C. Whenever the superintendent of streets finds that a default has occurred in the performance of any term or
condition of the permit, written notice thereof may be given to the principal and to the surety on the bond, if there is
a surety bond. Such notice shall state the work to be done, the estimated cost thereof, and the period of time
deemed by the superintendent of streets to be reasonably necessary for the completion of the work.
D. In the event that the surety (or principal), within a reasonable time following the giving of such notice (taking into
consideration the exigencies of the situation, the nature of the work, the requirements of public safety and for the
protection of persons and property), fails either to commence and cause the required work to be performed with
due diligence, or to indemnify the city for the cost of doing the work, as set forth in the notice, the city may perform
the work, at the discretion of the superintendent of streets, with city forces or contract forces or both, and suit may
be commenced by the city attorney against the contractor and bonding company and such other persons as may
be liable, to recover the entire amount due to the city, including attorney fees, on account thereof. In the event that
cash has been deposited, the cost of performing the work may be charged against the amount deposited, and suit
brought for the balance due, if any. (Ord. 99-05, 2-2-1999)
12.08.190: FAILURE TO CONFORM TO DESIGN STANDARDS; PENALTY:
For failure to conform to the design standards and regulations, the superintendent of streets may:
A. Suspend or revoke the permit;
B. Issue a stop order;
C. Order removal and replacement of faulty work;
D. Require an extended warranty period; and/or
E. Negotiate a cash settlement to be applied toward future maintenance costs. (Ord. 99-05, 2-2-1999)
12.08.200: APPEAL OF SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, OR STOP ORDER:
Any suspension, revocation or stop order by the superintendent of streets may be appealed by the permittee to the
mayor or his designee, by filing a written notice of appeal within ten (10) days of the action of the superintendent of
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 187/571
streets. The mayor or his designee shall hear such appeal, if written request therefor be timely filed, as soon as
practicable, and render his/her decision within a reasonable time following filing of notice of appeal. (Ord. 99-05, 2-2-
1999)
12.08.210: TAMPERING WITH TRAFFIC BARRICADES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously or wantonly or without authorization and legal cause, extinguished,
remove or diminish any light illuminating any barricade or excavation, or to tear down, remove or in any manner alter
any rail fence or barricade protecting any excavation or other construction site. (Ord. 99-05, 2-2-1999)
12.08.220: CONFLICT WITH GOVERNING PROVISIONS:
Should there be a conflict between the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any other ordinance,
agreement, franchise, or other document governing the excavation of a public way, the more restrictive provisions of
the aforesaid documents shall apply. (Ord. 99-05, 2-2-1999)
12.08.230: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, a violation of any provision of this chapter, or failure to comply with an order
of suspension, revocation or stop work, shall be a class B misdemeanor. Each day the violation exists shall be a
separate offense. No criminal conviction shall excuse the person from otherwise complying with the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 99-05, 2-2-1999)
Chapter 12.12
STREET AND SIDEWALK OBSTRUCTIONS
12.12.010: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to cast, place or deposit upon any street or sidewalk:
A. Any broken ware, glass, rubbish, refuse matter, ice, water, mud, garbage, ashes, tin cans or other like substances;
B. Any vehicles, lumber, wood, boxes, fences or fencing, building materials, dead trees, tree stumps, merchandise or
any article or thing which would obstruct the street or sidewalk or any part thereof, or the free use and enjoyment
thereof, or the free passage over or upon the same, without the express permission of the council and then only in
accordance with the strict terms of such permission. (1986 Code)
Chapter 12.16
SIGNS AND BANNERS OVER STREETS
12.16.010: BANNERS ACROSS STREETS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, erect or maintain any streamers, banners or signs, or suspend the
same over any public street or alley of the city without obtaining a permit to do so from the council, applications for
which shall specify the width and length of the streamers, banners or signs, the height the same shall be suspended
from the pavements, and the length of time the same is desired to remain. (1986 Code)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 188/571
12.16.020: SIGNS OVER STREETS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or construct any sign, signpost, signboard, wood or metal awning,
permanent advertisement, arch or any other structure, above, over, in or around any part of any street or sidewalk in
the city, without first obtaining permission to do so from the council. Application for such permission shall be in writing,
and shall contain the name of the person for whose benefit the same is made, the period of time for which such permit
is so desired, the place where the structure is to be erected or constructed, the dimensions thereof, the material of
which the same is to be composed, and the manner of construction; which application shall be accompanied by a
blueprint, drawing or tracing of the proposed sign or other structure. Each sign shall be installed in accordance with
the requirements of the building inspector and building code, and meet the required specifications of materials and
construction. (1986 Code)
Chapter 12.20
REMOVAL OF SNOW AND/OR ICE
12.20.010: DUTY TO REMOVE:
It shall be the duty of the owner or tenant of any premises abutting or adjoining any public sidewalk to remove all snow
and/or ice from such sidewalk. (1986 Code)
12.20.020: NOTICE TO BE GIVEN:
It shall be the duty of the municipality to give notice to any owner or tenant of any property to remove snow and/or ice,
which notice shall be sent by registered mail to the last known address of such owner, tenant or occupant. The owner
or occupant shall have not more than twenty four (24) hours from and after receipt of such notice, within which to
remove the snow and/or ice as set forth in the notice. (1986 Code)
12.20.030: AUTHORITY OF MUNICIPALITY TO REMOVE:
Upon failure of an owner or tenant to comply with the provisions of this chapter, the municipality shall have the right to
remove such snow and/or ice and assess the cost thereof against the premises abutting the sidewalk. Such
assessment is to be certified to the county assessor or other proper county official having charge of the making of the
assessment roll and such charge shall be placed on the assessment roll, and collected in the same manner as other
municipal taxes are collected. (1986 Code)
Chapter 12.24
CULVERTS AND BRIDGES
12.24.010: CULVERTS REQUIRED OVER DITCHES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to convey water across any sidewalk within the city, except in a covered culvert or
box extending the whole width of the sidewalk. It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to use or maintain any such
culvert or box without keeping the same in good repair. (1986 Code)
12.24.020: CULVERTS; PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, build, put in or install in, over or across any public irrigation ditch,
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 189/571
public drainage ditch or public watercourse within the city, any bridge, culvert, piping or covering without first obtaining
a permit therefor as provided in this chapter. (1986 Code)
12.24.030: APPLICATION; APPROVAL:
Before making any such installation, the abutting property owner, or his authorized agent or representative shall
submit to the building inspector a written application therefor, signed by him, which shall supply information as to the
location of the proposed installation, type of material to be used, size of piping or culvert and such other pertinent
information as the building inspector shall deem necessary to enable him to determine if such installation complies
with the rules and regulations of the city and is of sufficient size and has a sufficient opening to permit the full and free
flow of water therethrough or thereunder. If the building inspector finds that the proposed installation meets the
requirements of the city, he shall issue to the applicant a permit authorizing him to proceed with the installation. There
shall be no fee charged for issuing the permit. (1986 Code)
Chapter 12.28
CEMETERY REGULATIONS
12.28.010: OFFICE OF SEXTON:
There is created the office of sexton, which office shall be filled by appointment by the mayor, by and with the advice
and consent of the council. (1986 Code)
12.28.020: DUTIES OF SEXTON:
It shall be the duty of the sexton to take charge of the cemetery and to improve the ground therein under the direction
of the council; to dig or cause to be dug all graves required for the burial of the dead therein, and keep a record of the
same; and perform such other duties in relation to the cemetery as may be required. (1986 Code)
12.28.030: SALE OF LOTS; MAINTENANCE:
A. Perpetual Maintenance: Any person who has heretofore purchased a lot, part of lot, or individual burial site in the
cemetery may, and any person who shall hereafter purchase such lot, part of lot, or individual burial site shall pay
into the treasury the sum of forty dollars ($40.00) for each burial site, and the sum of forty five dollars ($45.00) for
each burial site to be occupied by a nonresident of the city, as full maintenance of the lot or part thereof, or
individual burial site, and the city shall thereafter forever, at its own expense, care for, maintain and furnish water
for and irrigate the lot, part of lot or individual burial site in grass or some other type of vegetation.
B. Seasonal Care: The cost of seasonal care for burial lots, or portions thereof, in the cemetery shall forthwith be ten
dollars ($10.00) per year for the care of the lot.
C. Transferability: No burial site shall be transferred from one individual to another unless the payments for care,
either seasonal or perpetual as the case may be, are paid in full. (1986 Code)
12.28.040: RECORDS TO BE KEPT:
The recorder shall keep a record in a book to be kept for the purpose, of all conveyances executed as provided in this
chapter, stating the number of lot and block conveyed, the date of such conveyance, the person to whom conveyed,
and the amount received for the same. (1986 Code)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 190/571
12.28.050: INTERMENTS:
No body of any deceased person shall be interred within the limits of the city except in the cemetery, or in such other
cemetery as may be hereafter established by consent of the council. No body of any deceased person shall be
interred in any cemetery, nor taken beyond the limits of the city for interment, except by a written permit signed by the
health officer; nor shall a railroad or other common carrier of any such person receive any body for transportation
beyond the limits of the city without such permit. (1986 Code)
12.28.060: DEATH CERTIFICATES:
Before burying any dead body in any cemetery, and before transporting any dead body beyond the limits mentioned in
this chapter, the relatives or any other person having charge of the body must furnish to the health officer a statement
in writing of the death, which shall be recorded by him. The statement, as well as the record, shall include the names
of the person deceased, with the names of his parents or other relatives, if known; when and where born, if known; the
date and cause of death, together with the name of the attending physician, if any, or coroner, as the case may be;
also the date of burial, as well as the name of the cemetery, with the number of the lot where the body is buried, and
such other pertinent facts as may be necessary; or if transported beyond the limits mentioned in this chapter, the place
of destination. (1986 Code)
12.28.070: BURIAL PERMITS; DISINTERMENT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to bury the body of a deceased person in the cemetery without paying for and
obtaining, as provided in this chapter, a certificate of purchase of the lot used, or if he does not own or purchase a lot,
without furnishing a written permit from the owner or nearest relative of the owner thereof, which permit shall be filed
with the recorder. It shall be unlawful for any body to be buried in the cemetery or in any other cemetery within the
limits of the city except under the direction of the sexton; and before disinterment, the sexton shall require a permit
from the health officer and a written order from the owner of the lot authorizing such removal, which order he shall file
and preserve, and all such removals shall be recorded in a book kept for that purpose. It shall be unlawful for any
person to remove the body of a person who has died of a contagious disease within two (2) years from the date of
burial, unless the body has been buried in a hermetically sealed coffin, and is found to be so encased. (1986 Code)
12.28.080: SEXTON TO KEEP RECORD:
The sexton shall keep in a good and substantial and well bound book, a true and complete record of the death and
place of burial of every person so reported to him, said book to be furnished at the expense of the city. All records kept
in pursuance of this chapter shall be the property of the city, and at all reasonable times shall be open to the
inspection of the public, and at the expiration of his term of office the sexton shall turn all such property over to his
successor in office; and he shall report fully to the council as is required by that body. (1986 Code)
12.28.090: MARKERS AND VAULTS TO BE USED IN CEMETERY:
A. No person owning a lot in the city cemetery or any person or firm selling markers to persons owning lots in the city
cemetery shall plant, grade, or do any work in the cemetery except by written authority had and obtained from the
city recorder. The city council shall, by resolution, designate the type of markers, grade of ground, planting and
other improvements which may be permitted in the city cemetery. No marker or headstone of any kind shall be
placed in or on a lot on which perpetual care has been paid for and it shall be the duty of the sexton to see
perpetual care is maintained except where permission is first had and obtained. In no event shall any headstone or
marker be placed in the cemetery unless the headstone is constructed with a nine inch (9") plate extending
horizontally from the base of the headstone in order that maintenance of the cemetery may be facilitated.
B. No interment shall be made in the cemetery unless the body is placed in a cement vault meeting the requirements
as to strength as provided by the sexton. (1986 Code)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 191/571
12.28.100: COMPENSATION BY PRIVATE PERSONS:
A. The treasurer is authorized and required to collect from those requiring the services of the sexton the following fees:
for digging each grave for an adult and replacing earth, twenty five dollars ($25.00); for digging each grave for an
infant and replacing earth, ten dollars ($10.00); for removing each body, a charge per diem of fifty dollars ($50.00).
B. The sexton must perform his duty upon presentation of a properly executed receipt from the treasurer showing that
the fees, as set forth in this section, have been paid. (1986 Code)
12.28.110: BURIAL OF INDIGENT PERSONS:
Such lots as the council shall from time to time designate shall be reserved for the burial of indigent persons. (1986
Code)
12.28.120: DRIVING RULES IN CEMETERY:
Driving on lots, backing over graves, cutting corners or speeding in the cemetery is prohibited. (1986 Code)
12.28.130: DEFACING OR REMOVING SHRUBS OR MARKERS:
No person shall injure, deface, take or carry away from any grave or lot any monument, marker, tree, shrub, flower,
ground or any other property or ornament in the cemetery except with written permission of the sexton. (1986 Code)
12.28.140: ANIMALS TRESPASSING IN CEMETERY:
It shall be unlawful for the owner, caretaker or other person in charge of livestock to allow or negligently permit animals
to run at large or trespass on cemetery grounds. (1986 Code)
12.28.150: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to dig or attempt to dig any grave in the cemetery, or exhume or remove any corpse
from any grave therein without the permission of the sexton, or tie or hitch any horse or animal to any tree,
gravestone, tablet, tomb or monument on the grounds of the cemetery, or to cut in any manner, disfigure or injure the
main fence of any of the enclosures within the cemetery. (1986 Code)
12.28.160: ADOPTION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The council shall prepare and have printed rules and regulations for the operation of the cemetery, and such rules and
regulations will cover all matters necessary for the operation of the cemetery which are not contained in this chapter.
(1986 Code)
Title 13
PUBLIC SERVICES
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2020-01 - PUBLIC DRIKING WATER SYSTEMS . Go
to new ordinance.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 192/571
Chapter 13.04
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
13.04.010: CITY CONTROL OF SYSTEM:
The water and sewer system constructed by the city shall be the property of the city and shall be under the sole and
exclusive control of the mayor and council who may, from time to time, direct the construction of such reservoirs,
tanks, mains, service pipes and hydrants as the necessities of the inhabitants of the city may require. (1986 Code)
13.04.020: EMPLOYMENT OF SUPERINTENDENT:
The council with the advice of the mayor shall employ a competent and suitable person to care for the water and
sewer system of the city. This employee shall be known as the superintendent of the water and sewer system. (1986
Code)
13.04.030: DUTIES OF SUPERINTENDENT:
The superintendent shall, under the direction of the mayor and council, have charge of the water and sewer system
and all appurtenances and equipment thereof. He shall supervise the laying of mains and service pipes for the sewer
and water system and shall perform such other duties connected therewith as shall be required by law or by his
contract of employment. He shall supply a fidelity bond to the city in the amount of not less than five thousand dollars
($5,000.00) to assure the faithful performance of his duties, and the prompt enforcement, collection, and application of
all fees and charges due for the water and sewer service supplied by the system. (1986 Code)
13.04.040: SPRINKLING TRUCKS:
Sprinkling trucks or other vehicles for sprinkling will be regulated by the water department superintendent. (1986
Code)
13.04.050: ACCESS TO PREMISES:
The superintendent and his agents, with the consent of the property owner when necessary, at all regular hours during
the daytime, have access to places supplied with water from the waterworks system for the purpose of reading water
meters, ascertaining the amount of water used and the manner of its use, or inspecting the water meter for routine
maintenance. (1986 Code)
13.04.060: CITY NOT LIABLE FOR DAMAGE:
The city shall not be liable for any damage to a water user by reason of stoppage or interruption of his water supply
caused by fires, scarcity of water, accidents to works, or mains, alterations additions, repairs or from any other
unavoidable cause. (1986 Code)
13.04.070: FIRE HYDRANTS:
All public fire hydrants shall be under the control of and shall be kept in repair by the superintendent, and in case of
fire the fire department shall have free access to the hydrants. No other person shall open or operate any fire hydrant,
or attempt to draw water therefrom without special permission of the superintendent, or obstruct the approach thereto.
(1986 Code)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 193/571
13.04.080: SCARCITY OF WATER:
In the event of scarcity of water, whenever it shall, in the judgment of the council, be necessary, the mayor shall, by
proclamation, limit the use of water for other than domestic purposes, to such an extent as may be required for the
public good. (1986 Code)
13.04.090: UNLAWFUL INTERFERENCE WITH WATERWORKS OFFICERS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, molest, hinder or obstruct the superintendent or the health officer
or any of their employees, agents or servants while in the performance of their duties as provided in this chapter.
(1986 Code)
13.04.100: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The mayor and council shall make such rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter as
may be necessary for the further regulation and control of the city waterworks system. (1986 Code)
13.04.110: DELIVERY OF IRRIGATION WATER STOCK:
A. The purpose of this section is to provide for the delivery of irrigation water stock and the amount thereof to the city
as a requirement for issuance of a building permit and to provide penalties for the violation thereof, so as to
promote the health, safety and general welfare of the city and to these ends to provide for the orderly development
of the area and to provide municipal water and other facilities.
B. No permit shall be granted for the erection and construction of any building or other structures for which a permit is
required where culinary water will be used under the building code of the city, or a school or church unless the
person or applicant applying for the permit shall first convey to the city irrigation water stock based on the percent
of the lot using culinary water and irrigation water. This conveyance to the city is in consideration of the city
providing culinary water to the property.
The determination of the equivalent of water irrigation stock in different water companies shall be based on the
amount of irrigation stock supplying water to the particular land over the last five (5) years to the given area where
the building is to be erected and constructed.
C. Any firm, corporation, person or persons violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine in any sum less than two hundred ninety
nine dollars ($299.00) or by imprisonment for any term not exceeding six (6) months or by both such fine and
imprisonment. (1986 Code)
Chapter 13.08
SERVICE REQUIREMENTS
13.08.010: APPLICATION FOR WATER SERVICE; DEPOSIT:
(Rep. by Ord. 88-4)
13.08.020: TURNING WATER ON:
(Rep. by Ord. 88-4)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 194/571
13.08.030: SERVICE PIPES TO BE SEPARATE:
A. Service pipes must be so arranged that the supply to each separate house or premises may be controlled by a
separate stopcock and water meter placed within and near the line of the street curb. Before water will be supplied
through the service pipe, some person may agree to be responsible for and pay for all water used through the
service.
B. Where water is now supplied through one service, to one or more houses or persons, the superintendent may in his
discretion, either refuse to furnish water until separate services are provided or may continue to supply on
condition that one person shall be responsible for and pay for all water used through the service. (1986 Code)
13.08.040: SERVICE PIPES; SPECIFICATIONS:
All service pipes used underground shall be of cast iron, extra strong lead, galvanized iron, or tin lined lead, and laid
not less than three feet (3') below the grade, and of sufficient strength to stand the water pressure; and all such work,
alternations or extensions thereof, together with the size of the pipe, must be to the acceptance of the superintendent.
No extension of service pipes shall be made without first obtaining a permit therefor from the superintendent, and no
service pipe less than one inch (1") in diameter shall be connected with the water mains at the junction of any street in
the city. (1986 Code)
13.08.050: PLUMBING PERMIT REQUIRED; REPORT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to make any extension of any pipe or connect any fixture attached to the
waterworks system for any purpose whatever without first obtaining a permit from the water department. Within twenty
four (24) hours after the completion of any plumbing work connected with the waterworks system, the same must be
reported to the water department. (1986 Code)
13.08.060: INSPECTION PERMIT:
A. There shall be required by the city that any property owner or person in possession of property who desires to
connect to the sewer system, in addition to paying a connection fee, as provided in this chapter, shall obtain from
the city an inspection permit and pay the fees therefor. The permit is to be issued for the purpose of allowing the
city to inspect and approve the service line as to materials, workmanship and specifications prior to the time the
actual connection is made from the improvements on the property to the city system. The requirements as to use
of approved materials and as to depth of service line, cleanouts and other provisions shall be provided in printed
form and available at the city office, and such provisions shall be complied with before such physical connection is
made to the system.
B. Any person who is a licensed plumber, or an officer or director in a licensed plumbing company, who shall make
connection to the city sewer system without first having obtained an inspection permit, shall be guilty of a felony
and shall be subject to cancellation by resolution of the council. (1986 Code)
Chapter 13.10
MUNICIPAL ENERGY SALES AND USE TAX
13.10.010: PURPOSE:
It is the intent of Mapleton City to adopt the municipal energy sales and use tax, pursuant to, and in conformance with,
Utah Code Annotated section 10-1-301 et seq., "The municipal energy sales and use tax act". (1986 Code)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 195/571
13.10.020: DEFINITIONS:
CONSUMER: A person who acquires taxable energy for any use that is subject to the municipal energy sales and use
tax.
CONTRACTUAL FRANCHISE FEE: A. A fee:
1. Provided for in a franchise agreement; and
2. That is consideration for the franchise agreement; or
B. 1. A fee similar to subsection A of this definition; or
2. Any combination of subsection A or B of this definition.
DELIVERED VALUE: The fair market value of the taxable energy delivered for sale or use in the municipality and
includes:
A. The value of the energy itself; and
B. Any transportation, freight, customer demand charges, service charges, or other costs typically incurred in
providing taxable energy in usable form to each class of customer in the municipality.
"Delivered value" does not include the amount of a tax paid under part 1 or part 2 of chapter 12, title 59 of the
Utah Code Annotated.
ENERGY SUPPLIER: A person supplying taxable energy, except for persons supplying a de minimus amount of
taxable energy, if such persons are excluded by rule promulgated by the state tax commission.
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT: A franchise or an ordinance, contract, or agreement granting a franchise.
FRANCHISE TAX: A. A franchise tax;
B. A tax similar to a franchise tax; or
C. Any combination of subsection A or B of this definition.
PERSON: Includes any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, estate, trust, business
trust, receiver, syndicate, this state, any county, city, municipality, district, or other local governmental entity of the
state, or any group or combination acting as a unit.
SALE: Any transfer of title, exchange, or barter, conditional or otherwise, in any manner, of taxable energy for a
consideration. It includes:
A. Installment and credit sales;
B. Any closed transaction constituting a sale;
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 196/571
C. Any transaction under which right to acquire, use or consume taxable energy is granted under a lease or
contract and the transfer would be taxable if an outright sale were made.
STORAGE: Any keeping or retention of taxable energy in this city for any purpose except sale in the regular course of
business.
TAXABLE ENERGY: Gas and electricity.
USE: The exercise of any right or power over taxable energy incident to the ownership or the leasing of the taxable
energy. "Use" does not include the sale, display, demonstration, or trial of the taxable energy in the regular course of
business and held for resale. (1986 Code)
13.10.030: MUNICIPAL ENERGY SALES AND USE TAX:
There is hereby levied, subject to the provisions of this chapter, a tax on every sale or use of taxable energy made
within Mapleton City equaling six percent (6%) of the delivered value of the taxable energy to the consumer. This tax
shall be known as the municipal energy sales and use tax.
A. The tax shall be calculated on the delivered value of the taxable energy to the consumer.
B. The tax shall be in addition to any sales or use tax on taxable energy imposed by Mapleton City authorized by title
59, chapter 12, part 2 of the Utah Code Annotated, the local sales and use tax act. (1986 Code)
13.10.040: EXEMPTIONS FROM THE MUNICIPAL ENERGY SALES AND USE TAX:
A. No exemptions are granted from the municipal energy sales and use tax except as expressly provided in Utah
Code Annotated section 10-1-305(2)(b); notwithstanding an exemption granted by section 59-1-104 of the Utah
code.
B. The following are exempt from the municipal energy sales and use tax, pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section
10-1-305(2)(b):
1. Sales and use of aviation fuel, motor fuel, and special fuels subject to taxation under title 59, chapter 13 of the
Utah Code Annotated;
2. Sales and use of taxable energy that is exempt from taxation under federal law, the United States constitution, or
the Utah constitution;
3. Sales and use of taxable energy purchased or stored for resale;
4. Sales or use of taxable energy to a person, if the primary use of the taxable energy is for use in compounding or
producing taxable energy or a fuel subject to taxation under title 59, chapter 13 of the Utah Code Annotated;
5. Taxable energy brought into the state by a nonresident for the nonresident's own personal use or enjoyment
while within the state, except taxable energy purchased for use in the state by a nonresident living or working in
the state at the time of purchase;
6. The sale or use of taxable energy for any purpose other than as a fuel or energy; and
7. The sale of taxable energy for use outside the boundaries of Mapleton City.
C. The sale, storage, use, or other consumption of taxable energy is exempt from the municipal energy sales and use
tax levied by this chapter, provided:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 197/571
1. The delivered value of the taxable energy has been subject to a municipal energy sales or use tax levied by
another municipality within the state authorized by title 59, chapter 12, part 3 of the Utah Code Annotated; and
2. Mapleton City is paid the difference between the tax paid to the other municipality and the tax that would
otherwise be due under this chapter, if the tax due under this chapter exceeds the tax paid to the other
municipality. (1986 Code)
13.10.050: NO EFFECT UPON EXISTING FRANCHISES; CREDIT FOR FRANCHISE FEES:
A. This chapter shall not alter any existing franchise agreements between Mapleton City and energy suppliers.
B. There is a credit against the tax due from any consumer in the amount of a contractual franchise fee paid if:
1. The energy supplier pays the contractual franchise fee to Mapleton City pursuant to a franchise agreement in
effect on July 1, 1997;
2. The contractual franchise fee is passed through by the energy supplier to a consumer as a separately itemized
charge; and
3. The energy supplier has accepted the franchise. (1986 Code)
13.10.060: TAX COLLECTION CONTRACT WITH STATE TAX COMMISSION:
A. On or before the effective date of this chapter, the city shall contract with the state tax commission to perform all
functions incident to the administration and collection of the municipal energy sales and use tax, in accordance
with this chapter. The mayor, with the approval of the Mapleton City attorney, is hereby authorized to enter
supplementary agreements with the state tax commission that may be necessary to the continued administration
and operation of the municipal energy sales and use tax ordinance enacted by this chapter.
B. An energy supplier shall pay the municipal energy sales and use tax revenues collected from consumers directly to
Mapleton City monthly if:
1. Mapleton City is the energy supplier; or
2. a. The energy supplier estimates that the municipal energy sales and use tax collected annually from its Utah
consumers equals one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) or more, and
b. The energy supplier collects the municipal energy sales and use tax.
C. An energy supplier paying the municipal energy sales and use tax directly to Mapleton City may deduct any
contractual franchise fees collected by the energy supplier qualifying as a credit and remit the net tax less any
amount the energy supplier retains as authorized by section 10-1-307(4), Utah Code Annotated. (1986 Code)
13.10.070: INCORPORATION OF PART 1, CHAPTER 12, TITLE 59, UTAH CODE, INCLUDING
AMENDMENTS:
A. 1. Except as herein provided, and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of title 10, chapter 1,
part 3, municipal energy sales and use tax act, as well as this chapter, all of the provisions of part 1, chapter 12,
title 59 of the Utah Code Annotated 1953, as amended, and in force and effect on the effective date of this chapter,
insofar as they relate to sales and use taxes, excepting sections 59-12-101 and 59-12-119 thereof, and excepting
for the amount of the sales and use taxes levied therein, are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as if
fully set forth herein.
2. Wherever, and to the extent that in part 1, chapter 12, title 59, Utah Code Annotated 1953, as amended, the
state of Utah is named or referred to as the "taxing agency", the name of Mapleton City shall be substituted,
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 198/571
insofar as is necessary for the purposes of that part, as well as part 3, chapter 1, title 10, Utah Code Annotated
1953, as amended. Nothing in this subsection A2 shall be deemed to require substitution of the name Mapleton
City for the word "state" when that word is used as part of the title of the state tax commission, or of the
constitution of Utah, nor shall the name of Mapleton City be substituted for that of the state in any section when
the result of such a substitution would require action to be taken by or against Mapleton City or any agency
thereof, rather than by or against the state tax commission in performing the functions incident to the
administration or operation of this chapter.
3. Any amendments made to part 1, chapter 12, title 59, Utah Code Annotated 1953, as amended, which would be
applicable to Mapleton City for the purposes of carrying out this chapter are hereby incorporated herein by
reference and shall be effective upon the date that they are effective as a Utah statute. (1986 Code)
13.10.080: NO ADDITIONAL LICENSE TO COLLECT THE MUNICIPAL ENERGY SALES AND
USE TAX REQUIRED; NO ADDITIONAL LICENSE OR REPORTING REQUIREMENTS:
No additional license to collect or report the municipal energy sales and use tax levied by this chapter is required,
provided the energy supplier collecting the tax has a license issued under section 59-12-106, Utah Code Annotated.
(1986 Code)
13.10.090: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter is effective June 30, 1997. The municipal energy sales and use tax shall be levied beginning one minute
after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M., July 1, 1997. (1986 Code)
Chapter 13.12
USE REGULATIONS
13.12.010: REPAIR OF PIPES:
All water users shall keep their service pipes and connections and other apparatus in good repair and protected from
frost at their own expense, but no person, except under the direction of the water department, shall be allowed to dig
into the street for the purpose of laying, removing or repairing any service pipe. (1986 Code)
13.12.020: WASTE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any water user to waste water, or to allow it to be wasted by imperfect stops, taps, valves, leaky
joints or pipes, or to allow tanks or watering troughs to leak or overflow, or to wastefully run water from hydrants,
faucets or stops or through basins, water closets, urinals, sinks or other apparatus, or to use the water for purposes
other than those for which he has paid, or to use water in violation of the rules and regulations for controlling the water
supply. (1986 Code)
13.12.030: WATER NOT TO BE SUPPLIED TO MOTORS OR FOR IRRIGATION:
No water shall be supplied from the pipes of the city waterworks for the purpose of sprinkling or irrigation of gardens,
driving any motor, syphon turbine or other wheels, or any hydraulic engines, or elevators, or for driving or propelling
machinery of any kind whatsoever, nor shall any license be granted or issued for any such purpose except by special
permission of the city council. (1986 Code)
13.12.040: SPRINKLING DURING FIRE:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 199/571
It shall be unlawful for any person to sprinkle any lawn with water from the city waterworks system during any fire.
(1986 Code)
13.12.050: CONTINUOUS STREAMS OF WATER:
Continuous streams of water shall not be permitted to flow from hydrants, faucets or stops over wash basins, water
closets, or urinals, or from any apparatus for drawing water. (1986 Code)
13.12.060: USING WATER WITHOUT PAYMENT:
It shall be unlawful for any person by himself, family, servants, or agents to take or use water coming through the
water mains without paying therefor as provided in this chapter, or without authority, to open any stopcock, valve,
water meter or other fixture attached to the system of water supply, or in any way to injure, deface or impair any part,
or any appurtenance of the waterworks, or to cast anything into any reservoir or tank of the waterworks. (1986 Code)
13.12.070: TURNING WATER ON AFTER SHUT OFF:
It shall be unlawful for any person, after the water has been turned off from his premises on account of nonpayment of
dues, or for violation of the rules and regulations relating to the water supply, to turn the water on again or allow the
water to be used without authority. (1986 Code)
13.12.080: BEFOULING CITY WATER SUPPLY:
It shall be unlawful for any person at any point within three hundred feet (300') of any stream or watercourse, or
tributary thereof, from which culinary or domestic water for the inhabitants of the city is derived, where water is taken
into the waterworks of the city, to do or to permit to be done any of the following:
To construct or maintain any corral, sheep pen, pigpen, goat pen, chicken coop, stable or other offensive or
contaminating yards or outhouses; to deposit, pile, unload or leave any manure, or offensive rubbish, or carcass of
any dead animal; to drive or permit to run at large any loose cattle, horses, sheep, goats, hogs, or other animals; to
stake or graze horses, cattle, sheep, hogs, goats or other animals within three hundred feet (300') of the banks of such
stream; to permit any horses, cattle, sheep, goats or hogs or other animals to water directly from the stream; to throw
or deposit any garbage, or other deleterious matter of any kind anywhere within the limits; to wade or bathe in the
stream; to wash dishes or other articles in the stream; to construct, use or maintain any closet, privy outhouse,
cesspool or sewage disposal system, or any public bathhouse or swimming tank; or in any way pollute any such
stream, water supply or source of water supply. (1986 Code)
Chapter 13.16
UTILITY SERVICES; RATES AND CHARGES
13.16.010: UNAUTHORIZED USE OF CITY UTILITY SERVICES PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person, his family, or agents to open any stopcock valve or other fixture attached to the city
water system and/or to use the water coming through the water mains without first submitting an application for utility
service and receiving authorization, as provided for in this chapter. (1986 Code)
13.16.020: REQUESTS FOR CITY UTILITY SERVICES:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 200/571
A. Existing Connection: The owner of property desiring to obtain culinary water, garbage collection or other city
provided utility service to a premises which has been previously connected to the city water shall submit to the city
treasurer:
1. An application for service, to be submitted on forms furnished by the city.
2. An executed utility use agreement whereby the applicant agrees to abide by all rules and regulations governing
the use of the water, garbage collection and other applicable utility service and to pay promptly for the services
received as set forth on the billing notice. Upon satisfactory completion of the application process the city will
turn on the water valve and/or read the meter and establish the utility service account for the user.
B. New Connection: The owner of property desiring to obtain culinary water, garbage collection or other city provided
utility service to a premises which has not been previously connected to the city water system shall be authorized
to make the connection to the water system and receive utility services, subject to:
1. Receipt of a properly executed application and agreement form in accordance with the provisions of subsection
A of this section.
2. Receipt of payment of the required connection fee, public facility improvement fee and evidence of conveyance
of water right.
3. A determination by the city that there is sufficient capacity in the system at the location at which the service is
being requested to adequately accommodate the additional connection and that the connection will be in
accordance with city standards.
Upon satisfactory completion of the application process the applicant shall be entitled to make connection to the
water system and to receive utility services.
C. Services To Tenants; Responsibility Of Property Owner; Limitations: In the event that the premises is occupied by a
renter, tenant or person other than the owner, the use agreement provided for under subsection A of this section
shall be signed by the owner and shall provide that in consideration of the granting of the application the owner
agrees to pay for all services furnished to the premises by the city.
Any property owner acquiring utility services in accordance with this section shall be liable for the payment for such
services until such time that he/she notifies the city that the services are to be terminated. Such notification shall be
in writing or in person. (1986 Code)
13.16.030: COUNCIL TO ESTABLISH USER CHARGES AND CONNECTION FEES; BOARD OF
EQUALIZATION:
A. Rates And Fees To Be Established By Council: The amount of service rates and charges, penalty fees for
delinquency in payment, fees for connection to the water system and other fees applicable to the operation of the
utility system or service shall be as fixed from time to time by resolution of the city council. The council may also,
by resolution, establish various classes of users, enact rules for levying, billing, guaranteeing and collecting
charges for services, and setting forth such other regulations as are deemed necessary for the management and
control of the systems.
B. Council To Act As Board Of Equalization: The council is hereby constituted as the board of equalization of water
and utility rates to hear complaints and make corrections of any assessments or charges deemed to be illegal,
unequal or unjust. (1986 Code)
13.16.040: BILLING AND PAYMENT OF SERVICE FEES; FAILURE TO PAY; DISCONNECTION OF
SERVICE PERMITTED:
A. Charges For Utility Services To Be Combined Into Single Billing: The city may combine the billing for water, garbage
collection and any other service which may be provided by the city into a single "utility bill". Any such combined
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 201/571
billing shall delineate thereon the amount assessed for each utility or service. However, for purposes of payment,
determination of delinquency, and disconnection of water service, the billing shall be considered as a single utility
bill.
B. Billing Period: The utility billing period shall be bimonthly or at such other frequency as shall be set by resolution of
the city council. (1986 Code)
C. Procedure For Billing And Payment Of Service Fee; Failure To Pay: On or before the first day of each utility billing
period the city shall mail or otherwise deliver a written or printed statement to each user showing the amount of
charges for culinary water service, garbage collection and any other services provided to the user for the preceding
billing period, together with any late payment fees or other outstanding charges which shall have been assessed.
The statement shall also indicate the place of payment and the due date.
The full amount of the charges for utility services and any other outstanding assessments as set forth on the
statement shall be due and payable upon receipt of the statement and shall be considered past due on the
twentieth day of the month in which the statement is received (past due date). In the event that payment in full of
the charges assessed has not been received by the city prior to the past due date, the city shall be entitled to
assess a past due fee in an amount to be set by resolution of the council.
In the event that the city shall not have received payment in full of all past due utility charges and any past due fees
that shall have been assessed prior to the next payment due date, the account shall be considered delinquent and
the water service shall be subject to shutoff by the city. Prior to shutoff the city will make reasonable efforts to notify
past due utility customers of the pending shutoff. (Ord. 2009-15, 12-16-2009, eff. 1-27-2010)
D. Tenant Occupants; Owner To Receive Billings: In the instance where a premises is occupied by a tenant or person
other than the owner the city may, upon request by the owner, provide duplicate copies of all statements and other
notices to the tenant.
E. Disconnection Of Water Service For Nonpayment Authorized; Other Remedies: In the event that the occupant
and/or owner shall fail to pay any water or other utility service charges or any past due assessments thereon, or
shall use such services in violation of the provisions of this chapter or the rules and regulations adopted pursuant
hereto the city may cause the water to be shut off from such premises.
Before any water service which has been shut off as a result of nonpayment of service fees shall be restored, all
outstanding service charges, past due assessments and such extra charge for turning the water on and off as the
council may have established by resolution shall be paid in full.
The city is authorized and empowered to enforce the payment of all delinquent water and sewer service charges
by any action at law in the corporate name of the city1.
F. Turning On Water After Being Turned Off Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person, after the water shall have been
turned off for nonpayment of service charges or other violation of the rules and regulations pertaining to the water
or sewer system, to turn on the water or allow it to be turned on or used without authorization to do so from the city.
(1986 Code)
13.16.050: PENALTY:
Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be a class C misdemeanor. (1986 Code)
Chapter 13.20
EXTENSIONS TO WATER, ROAD, OR SEWER SYSTEM
13.20.010: APPLICATION OF CHAPTER:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 202/571
The terms of this chapter shall be applicable to all requests for extension of the city's water distribution system, and/or
sewer distribution system, and/or public road system when not included as part of a proposed subdivision, planned
development or similar project. (1986 Code)
13.20.020: INTENT:
It is the intent of this chapter to:
A. Provide for the logical extension of essential utility and road system improvements in a manner consistent with the
city's general plan and the economic capacity of the community.
B. Provide a means whereby property, which is ineligible for development because the property does not front on an
improved public street and/or is not adjacent to an adequate water line, and/or sewer line, may be made eligible1.
(1986 Code)
13.20.030: PROCEDURE:
A. Application For Extension: Any person desiring to extend a water main, and/or sewer main, and/or any street within
the city shall first submit an application and pay the required application fee to the city. Said application shall
contain a description of the proposed extension accompanied by a map showing the location thereof.
B. Referral To City Staff And Planning Commission: The staff and planning commission shall review the application
materials and provide a recommendation to the city council. Said review shall include an evaluation as to the
conformance of the proposal with city standards and consistency with the city's general plan elements (utility
general plan, major street plan, etc.).
C. Recommendation To Council: Upon completion of the review, the planning commission shall submit their
recommendations to the city council.
D. City Council To Act On Application: Upon receipt of the documents and the report of the planning commission, the
city council shall consider the question of the extension, and upon a motion properly presented, shall act to
approve or deny the extension. An action to approve shall constitute preliminary approval of the extension and
shall be binding upon the city subject to compliance with the terms of this chapter and any conditions which shall
have been attached as part of the approval.
E. Detailed Plans To Be Submitted; Final Documentation: Upon receiving preliminary approval from the council the
applicant shall submit:
1. Detailed engineering plans for the proposed improvement (when required).
2. Documentation, acceptable to the council, agreeing to construct any off site improvements to be included as part
of the extension, and accepting the terms and conditions relating to reimbursement.
3. Financial assurances guaranteeing construction of the proposed improvements. Said guarantees shall be
submitted and processed in accordance with the provisions of title 17, chapter 17.20 and section 17.04.110 of
this code. (1986 Code)
13.20.040: DESIGN REQUIREMENTS AND CRITERIA:
A. Water System Extensions:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 203/571
1. Conformance With City Standards: The design, location, materials and standards of construction shall be in
accordance with city standards as approved by the city engineer.
The design and sizing of all extensions shall be based upon considerations of adequacy to meet both present
and future requirements for domestic water supply and fire protection within the city.
2. To Be Connected To Existing Adequate Supply: The requested water main extension shall be connected to the
nearest adequate existing main as determined by the city.
3. Length Of Line Extension; Construction Of Off Site Lines:
a. For lots in all residential zones the line shall extend from the point of connection with the existing water main
to and across the full width of the lot.
b. For lots in the A-2 agricultural and nonresidential zones the new line shall extend from the point of connection
with the existing main to and across the width of the lot to a point which is one-half (1/2) the distance of the
frontage required for a lot beyond the center of the proposed main building. Provided that in all cases the
applicant shall be required to extend the line across his property a minimum distance equal to the minimum
frontage requirement of the zone.
c. In the event that the lot or parcel to be served by the proposed extension is not contiguous to the existing city
line the applicant shall, in addition to the portion of the extension fronting his lot, be responsible for
construction of the line across the intervening property (the off site portion).
B. Road System Improvements:
1. Conformance With City Standards: The design, location, materials and standards of construction shall be in
accordance with city standards as approved by the city engineer.
2. Consistent With Major Street Plan: Where the proposed extension corresponds with a planned road as shown
on the general street plan said extension shall be designed and located as set forth on the plan.
3. Length Of Street Right Of Way: The length of right of way for all street extensions shall be from the point of
connection with the existing street to and across the full width of the lot to be served by the street.
4. Length Of Street Improvements:
a. For lots in all residential zones the required street improvements shall extend from the point of connection with
the existing road, to and across the full width of the lot.
b. For lots in the A-2 agricultural and nonresidential zones the required street improvements shall extend from
the point of connection with the existing road, to and across the width of the lot to a point which is one-half
(1/2) the distance of the frontage required for a lot beyond the center of the proposed main building location.
Provided that in all cases the applicant shall be required to extend the street improvements across his property
a minimum distance equal to the minimum frontage requirement of the zone.
5. Street Improvements Standards: All street extension shall be hard surfaced. The minimum width of the hard
surfacing and the location and type of other required improvements (curb, gutter, sidewalk, etc.) shall be in
accordance with the city standards and specifications for the class of street proposed for extension. Extensions
along boundaries between two (2) parcels shall conform to the requirements for partial width streets.
C. Sewer System Extensions:
1. Conformance With City Standards: The design, location, materials and standards of construction shall be in
accordance with city standards as approved by the city engineer.
The design and sizing of all extensions shall be based upon considerations of adequacy to meet both present
and future requirements for usage of the sewer system.
2. To Be Connected To Existing Adequate Supply: The requested sewer main extension shall be connected to the
nearest adequate existing sewer main as determined by the city.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 204/571
3. Length Of Line Extension; Construction Of Off Site Lines:
a. For lots in all residential zones the line shall extend from the point of connection with the existing sewer main
to and across the full width of the lot.
b. For lots in the A-2 agricultural and nonresidential zones the new sewer line shall extend from the point of
connection with the existing sewer main to and across the width of the lot to a point which is one-half (1/2) the
distance of the frontage required for a lot beyond the center of the proposed main building. Provided that in all
cases the applicant shall be required to extend the line across his property a minimum distance equal to the
minimum frontage requirement of the zone.
c. In the event that the lot or parcel to be served by the proposed extension is not contiguous to the existing city
sewer line the applicant shall, in addition to the portion of the extension fronting his lot, be responsible for
construction of the sewer line across the intervening property (the off site portion). (1986 Code)
13.20.045: SPECIAL PERMITS AND BONDING:
A. It shall be unlawful to do any construction, excavation work, or to use construction or excavation equipment on or
across any street, curb, gutter, sidewalk, sewer line, water line or other infrastructure, addition or improvement in
Mapleton City without a public works permit from the city to do so. No construction or excavation work shall begin,
and no construction or excavation equipment shall be driven on or across any curb, gutter, or sidewalk until a
permit is secured.
B. All permits issued for construction or excavation work on or across any street, curb, gutter, sidewalk, sewer line,
water line or other infrastructure, addition or improvement in Mapleton City, for which a public works permit is
required, shall be issued only after approval by the city and upon the posting of a bond in an amount to be
determined by resolution of the city council. Said bond may be posted in cash surety, or property; however, surety
and property bonds must be reviewed and approved by the city prior to being accepted.
C. The provisions of any permit granted shall be construed as regulatory and not as contractual. The interest or right
of an applicant shall not be transferred to another except by written consent of the Mapleton City council. No
inherent or restrained right or privilege belonging to any abutting property owner is affected or interfered with nor is
Mapleton City corporation or any Mapleton City authorities to be held responsible for any damage claim which may
arise between the applicant and any property owner concerning said right of way or its occupancy or use.
D. Before a permit is issued, plans shall be furnished to Mapleton City with such copies of the working drawings as
may be required for approval and construction purposes. Where engineering is desired by and performed by
Mapleton City, the applicant, firm, or corporation signing permit shall agree to pay a reasonable engineering fees.
E. Applicant or applicant representatives shall inform Mapleton City twenty four (24) hours in advance when work is to
begin. All material and each part or detail of the work shall be subject at all times to inspection by Mapleton City.
Applicant or his firm or corporation shall be required to pay reasonable inspection fees. (Ord. 96-20)
F. The purpose of the permit and bond is to secure payment for any damage caused by the property owner, its agent,
representative or independent contractor to any street, curb, gutter sidewalk, sewer line, water line or other
infrastructure, addition or improvement in Mapleton City which is damaged during the work for which the permit
was issued. In the event of any damage as described above, the individual or entity applying for the permit shall be
solely responsible to the city for the damages caused. Payment to Mapleton City of any damages in excess of the
amount of the bond posted is the sole responsibility of the individual or entity signing the application for the permit
from the city. In addition to actual damages amounts, the individual or entity signing the application for the permit
shall also be liable to the city for all consequential damages, attorney fees and costs of court. (Ord. 97-13)
13.20.050: APPLICANT TO CONSTRUCT IMPROVEMENTS:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 205/571
All costs in connection with the construction of the water system, sewer system, and street extensions shall be borne
by the applicant. Provided, that the person constructing improvements shall be eligible for reimbursement for certain of
the improvements as hereinafter set forth. (1986 Code)
13.20.060: REIMBURSEMENT:
A. Eligible Improvements: Any developer that incurs the expense of installing the following improvements which are
adjacent to the property of another may receive reimbursement for part of that expense if an adjacent benefiting
party makes use of the improvement(s). Eligible improvements include:
1. Sewer main line or trunk line.
2. Culinary water main line or trunk line.
3. Pressurized irrigation main line or trunk line.
4. Asphalt and road base when built to full City standards.
5. Curb, gutter and sidewalk.
B. Reimbursement Agreement: The party installing the improvements shall enter into a written reimbursement
agreement with the City prior to recording of a final plat, or in the case where a plat is not required, prior to
installation of the improvements. The City Manager or his/her designee shall be authorized to enter into a
reimbursement agreement. The reimbursement agreement shall include the following:
1. Identification of all benefiting parties;
2. Identification of all improvements that are to be included in the agreement;
3. Identification of the total potential reimbursement amount and the prorated percentage assigned to each
benefiting party; and
4. The notarized signatures of the applicant and the City Manager or his/her designee agreeing to the terms of the
reimbursement agreement.
C. Noticing: Upon completion of a reimbursement agreement the City shall send by certified mail a notice within ten
(10) business days to all of the identified benefiting parties alerting them to the reimbursement agreement. The City
shall also record a notice with the Utah County Recorder on each benefitted property. The applicant shall
reimburse the City for all postage and recording costs.
D. Eligible For Reimbursement: The amount of the eligible reimbursement shall be limited to those improvements
installed by a party which:
1. Provide a direct benefit to property fronting on said improvements; and
2. Are greater than the roughly proportional share of improvements needed to service the development. (Ord.
2013-07, 8-20-2013, eff. 9-13-2013)
E. Reimbursement Amounts: The reimbursement amounts shall be based on the City Engineer's subdivision bond
estimates for each type of improvement. Upon collection of a reimbursement, the City shall retain one percent (1%)
as an administrative fee prior to remitting the reimbursement to the original developer. (Ord. 2018-11, 12-5-2018,
eff. 12-27-2018)
F. Reimbursement Period: The period for which a party is eligible to receive reimbursements shall not exceed five (5)
years from the date of the reimbursement agreement for roads, curb, gutter and sidewalk, and ten (10) years for all
other eligible improvements.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 206/571
G. Collection And Remittance Of Reimbursements: If within the reimbursement period described in subsection F of
this section an adjacent party makes use of reimbursable improvements, the City shall collect from said party the
reimbursement fee due based on subsection E of this section prior to the issuance of the first building permit for
the project. The reimbursement amount, less an administrative fee, shall then be remitted by the City to the original
party in accordance with the reimbursement agreement.
H. City As A Developer: If Mapleton City installs eligible improvements at the City's expense, the City may require and
receive reimbursement from developing parties pursuant to this section as though the City were a private party. No
reimbursement agreement as described in subsection B of this section shall be required.
I. City Council Review: The City Council may approve a reimbursement agreement that varies from the standards of
this section if it determines that special circumstances exist (i.e., oversized mains, City master plan, etc.) that this
section does not adequately address. (Ord. 2013-07, 8-20-2013, eff. 9-13-2013)
13.20.070: OVERSIZE FACILITIES:
Where the City determines that future growth in the area will require construction of a culinary water, secondary
irrigation and/or sewer main larger than twelve inches (12") in diameter, or other facility which is larger than is required
to serve the applicant, the City may require the construction of such oversize line or facility as a condition of approval
of the extension. (Ord. 2006-03, 1-4-2006, eff. 1-4-2006)
13.20.080: COUNCIL TO ESTABLISH FEES:
The City Council may, by resolution, establish fees and charges for the purpose of defraying the costs of processing
extension applications and the administration of this chapter. (Ord. 95-36)
Chapter 13.24
CONNECTIONS REQUIRED
13.24.010: SEWER CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS:
It is expressly provided that it shall be unlawful for the owner or other person having charge of or occupying any
property upon which a building shall have been or is being constructed for residential, commercial or industrial use,
any part of which building is within three hundred feet (300') of any street, alley, or way in which a public sewer is then
in existence and used in the city, to construct or permit to be constructed or to use or permit to be used any privy vault,
septic tank or cesspool connected with such building. Each such owner or other person shall within ninety (90) days
after having been given notice by the city that an accepted public sewer is ready to receive connections, therewith
cause such building to be connected with the sewer (except that if such building shall not, at the time such notice is
given, have therein any toilet or toilets, the owner or person having charge thereof or occupying any such building
shall have a period of 2 years in which to connect it with such public sewer) and it shall thereafter be unlawful for such
owner or other person to have the plumbing in such building remain unconnected to the public sewer or to maintain or
use or cause or permit to exist any privy vault, septic tank or cesspool to which the building is connected or which is
used by the occupant thereof. Whenever an accepted public sewer is available to receive connections therewith, the
manager of the system shall cause appropriate notice to be served upon the owner, agent or other persons having
charge of or occupying all property coming within the scope of this section, that the public sewer is ready to receive
connections therewith and that all plumbing must be connected with such sewer. (1986 Code)
Chapter 13.28
DRINKING WATER SOURCE PROTECTION
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 207/571
13.28.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to ensure the provision of a safe and sanitary drinking water supply for the city by the
establishment of drinking water source protection zones surrounding wellheads for all wells and springs which are the
supply source for the city water system and by the designation and regulation of property uses and conditions which
may be maintained within such zones. (Ord. 2004-04, 5-19-2004, eff. 5-20-2004)
13.28.020: DEFINITIONS:
DESIGN STANDARD: A control which is implemented by a potential contamination source to prevent discharges to
the ground water. Spill protection is an example of a design standard.
LAND MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES: Zoning and nonzoning controls which include, but are not limited to, the
following: zoning and subdivision ordinances, site plan reviews, design and operating standards, source prohibitions,
purchase of property and development rights, public education programs, ground water monitoring, household
hazardous waste collection programs, water conservation programs, memoranda of understanding, written contract
and agreements, and so forth.
POLLUTION SOURCE: Point source discharges of contaminants to ground water of potential discharges of all forms
of "hazardous substances" which are stored in containers in excess of "applicable threshold planning quantities" as
specified in SARA title III. Examples of possible pollution sources include, but are not limited to, the following: storage
facilities that store the liquid forms of hazardous substances, septic tanks, drain fields, class V underground injection
wells, landfills, open dumps, landfilling of sludge and septage, manure piles, salt piles, pit privies, and animal feeding
operations with more than ten (10) animal units. The following clarify the definition of pollution source:
Animal Feeding Operation: A lot or facility where the following conditions are met: animals have been or will be
stabled or confined and fed or maintained for a total of forty five (45) days or more in any twelve (12) month period,
and crops, vegetation forage growth, or postharvest residues are not sustained in the normal growing season over any
portion of the lot or facility. Two (2) or more animal feeding operations under common ownership are considered to be
a single feeding operation if they adjoin each other, if they use a common area, or if they use a common system for
the disposal of wastes.
Animal Unit: A unit of measurement for any animal feeding operation calculated by adding the following numbers:
the number of slaughter and feeder cattle multiplied by 1.0, plus the number of mature dairy cattle multiplied by 1.4,
plus the number of swine weighing over fifty five (55) pounds multiplied by 0.1, plus the number of horses multiplied by
2.0.
Extremely Hazardous Substances: Those substances which are identified in section 302 (EHS) column of the "Title
III Lists-Consolidated List Of Chemicals Subject To Reporting Under SARA Title III", (EPA 560/4-91-011).
POTENTIAL CONTAMINATION SOURCE: Any facility or site which employs an activity or procedure which may
potentially contaminate ground water. A pollution source is also a PCS.
REGULATORY AGENCY: Any governmental agency with jurisdiction over hazardous waste as defined herein.
SANITARY LANDFILL: A disposal site where solid wastes, including putrescible wastes, or hazardous wastes, are
disposed of on land by placing earth cover thereon.
SEPTIC TANK/DRAIN FIELD SYSTEMS: A system which is comprised of a septic tank and a drain field which
accepts domestic wastewater from buildings or facilities for a subsurface treatment and disposal. By their design,
septic tank/drain field system discharges cannot be controlled with design standards.
WELLHEAD: The upper terminal of a well, including adapters, ports, seals, valves and other attachments. (Ord. 2004-
04, 5-19-2004, eff. 5-20-2004)
13.28.030: ESTABLISHMENT OF DRINKING WATER SOURCE PROTECTION ZONES:
There are hereby established use districts to be known as zones one, two, three, and four of the drinking water source
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 208/571
protection area; identified and described in the city's drinking water source protection plans and as follows:
A. Zone one is the area within a one hundred foot (100') radius from the wellhead.
B. Zone two is the area within a two hundred fifty (250) day ground water time travel to the wellhead, the boundary of
the aquifer(s) which supplies water to the ground water source, or the ground water divide, whichever is closer.
C. Zone three (waver criteria zone) is the area within a three (3) year ground water time of travel to the wellhead or
margin of the collection area, the boundary of the aquifer(s) which supplies water to the ground water source, or
the ground water divide, whichever is closer.
D. Zone four is the area within a fifteen (15) year ground water time of travel to the wellhead, the boundary of the
aquifer(s) which supplies water to the ground water source, or the ground water divide, whichever is closer. (Ord.
2004-04, 5-19-2004, eff. 5-20-2004)
13.28.040: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses shall be permitted within drinking water source protection zones:
Any other open land use where any building located on the property is incidental and accessory to the primary open
land use.
Any use permitted within existing agricultural, single-family residential, multi-family residential, and commercial
districts so long as the use conforms to the rules and regulations of the regulatory agencies. (Ord. 2004-04, 5-19-
2004, eff. 5-20-2004)
13.28.050: PROHIBITED USES:
The following uses or conditions shall be and are hereby prohibited within drinking water source protection zones,
whether or not such use or condition may otherwise be ordinarily included as a part of a use permitted under section
13.28.040 of this chapter:
A. Zone one: The location of any uncontrolled PCS as defined herein.
B. Zone two: The location of a pollution source unless its contaminated discharges can be controlled with design
standards.
C. Zones three and four: The location of a PCS unless it can be controlled through land management strategies. (Ord.
2004-04, 5-19-2004, eff. 5-20-2004)
13.28.060: ADMINISTRATION:
The policies and procedures for administration of any source protection zone established under this chapter, including,
without limitation, those applicable to nonconforming uses, exceptions, enforcement and penalties, shall be the same
as provided in the existing zoning ordinance as the same may be from time to time amended. (Ord. 2004-04, 5-19-
2004, eff. 5-20-2004)
Chapter 13.30
PRESSURIZED IRRIGATION
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 209/571
13.30.010: CONNECTIONS:
The record owners, or their duly authorized agents, of all residential sites and all commercial sites located within
Mapleton City whose properties are adjacent to a street or easement containing the Mapleton City pressurized
irrigation system, may connect their properties to the pressurized irrigation system and become users of the system.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any property served by the pressurized irrigation system, or any user
thereof, to permit any person from other premises, or any unauthorized persons, to use or obtain water regularly from
the premises or pressurized irrigation fixtures. (1986 Code)
13.30.020: CONNECTIONS AND EXTENSIONS:
No connection shall be made to the pressurized irrigation system and no extension shall be made to any installation
served by the pressurized irrigation system until a permit has been issued by the city public works director. The
director shall not issue a permit until the required connection and other fees have been paid.
All pressurized irrigation system users shall keep their service pipe and connections and other apparatus in good
repair and protected from frost at their own expense, but no person, except under the direction of the city public works
director, shall be allowed to dig into the street, parking strip, sidewalk, or other public property or right of way for the
purpose of laying, removing, or repairing any service pipe. (1986 Code)
13.30.030: WASTING WATER PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any pressurized irrigation user to waste water by imperfect stop taps, valves, leaky joints or
pipes, or to allow tanks or watering troughs to leak or overflow. Additionally water shall not be wasted by allowing
water to run from hose bibs, open pipes, or other apparatus, or to use the water in such a manner as to cause it to
overflow into the neighboring yards, property, streets or sidewalks, or in violation of the rules and regulations set forth
by resolution for controlling the pressurized irrigation system service.
The city council may, by resolution, regulate, restrict, or limit the use of water during water shortage periods and shall
have the power to take all necessary means to make any necessary regulations as circumstances may require to
protect the users of the pressurized irrigation system. (1986 Code)
13.30.040: CITY TO HAVE UNRESTRICTED ACCESS:
The city shall at all ordinary hours after reasonable attempts to notify the owner or occupant have unrestricted access
to places supplied with water from the pressurized irrigation system for the purpose of examining the apparatus to
ascertain the amount of water used and the manner of its use. (1986 Code)
13.30.050: CITY NOT LIABLE FOR DAMAGE:
The city shall not be liable for any damage to a pressurized irrigation user by reasons of stoppage or interruption of the
pressurized irrigation supply caused by fires, scarcity of water, accidents to works or mains, alterations, additions,
repairs, or from any other cause. (1986 Code)
13.30.060: WATER NOT FOR MOTORS:
No water shall be supplied from the pipes of the pressurized irrigation system for the purposes of driving any motor,
siphon, turbine, or other wheels, or any hydraulic engines, or elevators, or for driving or propelling machinery of any
kind, nor shall any license be granted or issued for any such purpose except by special permission of the city council.
(1986 Code)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 210/571
13.30.070: PROHIBITIONS:
A. Use of pressurized irrigation water shall be limited to providing water to the landscaping only and not for
commercial production or agricultural use.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person, after the pressurized irrigation has been turned off from the premises for either
nonpayment of utility charges as provided for herein or for a violation of the rules and regulations pertaining to the
Mapleton City water, sewer, and pressurized irrigation systems, to turn on or allow the water to be turned on or
used without authorization from the Mapleton City water superintendent.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to destroy, deface, injure, or interfere with the operation of any part, pipe, fixture,
appliance, or appurtenance of the pressurized irrigation system.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to place or introduce into the pressurized irrigation system or any source of water
supplying the system any matter, substance, chemical, or compound without authorization from the Mapleton City
water superintendent.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person to connect any part of the pressurized irrigation system to any part of any
culinary water system to create a potential cross connection whereby irrigation water could be introduced to any
system that provides culinary water.
F. It shall be unlawful for any person to use substantial quantities of water from the pressurized irrigation system for
the purpose of flood irrigating any property. Except for incidental watering of shrubs, flowers, trees, and other
limited use applications, water from the pressurized irrigation system used for irrigation of lawns, gardens, and
other irrigation applications must be applied through either a sprinkler or drip irrigation system, including sprinklers
attached to garden hoses. (1986 Code)
13.30.080: FAILURE TO PAY FOR SERVICES:
If the owner of any of the premises fails to pay the required fees and charges applicable to the pressurized irrigation
system, or violates any provisions of this chapter, the city may cause the utilities, including, but not limited to, culinary
water and pressurized irrigation water service, to be shut off from the premises, and the city shall not be required to
turn the utility on again until all arrears are paid in full. (1986 Code)
13.30.090: SHUT OFF VALVE:
Persons connecting to the pressurized irrigation system shall be required to provide and install a valve independent of
the city's shut off valve with which they may control the pressurized irrigation service to their premises. At no time will
a person be allowed to tamper with or operate the city's shut off valve unless acting under the direction of the city
public works director. (1986 Code)
13.30.100: USE OF CULINARY WATER:
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to use culinary water for outside watering of lawns or plants if the property
is connected to the pressurized irrigation system and water is available in the system. (1986 Code)
13.30.110: FEES:
The fees for connection to and use of the secondary irrigation system shall be established and subsequently modified
by resolution of the Mapleton City council, and shall be published with the Mapleton schedule of fees. (1986 Code)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 211/571
13.30.120: VIOLATIONS:
A. Criminal Prosecution: A violation of the provisions of this chapter prohibiting a cross connection between the
pressurized irrigation system and the Mapleton City culinary water system constitutes a class B misdemeanor. All
other violations of this ordinance constitute a class C misdemeanor.
B. Presumption: The owner of the property where a cross contamination occurs shall be presumed to be responsible
for any violation of this chapter.
C. Civil Penalties: In addition to the city's ability to prosecute violations in criminal proceedings, a violation of any of
the provisions contained herein shall also subject the violator to civil penalties including termination of secondary
water supply until proof of termination of the violation is presented to the public works director. Where it is
determined a cross connection exists the property owner shall pay to the city an administrative reimbursement
equal to the actual costs incurred by the city. Actual costs shall include costs of engineers, city employees, the city
attorney and court costs, if necessary, to locate the cross connection, protect the city water system from cross
contamination, and to collect reimbursement from the property owner. In the event of a second violation of the
same section of this chapter by a property owner, the property owner shall pay an administrative penalty equal to
twice the actual costs incurred by the city. (1986 Code)
Chapter 13.32
UTILITY ROAD FUND
13.32.010: INTENT IN CREATING A ROAD UTILITY FUND:
The city council hereby finds, determines, and declares that the public necessity of providing maintenance, upkeep,
improvement, and repair of the city's streets and related facilities within the right of way requires the establishment of a
comprehensive road utility with the purpose and power of undertaking such maintenance and improvement of city
streets and related facilities as may be necessary and proper, with such mandate to include, without limitation, the
following activities: patching, crack sealing, seal coating, overlaying and other activities as are necessary in order that
local streets may be properly maintained to safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the city and its inhabitants. As
part of the establishment of this utility, a utility road fund ("fund") is hereby created for the purpose of providing funds
for the maintenance of Mapleton City streets. Insofar as possible to do so with funds available, and in accordance with
policies adopted by the city council, the city intends to maintain only Mapleton City public streets and rights of way and
shall not use funds for the maintenance of private streets, rights of way, or easements. (Ord. 2016-04, 7-20-2016, eff.
8-16-2016)
13.32.020: DEFINITIONS:
COMMERCIAL: A nonpublic use, nonresidential land use including, but not limited to, industrial, office, retail, for profit
education, for profit medical facilities, or professional services establishments.
PUBLIC USE: A land use for a tax exempt property, including, but not limited to, government property, school district
property, education or religious property, or tax exempt medical facilities.
RESIDENTIAL: A one-family detached, semidetached (twin home), attached (townhome - side by side under separate
ownership), or apartment dwelling unit arranged, designed for, and occupied by one family living independently of
each other.
STREET: Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, viaduct, alley, or other way for the movement of
vehicular traffic, or a street or way shown upon a plat, heretofore approved, pursuant to law or approved by official
action; and includes the land between street lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement
shoulders, gutter, parking areas, and other areas within the right of way. For the purposes of this chapter, sidewalks
are not considered as part of streets. (Ord. 2016-04, 7-20-2016, eff. 8-16-2016)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 212/571
13.32.030: ESTABLISHMENT OF UTILITY ROAD FUND:
There is hereby created a utility road fund, to be reported as a capital improvement, to be funded by a fee ("fee") to be
paid by the users of Mapleton City utilities within the corporate limits of Mapleton City. Such fee shall be established by
resolution of the city council in such amounts as deemed necessary to provide funds to properly maintain city streets.
The amount of the fee shall be adopted in the consolidated utility fee schedule, which may be amended as needed by
resolution of the city council. The amount of the fee charged shall be based upon the following land use categories:
A. Residential.
B. Commercial/public use. (Ord. 2016-04, 7-20-2016, eff. 8-16-2016)
13.32.040: BILLING AND COLLECTION:
The utility road fee shall be billed and collected with and as part of the monthly consolidated utility bill. The person(s)
responsible for payment of the fee shall be the same person(s) responsible for payment of other city utilities. All such
bills shall be rendered monthly by the city and shall become due and payable in accordance with the rules and
regulations adopted by the city pertaining to the collection of utility fees, and the city's finance officers shall place all
such fees so collected into the fund to be deposited and separately kept to be used only for the road utility purposes
provided herein. (Ord. 2016-04, 7-20-2016, eff. 8-16-2016)
13.32.050: ENFORCEMENT:
Any charge due hereunder which is not paid when due may be recovered in an action at law or equity by the city. In
addition to any other remedies or penalties provided by this chapter or any other ordinance of the city, failure of any
person responsible for the payment of city utilities to timely pay the charges when due shall subject such person to
discontinuance of utility services provided by the city, consistent with city policies regarding termination of utility
services. (Ord. 2016-04, 7-20-2016, eff. 8-16-2016)
13.32.060: DEDICATION OF FUNDS:
All funds collected by the city from this fee shall annually be paid into the utility road fund, which is hereby created as
an established capital improvement fund in the city budget. Such revenues shall be used for the purposes of the
operation, improvement, and maintenance of existing Mapleton City streets. It shall not be required that the
operations, improvement, and maintenance expenditures from the fund specifically relate to any particular property
from which the fees were collected. (Ord. 2016-04, 7-20-2016, eff. 8-16-2016)
13.32.070: ANNUAL REPORT AND GAS TAX REVENUES:
A. Each year during the annual budget process, the city council shall receive an annual report detailing the income
and expenditures of the fund. This report shall be in writing and shall be presented at a meeting of the city council
by representatives of the public works department or the finance department.
B. In the event that any state or county legislation is enacted that either changes the rate of a tax or enacts a new tax,
the purpose of which tax is to provide funds for the operation, improvement, or maintenance of municipal streets,
and that results in the city receiving increased revenues dedicated to that purpose, the city council shall also hold a
public hearing not more than twelve (12) months following the effective date of such legislation, to allow sufficient
time to gather necessary and relevant data, to specifically consider the question of whether the fee should be
reduced to offset, either entirely or partially, those increased revenues. Such hearing may be held as a part of the
public hearing held on the city budget, so long as this question is specifically addressed. (Ord. 2016-04, 7-20-2016,
eff. 8-16-2016)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 213/571
Title 14
SEWER REGULATIONS
Chapter 14.20
SEWER
14.20.010: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used in this chapter shall be as follows:
ADDENDUM: The document amended hereto entitled "Service User Charge System". The addendum is incorporated
in this chapter as section 14.20.780.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD5): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic
matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty degrees centigrade (20°C), expressed in
milligrams per liter.
BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from
soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning
five feet (5') (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, also called
house connection.
CESSPOOL: An underground reservoir for liquid waste (as household sewage).
COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL FLOW: Those users of the system with BOD5 of more than two hundred milligrams
per liter (200 mg/l) and/or TSS of more than two hundred fifty milligrams per liter (250 mg/l).
EASEMENT: An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
FLOATABLE OIL: Oil, fat, or grease in physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment
in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is properly pretreated
and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system.
GARBAGE: The animal and vegetable waste resulting from processes, trade, or business as distinct from domestic or
sanitary wastes.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES: The wastewater from industrial processes, trade, or business as distinct from domestic or
sanitary wastes.
MAY: Is permissive (see also definition of Shall).
NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet (including storm sewers), into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of
surface or ground water.
OWNER: The owner(s) of the real property to which the sewer system is connected, or to which the sewer system is
required to be connected, which ownership is reflected on the records of the Utah County recorder as of the date a
charge or fee is assessed by the city. Any person who sells real property, subject to a charge or fee assessed under
this chapter, by means of a contract or instrument which does not transfer legal title to the buyer, shall be deemed the
owner of the premises for purposes of this chapter.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation, or group.
pH: The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogenous concentration. The concentration is the weight of hydrogenous,
in grams, per liter of solution. Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of 7 and a hydrogenous concentration of 107.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 214/571
PRETREATMENT OR TREATMENT: The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the
alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or
otherwise introducing such pollutants into the POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical,
chemical or biological means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d).
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS: Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a
national pretreatment standard imposed on an industrial user.
PRIVY: A small building having a bench with holes through which the user may defecate or urinate.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE: The wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that have
been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in
public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER: A common sewer controlled by a governmental agency, public utility, or the city.
RESIDENTIAL FLOWS: The average monthly wastewater flow from connections with BOD5 of less than or equal to
two hundred milligrams per liter (200 mg/l) and TSS of less than or equal to two hundred fifty milligrams per liter (250
mg/l). "Average monthly winter flow" is defined as the April water meter reading less the October water reading.
SANITARY SEWER: A sewer that carries liquid and water carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings,
industrial plants, and institutions together with minor quantities of ground, storm, and surface waters that are not
admitted intentionally.
SEPTIC TANK: A tank in which the solid matter of continuous flowing sewage is disintegrated by bacteria.
SEWAGE: The spent water of a community. The preferred term is "wastewater".
SEWER: A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.
SHALL: Is mandatory (see also definition of May).
SLUG: Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow
exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty four
(24) hour concentration or flows during normal operation and shall adversely affect the collection system and/or
performance of the wastewater treatment works.
STORM DRAIN (Sometimes Termed "Storm Sewer"): A drain or sewer for conveying water, ground water, subsurface
water, or unpolluted water from any source.
SUPERINTENDENT: The director of public works of Mapleton City or his authorized deputy, agent, or representative
as designated by the city.
SURCHARGE: An additional sum added to the usual amount or cost.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS: Total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in water,
wastewater, or other liquids, and that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in "Standard Methods For The
Examination Of Water And Waste Water" and referred to as nonfilterable residue.
SYSTEM: The sewer, wastewater or combined wastewater and storm or surface water facilities of the city.
UNPOLLUTED WATER: The water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would
not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
WASTEWATER: The spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid
and water carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with any
ground water, surface water, and storm water that may be present.
WASTEWATER FACILITIES: The structures, equipment, and processes required to collect, carry away, and treat
domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the effluent.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 215/571
WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS: An arrangement of devices and structures for treating wastewater, industrial
wastes, and sludge. Sometimes used as synonymous with "waste treatment plant" or "wastewater treatment plant".
WATERCOURSE: A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either continuously or intermittently. (Ord. 95-
19)
14.20.020: SEWER DEPARTMENT AND SYSTEM:
The sewer department of Mapleton City is hereby created. It shall administer the operation and maintenance of the
system of Mapleton City. (Ord. 95-19)
14.20.030: SUPERINTENDENT:
There is hereby created the position of superintendent of the system, who shall be the director of public works for the
city. The superintendent of the system shall manage and supervise the system pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter and pursuant to resolutions, rules and regulations adopted by the city council from time to time prescribing his
powers and duties and directing the manner and frequency with which he shall make reports to the mayor relating to
the system. All of the functions and activities of the superintendent shall be carried on under the direction of the mayor.
(Ord. 95-19)
14.20.040: APPLICATION FOR SEWER CONNECTION:
Any person, other than a subdivider or developer seeking multiple connections, who desires or is required to secure a
new connection to the city system, shall file with the sewer department for each such connection a written and signed
connection application in the form supplied by the city.
All owners or other persons who use the system shall adhere to these ordinances. (Ord. 95-19)
14.20.045: APPLICATION FOR SEWER CONNECTION BY SUBDIVIDER:
Whenever a subdivider or developer desires or is required to install sewer connections and extensions for a
subdivision or development, the subdivider or developer shall enter into a written agreement which shall constitute an
application for permission to make the extensions and connections and an agreement specifying the terms and
conditions under which the sewer extensions and connections shall be made and the payments that shall be required.
(Ord. 95-19)
14.20.050: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or
private property within the city of Mapleton, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any human excrement,
garbage, or other objectionable waste.
B. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city,
any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with
subsequent provisions of this chapter.
C. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank,
cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater.
D. The owner(s) of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other
purposes, situated within the city is hereby required, at the owner(s) expense to install suitable sewer facilities
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 216/571
therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, within sixty (60) days after date of official notice to do so, provided the sewer is within three hundred feet
(300') of the owner's property line and shall be charged a monthly sewer fee effective sixty (60) days after receiving
notice.
E. Where there are extenuating circumstances, such as: distance home is from property line, depth of wastewater line
from home to septic tank, topography of property, etc., then upon written application to the city council, the council
may, but shall not be required to, grant on an individual basis, a waiver of the requirement to hook onto the system.
(Ord. 95-19)
It is the responsibility of each property owner to maintain the building drain and building sewer associated with its
property and it shall be the responsibility of the city to maintain the public sewer as those terms are defined herein.
(Ord. 97-14)
14.20.100: PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL:
A. Where a public sewer is not available, the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal
system complying with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Before commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal system the owner(s) shall first obtain
written permit issued by the city. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city,
which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications, and other information as deemed necessary. A
permit and inspection fee shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed.
C. Permission to use the system for a private wastewater disposal system shall not be authorized until the installation
is completed in compliance with the approved plans applicable with all state and local codes and this chapter.
Authorized city employees shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction. The applicant for the
permit shall notify the appropriate city employee working within the city business office when the work is ready for
final inspection and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within two (2)
business days of the receipt of notice by that city employee.
D. The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all
recommendations of the department of environmental quality of the state of Utah and the local health department.
No permit shall be issued for any private wastewater disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption
facilities where the area of the lot is less than fourteen thousand five hundred (14,500) square feet. No septic tank
or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.
E. At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private wastewater disposal system,
(pursuant to section 14.20.050 of this chapter) the owner shall make a direct connection to the public sewer within
sixty (60) days after receiving notice of availability from the city, in compliance with this chapter, shall pay the
monthly fee to the city and the private disposal system shall be disconnected and made inoperable.
F. When a public sewer is not available, the owner(s) shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, and at no expense to the city.
G. No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be
imposed by the Utah state department of environmental quality. (Ord. 95-19)
14.20.200: SANITARY SEWERS, BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS; RATES FOR USE;
DELINQUENCY AND DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 217/571
A. No unauthorized person(s) shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any
public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city.
Any property owner, its agent, representative, any independent contractor, or other person who makes any
connections with or opening into, or uses the system without first filing with the sewer department a written and
signed connection application as required above, is guilty of theft of municipal services, a class B misdemeanor. In
addition to any criminal penalties which the court may affix, the individual or entity connecting to the system without
first filing with the sewer department a written and signed application as required in sections 14.20.040 and
14.20.045 of this chapter is liable to the city for actual and consequential damages resulting from the connection,
including legal and engineering fees incurred to correct the unauthorized use, and collection of all damages and
unauthorized use fees. In addition to any criminal penalties and damage amounts, the individual or entity
connecting to the system shall be liable to the city for the unauthorized use of the system in the amount of two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00), or an amount equal the cost to the city of discovering the unlawful use,
disconnecting it, and the monthly sewer fees which would have been charged during the term of connection if an
accurate term of the unauthorized use of the system can be determined. (Ord. 97-14)
B. There shall be two (2) classes of sewer connection permits: 1) class I for residential services, and 2) class II for
services to commercial and industrial establishments. Class I for residential services is defined to include all users
with residential flow, and class II for commercial and industrial establishments is defined to include users with
commercial and industrial flow. In either case, the owner(s) or its agent shall make application on a form obtained
from the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information
considered pertinent in the judgment of the city water and sewer superintendent. A permit and connection fee in
accordance with the fee rates listed in the addendum, as set out herein below, shall be paid to the city at the time
the application is filed.
Section 14.20.780 of this chapter contains an addendum entitled "Service User Charge System". This addendum
may be incorporated by reference and made a part of the ordinances of the city and its title shall be known and it
may be referred to as the "addendum" in any document, pleading, or proceeding pertaining to the sewer or
wastewater system of Mapleton City. References to the "addendum" shall be made only when there is ambiguous
declaration or statement in this or any other city ordinance of Mapleton City, Utah and any resolutions or
proceeding affecting the city sewer and wastewater system.
Until otherwise provided by resolution or an amending ordinance the rates shall be assessed in accordance with
the addendum.
C. The rates, penalty fee for delinquency in payment, connection fee, reconnection fee, inspection fee and other
charges incidental to connection and services from the system shall be fixed from time to time by resolution
enacted by the city council. The city council may from time to time promulgate rules for levying, billing,
guaranteeing and collecting charges for wastewater services and all other rules necessary for the management
and control of the system. Rates for services furnished shall be uniform with respect to each class or classes or
service established or that may hereafter be established.
D. All costs and expense incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the
owner(s). The owner(s) shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be
occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. Nothing herein shall preclude the city from turning off the water
to the property as a result of nonpayment as provided by resolution.
E. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one building stands
at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building
through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to
the rear building and the whole system will be considered a one building sewer. The city does not and will not
assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any such single connection
aforementioned.
F. Building sewers which formerly serviced buildings, which buildings no longer exist or are torn down, may be used in
connection with newly constructed buildings only when the building sewer is examined and tested by the city sewer
and water superintendent and found to meet all requirements of this chapter.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 218/571
G. The size, slope, alignment, materials or construction of all sanitary sewers, including building sewers, and the
methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform
to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city and the
state of Utah. In the absence of these code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set
forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCF manual of practice no. 9 shall apply.
H. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought from the building at an elevation below the basement floor.
In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage
carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. Where
such means are necessary, the owner shall be responsible for all installations, maintenance, and operating costs
for their operation.
I. No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of
surface runoff or ground water to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly
to a public sanitary sewer unless such connection is approved by the city and the Utah department of
environmental quality for purposes of disposal of polluted surface drainage.
J. The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and
plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city, and the state of Utah, or the procedures set
forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WPCF manual of practice no. 9. All such connections shall
be made gastight and watertight, any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by
the city before installation. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with
barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public
property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city and to a condition
equal to or better than the condition existing prior to the work being performed. (Ord. 95-19)
K. A separate assessment shall be made against the owner of real property for any and all charges, fees,
assessments, obligations or liabilities under this chapter on the same basis as provided in the city water ordinance.
The intent of this provision is to charge every user of sewer services who is also charged for water services, where
a residence exists. A duplex or any other multiunit housing structure shall be charged a separate connection fee for
each unit and a separate monthly service fee for each unit. A basement apartment shall be charged a monthly
service fee. (Ord. 97-14)
L. Irrespective of the occupant, user, tenant, co-tenant, permissive user, contract purchaser or any other person, firm,
partnership, corporation or entity being in possession of the premises to which a connection is supplied or service
is made available, the owner of the premises according to the records of the Utah County recorder as of the date
the charge, fee or assessment is made, unless designated otherwise, shall be legally responsible for the payment
of all charges, fees, assessments, obligations or liabilities of a user. Any person who sells property subject to this
chapter by means of a contract or instrument which does not transfer legal title to the buyer, but only purports to
transfer equitable title to the buyer and thus retains legal title to the property in the seller's name, shall be deemed
the owner of the premises. If any delinquent sewer connection, sewer user charge, repairs, maintenance or any
other obligation is imposed against any premises, property, buildings or structures, the obligation shall be deemed
by the city of Mapleton as a lien upon all of the real property on which any use is made from a sewer connection.
Water service to delinquent property shall be turned off by the city for failure to pay said fee, assessment, charge
or liability and will not be turned on again to those premises where a delinquency occurs unless and until all
liabilities to the city for sewer service are paid in full.
M. The mayor and council of Mapleton City may, at their discretion and at the highest legal rate, impose an interest
charge or a late fee on all delinquent or past due accounts either for connection fees, user charges, maintenance,
repair or any other charge which is provided for, imposed or authorized by this chapter. (Ord. 95-19)
14.20.330: NOTIFICATION:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 219/571
A. Each user will be notified at least annually, in conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate and that portion of the user
charges which are attributable to wastewater treatment services (O&M) versus debt service.
B. All bills for sewer service shall be rendered at the rates set by the city, together with surcharges, if any, on the same
bill with the city's water bill. Each bill shall show the amount of the sewer service charges separate from the water
bill, but the total thereof shall be considered one charge for the combined use of water and services of the system.
The portion of the bill rendered for water service cannot be paid separately from the portion rendered for sewer
services. (Ord. 95-19)
14.20.350: DELINQUENCY; DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE:
A. The sewer department, water department, or such other person as the governing body may designate, shall furnish
to each user by mail or leave at his place of residence or usual place of business, a written or printed statement
stating the sewer service charges assessed against him once each month or at such other regular intervals as the
governing body shall direct. The statement shall specify the amount of the bill, the place of payment, and the date
due.
B. If any person fails to pay his sewer charges within thirty (30) days of the date due, the city shall give the customer
notice in writing of the intent to discontinue the service of water to the premises unless the customer pays the bill in
full within five (5) days from the date of notice.
C. If the water service is thereafter discontinued for failure to make payment of the sewer service charges, before the
water service to the premises shall again be provided, all delinquent sewer charges must have been paid to the
municipal treasurer or arrangements made for their payment that are satisfactory to the municipality.
D. In the event water is turned off for nonpayment of sewer charges, before the water services to the premises shall
again be provided, the customer shall pay, in addition to all delinquent charges, such extra charge for turning the
water on and off as the governing body may have established by resolution or ordinance.
E. If any person fails to pay his sewer charges within thirty (30) days of the due date, the city is hereby authorized to
take all action necessary to enforce collection, including, but not limited to, the commencement of legal
proceedings in a court of proper jurisdiction seeking judgment for all the amount of the delinquent fees and service
charges and all costs of collection, including court costs and reasonable attorney fees. (Ord. 95-19)
14.20.400: ANNUAL REVIEW OF OPERATION COST; REVISION WHERE REQUIRED; DEBT
SERVICE:
The city shall review the total annual cost of operation and maintenance, long term debt service relating to the
wastewater treatment works, as well as each user's wastewater contribution percentage at least once every year, and
will revise the service user charge system as necessary to assure equity of the system established herein and to
assure that sufficient funds are obtained from the city's user charge system to: a) adequately operate and maintain the
wastewater treatment works; and b) cover said debt service. The city will apply excess revenues collected from a
class of users to the costs of operation and maintenance attributable to that class for the next year, and adjust this rate
accordingly. (Ord. 95-19)
14.20.450: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS:
A. No person(s) shall discharge or cause the discharge of any unpolluted waters such as storm water, surface water,
ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, or cooling water to any sewer. Storm water runoff from limited
areas, which storm water may be polluted at times, may be discharged to the sanitary sewer by permission of the
city and Utah department of environmental quality.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 220/571
B. Storm water and other than that exempted under the previous paragraph and all other unpolluted drainage shall be
discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to natural outlets approved by the
city and the Utah department of environmental quality. Unpolluted industrial cooling water or process waters shall
also be discharged to a storm sewer or natural outlet.
C. No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described water liquids or wastes to
any public sewer: 1) any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas;
2) any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or other wastes, to contaminate or interrupt any sewage
treatment process, constitute a hazard in or have an adverse effect on the waters receiving any discharge from the
works; 3) any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of
causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the wastewater works; and 4) solid or
viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other
interference with the proper operation of the wastewater facilities such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand,
mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, underground garbage, whole blood, paunch
manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by
garbage grinders. Each person or user which discharges any toxic pollutants which cause an increase in the cost
of managing the effluent of the sludge of the wastewater treatment works shall pay for such increased costs.
D. The following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes shall be limited in discharges to municipal system
to concentrations or quantities which will not harm either the sewers, the sludge of any municipal system, the
wastewater treatment process or equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or equipment,
will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or will not otherwise endanger lives, public property or
constitute a nuisance. The city may set limitations below if such more severe limitations are necessary to meet the
above objectives. In setting these requirements, the city will give consideration to such factors as the quantity of
subject waste in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, the
wastewater treatment process employed, capacity of the sewers, capacity of the wastewater treatment plant, and
other pertinent factors. The limitations or restrictions on materials or characteristics of waste or wastewaters
discharged to the sanitary sewer which shall not be violated without approval of the city are as follows:
1. Wastewater having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (65 degrees
Celsius).
2. Wastewater containing more than twenty five milligrams per liter (25 mg/l) of petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable
cutting oils, or products of mineral oil origin.
3. Wastewater from industrial plants containing floatable oils, fat, or grease.
4. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from
homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments, or similar places where garbage
originates from the preparation of food in commercial kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the premises.
5. Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances to
such degree that any such material received in the composite wastewater at the wastewater treatment works
exceeds the limits established by the state of Utah and the environmental protection agency for such materials.
6. Any waters or wastes containing odor producing substances exceeding limits which may be established by the
state of Utah and the environmental protection agency.
7. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half life of concentration as may exceed limits established in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
8. Quantities of flow, concentrations, or both which constitute a "slug" as defined herein.
9. Water or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater
treatment processes employed or are amendable to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater treatment
plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving
waters.
10. Any water or wastes which, by interaction with other water or wastes in the public system, release obnoxious
gases, form suspended solids which interfere with the collection system, or create a condition deleterious to
structures and treatment processes.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 221/571
E. If any water or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain
the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated above, and which are determined by the city to have a
deleterious effect upon the wastewater facilities, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise
create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city may:
1. Reject the wastes;
2. Require pretreatment in accordance with Spanish Fork's public sewer system pretreatment regulations;
3. Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge, and/or wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer
charges under the provisions of this chapter. If the city permits the pretreatment of equalization or waste flows,
the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the city and
the Utah state department of environmental quality.
4. A plot plan of sewers of the user's property showing sewer and pretreatment facility location.
5. Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities.
6. Details of systems to prevent and control the losses of materials through spills to the municipal sewer.
F. All measurements, tests, and analysis of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this
chapter shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods For The Examination Of
Water And Waste Water", published by the American Public Health Association. Sampling methods, location,
times, durations, and frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis, subject to approval by the city.
G. No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement
between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be
accepted by the city for treatment.
H. No persons shall maliciously, wilfully, or negligently break, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure,
appurtenances or equipment which is a part of the wastewater facilities. Any persons violating this provision shall
be subject to immediate arrest and charged according to law. (Ord. 95-19)
14.20.600: POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS:
A. Duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing pertinent to the
discharge to the community system in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Duly authorized city employees are authorized to obtain information concerning industrial processes which have a
direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the wastewater collection system. Industrial users may
withhold information when they have established that the revelation of said information to the public might result in
an advantage to competitors.
C. Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when liquid wastes containing floatable grease in excessive
amounts as specified herein, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients are introduced into public
sewers; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units, all
interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Utah state plumbing code, and shall be located as to
be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these interceptors, the owner(s)
shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captivated material and shall
maintain records of the dates and means of disposal which are subject to review by the city. Any removal and
means of disposal are subject to the review by the city. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not
performed by owner's(s') personnel must be performed by currently licensed waste disposal firms.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 222/571
D. Where pretreatment or flow equalization facilities are provided or required for any water or wastes, they shall be
maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner(s) at its expense.
E. When determined necessary by the city the owner(s) of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall install a building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes.
Such structures, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance
with plans approved by the city. The structure shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be
maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
F. The city may require any user of sewer services to provide information needed to determine compliance with this
chapter. These requirements may include:
1. Wastewater's discharge peak rate and volume over a specified time period.
2. Chemical analysis of wastewaters.
3. Information on raw materials, processes, and products affecting wastewater volume and quality.
4. Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge, oil, solvent, or other materials important to sewer control.
G. While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to herein, the duly authorized employees of the
city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company, and the company shall be
held harmless for injury or death to the city employees, and the city shall indemnify the company against loss or
damage to its property for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company growing out of the
gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to
maintain safe conditions.
H. Duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to,
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the wastewater facilities
lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement shall be done in full
accordance with the terms of the easement pertaining to the private property involved. (Ord. 95-19)
14.20.700: PENALTIES:
A. Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter, except nonpayment of charges, shall be served by
the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the
satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently
cease all violations.
B. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for the notice, shall be guilty of a class B
misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof shall be fined in the amount not exceeding one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each violation. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate
offense.
C. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the city for the expense, loss,
attorney fees or damage occasioned by the city by reason of such violation.
D. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
E. The invalidity of any section, clause, sentence, or provision of this chapter shall not affect the validity of any other
part of this chapter which can be given effect without such invalid part or parts. (Ord. 95-19)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 223/571
14.20.760: ORDINANCE IN FORCE:
This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval, recording, and publication as
provided by law. (Ord. 95-19)
14.20.780: ADDENDUM:
ADDENDUM
CALCULATION OF USER FEES
MAPLETON CITY CORPORATION
SEWER USER CHARGE SYSTEM
The sewer use charge system is the mechanism used to assess fees to the users of the system. The use charge
system is based on a residential equivalent (i.e., the flow and strength BOD on TSS of sewage equivalent to a single
"normal" household).
Note that shaded numbers are given numbers. All other numbers are calculated.
A. NUMBER OF CONNECTIONS
Residential Users 1300
Elementary School 1
Churches 4
Commercial and Small Business 11
Cafe 1
Public Buildings 4
B. CURRENT FLOW PER RESIDENT
Average Daily Flow per Resident (Q) gallons/day 400
Residential Equivalency Unit
REU = 30 days/month x Q gallons/month 12,000
Note:A residential equivalency unit (REU) is the quantity of wastewater generated by an average residence.
C. ESTIMATED AVERAGE FLOW FROM OTHER USERS
The second column RE (residential equivalents) rates the flow from a given establishment to the flows from a number
of "normal" residences.
Usage
gal/month
RE
equivalents
Elementary School 108,000 9
Churches 24,000 2
Commercial and Small Business 12,000 1
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 224/571
Cafe 12,000 1
Public Buildings 12,000 1
D. TOTAL ESTIMATED MONTHLY FLOWS
Classification
No.
Units RE
Monthly
Flow/Unit
Total
Gallons
Residential 1,300 1,300 12,000 15,600,000
Elementary School 1 9 108,000 108,000
Churches 4 8 24,000 96,000
Commercial and Small Business 11 11 12,000 132,000
Cafe 1 1 12,000 12,000
Public Buildings 4 4 12,000 48,000
TOTAL 1,333 15,996,000
E. ITEMIZATION OF O&M COSTS
This section is the budget for operation and maintenance of the wastewater system.
Payment for Treatment to Spanish Fork
15,996 thousand gallons x $0.360* per thousand gallons x 12 months
$ 69,103.00
Labor 24,000.00
Benefits 7,500.00
Truck 12,000.00
Vehicle Maintenance 1,300.00
Telephone 720.00
Operator Training 500.00
Sampling 500.00
Administration 6,600.00
Power 1,000.00
Lift Station Maintenance 1,300.00
Total Annual O & M Costs 124,523.00
Total Monthly Bm 10,377.00
* Unit cost for treatment at Spanish Fork will be adjusted annually based on the actual cost of operation of the
treatment plant.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 225/571
F. ITEMIZATION OF LOAN SERVICE
This section gives the amount that must be applied to loan service.
State Revolving Fund Loan $420,000.00
Reserve Fund 87,667.00
Emergency Repair and Replacement 43,833.00
Total Annual Loan Service 551,500.00
Total Monthly Lm 45,958.00
G. TOTAL COST OF WASTEWATER SYSTEM
Cost per year = 124,523 + 551,500 = 676,023
Cost per month = 10,377 + 45,958 = 56,335
H. COST PER EQUIVALENT USER
Monthly Cost =56,335 = $42.26
1,333
CRE =Bm + Lm
RE
I. RATE SCHEDULE CLASS I USERS
This is the contribution that each type of user pays.
USER RE # OF
USERS
MONTHLY
PER USER CUMULATIVE
Residences 1 1,300 42.30 54,990.00
Elementary School 9 1 380.70 380.70
Church 2 4 84.60 338.40
Commercial & Small Business
1 11 42.30 465.30
Cafe 1 1 42.30 42.30
Public Buildings 1 4 42.30 169.20
TOTAL MONTHLY CONTRIBUTIONS
56,385.90
J. ESTIMATED MONTHLY RATE CLASS II UNITS
Monthly Charge - $2.58 for each 1,000 gallons plus a surcharge
K. CONNECTION CHARGES
Initial connection fees during the system construction will be $350.00 for Class I units and $1,000.00 for Class II units
if paid on or before April 1, 1996. If not paid by that time, the fees will be $700.00 for Class I units and $2,000.00 for
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 226/571
Class II units until such time as the system is completed. After the system is complete, the connection fee will be the
average cost to the City for the service provided for the hookup.
(Ord. 95-19)
Title 15
BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Chapter 15.04
BUILDING CODE
15.04.010: ADOPTION:
Mapleton City does hereby adopt as its building codes:
A. The 2015 edition of the international building code, with current amendments as adopted by the state of Utah
department of commerce, division of occupational and professional licensing (hereinafter DOPL).
B. The international residential code, 2015 edition, with current amendments adopted by the DOPL.
C. The international mechanical code, 2015 edition, with current amendments adopted by the DOPL.
D. The international plumbing code, 2015 edition, with current amendments adopted by the DOPL.
E. The national electrical code, 2014 edition, with current amendments adopted by the DOPL.
F. The international fuel gas code, 2015 edition, with current amendments adopted by the DOPL.
G. The international energy conservation code, 2015 edition, with current amendments adopted by the DOPL.
H. The international fire code, 2015 edition, with current amendments adopted by the DOPL. (Ord. 2016-09, 11-16-
2016, eff. 12-11-2016)
The codes are adopted in their entirety, as amended and corrected, as the building regulations of the city for the
purpose of providing regulations consistent with nationally recognized standard practices for the safeguarding of
life, health and property. The codes, as amended, and all provisions thereof, are made part of this chapter to the
same extent and effect as though they were copied verbatim herein. (Ord. 2013-02, 1-15-2013, eff. 2-7-2013)
15.04.020: COPIES ON FILE:
There are on file with the city recorder three (3) copies of the building code for use and examination by the public and
city officials. (Ord. 96-21)
Chapter 15.06
ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS CODE
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 227/571
15.06.010: ADOPTION:
The uniform code for the abatement of dangerous buildings (current edition) printed as a code in book form by the
International Code Council (providing for a just, equitable and practicable method whereby buildings or structures
which from any cause endanger life, limb, health, morals, property, safety or welfare of the general public or their
occupants, may be required to be repaired, vacated, or demolished), is approved and adopted as the abatement of
dangerous buildings code of the city. It is adopted in its entirety and made part of this code as though fully printed in
this chapter, and is modified only as specifically provided for in this chapter and/or to the extent that relevant state law
requires it. (Ord. 2011-12, 8-2-2011, eff. 8-28-2011)
15.06.020: CODE MODIFIED:
The following rules, provisions and/or procedures modify, replace and/or supersede any conflicting rules, provisions
and/or procedures found in the abatement of dangerous buildings code:
A. Time To Comply: A responsible party must be given no less than ten (10) days after the day on which initial notice
is delivered in person or postmarked to comply with the notice and order from the building official.
B. Interior Of Structure: The building official may not abate conditions solely associated with the interior of a structure,
unless required for the demolition and removal of the structure.
C. Itemized Statement: The building official shall mail an itemized statement to the owner of, occupant of, or
responsible party of the real property from which an illegal object or structure is removed by the city, demanding
payment within thirty (30) days after the day on which the statement is postmarked. The statement is deemed
delivered when mailed by certified mail addressed to the property owner's of record, last known address according
to the records of the county recorder. The statement must include the following:
1. Address of the subject property;
2. An itemized list of expenses incurred, including administrative expenses incurred by the city;
3. Address of the city treasurer where payment is to be made; and
4. Notice, stating:
Failure to pay the expenses set forth in this itemized statement may result in a lien on your property in
accordance with Utah Code section 10-11-4. You may file a written objection to all or part of this statement within
20 days after the day of this statement's post-mark with the City Building Official at the City Office, 125 West 400
North, Mapleton, Utah 84664.
D. Objection: If a property owner files a timely written objection to all or part of the itemized statement, the city council
should hold a hearing in accordance with title 52, chapter 4, open and public meetings act, and give notice as
outlined in the abatement of dangerous buildings code. The city council should not hold a hearing until the time
period to object has expired and should only review and determine the actual cost of abatement, if any has been
incurred, at said hearing. A timely filed written objection extends the payment due date to thirty (30) days after the
day on which a hearing is held.
E. Recovery Of Cost: If an owner fails to file a timely written objection or to pay the amount set forth in the itemized
statement, the city may: 1) file an action in district court to recover all removal and destruction costs, including
administrative costs, and reasonable attorney fees, interest, and court costs. The city may execute on any
judgment received in the manner provided by law. The city may also: 2) certify the past due costs and expenses to
the county treasurer of the county in which the property is located.
F. Lien: The building official is authorized to file or cause to be filed a notice of a lien, including a copy of the itemized
statement described above or a summary of the statement in the records of the county recorder, indicating that the
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 228/571
city intends to certify any unpaid costs and expenses incurred in removing an illegal object or structure. A release
of lien must be filed after all amounts owing are paid.
G. Force And Effect Of A Valid Judgment: If the unpaid costs are certified, the county treasurer shall enter the costs
and expenses on the assessment and tax rolls of the county to be included in the tax notice for the property. After
entry by the treasurer of the county, the amount entered has the force and effect of a valid judgment of the district
court, is a lien upon the property, and shall be collected by the county treasurer at the time of the payment of
general taxes. (Ord. 2011-12, 8-2-2011, eff. 8-28-2011)
15.06.030: APPEALS:
An appeals board designated by the city council is authorized to hear and decide appeals of orders, decision or
determinations made by the building official, and to act pursuant to and in conformance with all relevant provisions of
the abatement of dangerous building code. The city council shall assemble a board consisting of qualified experts
having expertise in the matters being discussed. (Ord. 2011-12, 8-2-2011, eff. 8-28-2011)
15.06.040: PENALTY:
Any owner of, occupant of, or responsible party having interest in real property subject to this chapter who fails to
comply with a notice and order given pursuant to this chapter shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor for each
offense and shall incur a fine of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for each and every day such failure to comply continues
beyond the date fixed for compliance. Compliance by any owner, occupant, or responsible party to whom notice has
been given as provided in this chapter shall not be admissible in any criminal proceeding brought pursuant to this
section. (Ord. 2011-12, 8-2-2011, eff. 8-28-2011)
15.06.050: INTERPRETATION:
This chapter should be read in conjunction with Utah Code Annotated sections 10-11-1 through 4, as amended, or as
may be hereafter amended by the Utah legislature. The uniform code for the abatement of dangerous buildings
(current edition) and Utah code sections 10-11-1 through 4, while very similar, have distinct requirements which, under
certain circumstances, may conflict. To the extent there are differences or there arises a conflict, this chapter is
intended to follow any superseding provision of state code and should be interpreted accordingly. (Ord. 2011-12, 8-2-
2011, eff. 8-28-2011)
15.06.060: CODE OPERATIVE:
Unless modified by a specific provision in this chapter or superseded by conflicting provisions of state law, the
abatement of dangerous buildings code and all of its provisions are otherwise operative as adopted. (Ord. 2011-12, 8-
2-2011, eff. 8-28-2011)
15.06.070: COPIES ON FILE:
There are on file with the city recorder three (3) copies of the abatement of dangerous buildings code for use and
examination by the public and city officials. (Ord. 2011-12, 8-2-2011, eff. 8-28-2011)
Chapter 15.08
ELECTRICAL CODE
15.08.010: BUILDING INSPECTOR:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 229/571
The mayor, by or with the consent of the council, shall appoint a building inspector who shall perform such duties as
are or may hereafter be imposed upon him by the council. (1986 Code)
15.08.020: BUILDING INSPECTOR DUTIES:
The building inspector shall inspect all construction, installation and repairs of all electric light or power wiring, fixtures,
appliances or apparatus, in, upon or running to any building in the city, and require that they conform to the provisions
of the national electrical code. Wiring, fixtures, and apparatus heretofore installed need not necessarily be made to
conform strictly to all the provisions of the code, but the building inspector shall require the correction of such defects
as he deems actually dangerous to life or property. (1986 Code)
15.08.030: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; FEES:
In order to secure a permit for the installation of electrical wiring, fixtures, appliances or apparatus, and before any
addition to or alteration in any old installation of electrical wiring, fixtures, appliances or apparatus is made, a written
application shall be made to the building official on blanks provided for that purpose by the official and the applicant
therefor shall pay the city in advance all fees as provided by resolution of the council. (1986 Code)
15.08.040: NOTICE; INSPECTION:
Upon the completion of the installation of any electrical wiring, fixtures, appliances or apparatus in or on any building, it
shall be the duty of the person doing the work to notify the building inspector, who shall at once inspect the same, and
if approved, there shall be issued a certificate of proper inspection which shall contain the date of such inspection and
an outline of the result. It shall be unlawful for any person to turn on or connect the current with such installation until
such certificate shall be issued; and it shall also be unlawful to make any change, alteration or extension in or to the
installation of any electrical wiring, fixtures, appliances or apparatus in or on any building after inspection, without
notifying the building inspector and securing a permit to do so. (1986 Code)
15.08.050: RIGHTS AND POWERS:
The building inspector shall have the right to enter any premises at all reasonable hours for the purpose of inspecting
the electrical wiring, fixtures, appliances or apparatus therein. (1986 Code)
15.08.060: UNLAWFUL INSTALLATIONS:
If the building inspector shall find any part of any electrical light or power wiring, appliances, apparatus or fixtures in or
upon any building in the city to have been installed without a permit or installed not in accordance with this chapter or
to be dangerous to life or property, any building official of the city shall have the right and power to disconnect such
defective work, fixtures, appliances or apparatus, and place a seal upon same, and shall at the same time give written
notice of such disconnection to the owner or occupant of the building. After such disconnected wiring, fixtures,
appliances or apparatus has been put in condition required by this chapter, the seal so placed shall be removed, by
order of the building inspector. (1986 Code)
15.08.070: USE OF DISCONNECTED WIRING PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to use any current in, through or by any means of such disconnected wiring,
appliances, apparatus or fixtures, or to attach other wires for the supply of current to such disconnected wiring,
fixtures, appliances or apparatus, or to remove, break or deface any seal so placed. (1986 Code)
15.08.080: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 230/571
Any person who shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with the provisions of this chapter or who shall violate any of its
provisions, or those provisions of the national electrical code, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (1986 Code)
Chapter 15.12
PLUMBING CODE
15.12.020: PLUMBING INSPECTOR:
The council shall appoint a building inspector whose duty it shall be to inspect all plumbing done within the city. (1986
Code)
15.12.030: PLUMBING DEFINED:
"Plumbing" is defined as the performing of any mechanical work pertaining to the installation, alteration, change,
repair, removal, maintenance and use in buildings or on the premises thereabouts of the pipes, fixtures and fittings for
bringing in the water supply and removing liquid and water carried wastes, and every connection discharging, directly
or indirectly, into the building drainage systems and shall include the water supply distribution pipes, fixtures and
fixture traps, the soil, waste and vent pipes, the building drain, roof drains where installed inside the walls of a building,
settling traps, sewer connections, septic tanks and cesspools with their devices, appurtenances and connections.
(1986 Code)
15.12.040: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, and to hold himself out as engaging in the trade of plumbing within the
city without first procuring a license from the state of Utah license department. (1986 Code)
15.12.050: PERMIT:
A. Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, no plumbing work as defined in section 15.12.030 of this chapter
shall be started without first obtaining a permit from the city to do so. A permit to do plumbing work shall not be
issued to any but a duly licensed journeyman. Permits shall be procured for the work of replacing traps, soil, waste
and vent pipes unless waived by the building official.
B. Permits shall not be required for the cleaning out or removing stoppage from traps, soil, waste and vent pipes or for
repairs or maintenance of faucets, valves or roof drains. (1986 Code)
15.12.060: NOTICE OF COMPLETION:
Upon completion of any work done under permits issued by authority of this chapter, the plumber, to whom such
permit was issued, shall give notice thereof to the building inspector, and within twenty four (24) hours after being so
notified, the building inspector shall make a final examination of the whole work, and if found to comply with the
requirements of this chapter, he shall approve the same and shall issue a certificate therefor. He shall immediately
endorse on the application upon which the permit for the work was issued the date of the final inspection and approval
and file a duplicate of the certificate in the city office. (1986 Code)
15.12.070: TESTS:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 231/571
A. All the piping of a plumbing system shall be tested by means of the approved standard water or air test as required
by the building inspector. The entire system shall be watertight or airtight as the case may require. Any material or
workmanship found to be defective shall be replaced or corrected to comply with the plumbing code and the test
repeated if deemed necessary by the building inspector.
B. All work shall be left uncovered and accessible for inspection.
C. All devices for testing purposes shall be furnished by the plumbing contractor. The building inspector is empowered
to make such reasonable rules and regulations as he may deem necessary for a satisfactory test. (1986 Code)
15.12.080: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
A. The plumbing inspector shall have right of entry within reasonable hours to any building or premises for the purpose
of inspection or to investigate any work or conditions governed by the plumbing code, and he is empowered to
condemn and order repaired, removed, replaced or changed any plumbing found in an unsanitary condition or not
in accordance with the plumbing code.
B. It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any building or premises to fail, neglect, or refuse to repair,
remove, replace or change, within a reasonable time fixed by and after notice to do so from the plumbing inspector,
any plumbing condemned by the inspector. (1986 Code)
15.12.090: EXCAVATIONS; PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to start any excavation in any public street before first obtaining a written permit
from the city. The length of time for having a trench open shall be at the discretion of the sewer supervisor. Every
precaution must be taken to prevent the destruction or disturbance of any gutter, drain, gas, water or other pipe or
conduit, or the injury or destruction of property of any kind, and a bond must be provided as hereinafter required.
(1986 Code)
15.12.100: BARRICADES AT EXCAVATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or neglect to maintain proper and sufficient barricades and signals at or near
every excavation mentioned in this chapter so as to give warning of and protect against accident. (1986 Code)
15.12.110: EXCAVATION SETTLEMENT TO BE REPAIRED:
Any settlement that occurs in the surface of the ground within ninety (90) days from the inspection of the work through
the laying of any drain, as hereinafter provided, shall be repaired at the expense of the owner of the property from
which the drain has been laid. (1986 Code)
15.12.120: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person who shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with the provisions of this chapter or who shall violate any of its
provisions or the provisions of the plumbing code approved by the Utah state board of health shall be deemed guilty of
a misdemeanor. (1986 Code)
Chapter 15.16
SIGN CODE1
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 232/571
(Rep. by Ord. 96-24)
Chapter 15.20
GAS CODE
15.20.010: ADOPTED:
See section 15.04.010 of this title for adoption of the fuel gas code. (Ord. 2013-02, 1-15-2013, eff. 2-7-2013)
15.20.020: INSPECTIONS:
All inspections of gas installations will be conducted and approved by employees, agents or inspectors of Mountain
Fuel Supply Company. (1986 Code)
Chapter 15.24
FIRE PREVENTION CODE
15.24.010: ADOPTION OF FIRE PREVENTION CODE:
The city hereby adopts the international fire code by reference as if fully set out herein. (1986 Code)
Chapter 15.28
ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE
15.28.010: ADOPTED:
See section 15.04.010 of this title for adoption of the energy conservation code. (Ord. 2013-02, 1-15-2013, eff. 2-7-
2013)
15.28.020: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Violation of the provisions of the energy conservation code, as adopted by the city, as the same shall from time to time
be amended, shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding two hundred ninety nine dollars ($299.00) or by
imprisonment not to exceed six (6) months or by both such fine and imprisonment. (1986 Code; amd. Ord. 2013-02, 1-
15-2013, eff. 2-7-2013)
Chapter 15.32
FALLOUT SHELTERS
15.32.010: DEFINITION:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 233/571
For the purpose of this chapter, a "family fallout shelter" is a structure designed and constructed for emergency use
only, to afford minimum protection from nuclear radiation, commonly known as fallout, resulting from a nuclear incident
which recently has been, or is likely to be of catastrophic proportions. (1986 Code)
15.32.020: DESIGN:
A family fallout shelter shall be of a design conforming to that recommended or accepted by the federal department of
defense, office of civil defense. (1986 Code)
15.32.030: CONSTRUCTION:
A. A family fallout shelter shall, in all matters relating to construction and structural stability, comply with not less than
the equivalent of the provisions relating to design loads and general building requirements specified in the
international building code. (Ord. 2013-05, 6-18-2013, eff. 7-12-2013)
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the provisions contained in the building code relating to administration, permits and
inspections shall be applicable to family fallout shelters. (1986 Code)
Chapter 15.36
SWIMMING POOLS
15.36.010: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
Every private residential swimming pool constructed, installed and maintained hereafter shall comply with all
applicable provisions of this code. (1986 Code)
15.36.020: DEFINITIONS:
"Private residential swimming pool" is defined as a receptacle for water, or an artificial pool of water having a depth at
any point of more than two feet (2') intended for the purpose of immersion therein of human beings, and including all
appurtenant equipment, constructed, installed and maintained by an individual primarily for the sole use of his
household and guests and not for the purpose of profit or in connection with any business operated for profit. No out of
doors swimming pool intended for the use of members and their guests of a nonprofit club or organization, or limited to
house residents or a multiple dwelling unit, a block, subdivision, neighborhood, community or other specified area of
residence shall be permitted in a single-family residence, duplex residence or apartment district. (1986 Code)
15.36.030: LOCATION OF SWIMMING POOLS:
Private residential swimming pools shall be permitted in all residential and/or agricultural zones. No portion of a private
residential swimming pool shall be located at a distance less than eight feet (8') from any side or rear property line or
building line. Pumps, filters and pool water disinfection equipment installations shall be located at a distance not less
than eight feet (8') from any side property line. Pools and appurtenant equipment shall not be permitted in the side
yard between dwellings. (Ord. 89-4)
15.36.040: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to proceed with the construction, installation, enlargement or alteration of any private residential
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 234/571
swimming pool and appurtenances within the city unless a permit therefor shall have first been obtained from the
building inspector. (1986 Code)
15.36.050: DRAWINGS, PLANS AND PERMITS:
A. All drawings and plans for the construction, installation, enlargement or alteration of any private residential
swimming pool and appurtenances for which a permit is required shall first be presented to the building inspector
for examination and approval as to the proper location, construction and use.
B. All plans and drawings shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one-eighth inch (1/8") to the foot, on paper or cloth,
in ink, or by some process that will not fade or obliterate. All distances and dimensions shall be accurately figured
and drawings made explicit and complete, showing the lot lines and including information pertaining to the pool,
walk and fence construction, water supply system, drainage and water disposal systems, and all appurtenances
pertaining to the swimming pool. Detail plans and vertical elevations shall also be provided in accordance with the
building code.
C. All private residential swimming pools, appurtenances, water supply and drainage systems shall be constructed in
conformity with the approved plans. If any deviations from such plans are desired, a supplementary plan covering
that portion of the work involved shall be filed for approval and shall conform to the provisions of this title. (1986
Code)
15.36.060: RECIRCULATION POOLS:
All private residential swimming pools shall be of the recirculation type in which circulation of the water is maintained
through the pool by pumps, the water drawn from the pool clarified and disinfected before being returned to the pool.
(1986 Code)
15.36.070: MATERIALS:
A. Private residential swimming pool walls and floors shall be constructed of any impervious material which will
provide a tight tank with white or light colored finished easily cleaned surfaces. The floor or bottom surface of the
pool shall have a nonslip finish as smooth as possible. The side and end walls of a pool shall present a smooth
finish and shall be vertical to a depth of at least six feet (6') or shall have a slope or curvature meeting one of the
following conditions:
1. The pool wall may be vertical for thirty inches (30") from the water level below which the wall may be curved to
the bottom with a radius at any point equal to the difference between the depth at that point, and thirty inches
(30");
2. To a depth of six feet (6'), except as in subsection A1 of this section, the wall slope shall not be less than one
foot (1') horizontal in six feet (6') vertical.
B. Pool walls that are to be lined with a plastic liner shall be constructed of masonry or reinforced concrete. (1986
Code)
15.36.080: STRUCTURAL DESIGN:
Residential swimming pools shall be designed to withstand the water pressure from within and to resist the pressure of
the earth when the pool is empty, to a pressure of two thousand two hundred (2,200) pounds per square foot. The
slope of the bottom of any part of a pool in which the water is less than five feet (5') in depth shall not be more than
one foot (1') in each ten feet (10'). The maximum slope where water is five feet (5') or more in depth shall not exceed
one foot (1') in two feet (2'). (1986 Code)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 235/571
15.36.090: WALK AREAS:
Unobstructed walk areas not less than thirty six inches (36") wide shall be provided to extend entirely around the pool.
The walk areas shall be constructed of impervious material and the surface shall be of such as to be smooth and
easily cleaned and of nonslip construction. The slope of the walks shall have a pitch of at least one-fourth inch (1/4") to
the foot. (1986 Code)
15.36.100: FENCES:
All private residential swimming pools shall be completely enclosed by a fence erected along the periphery of the pool
walks. All fence openings or points of entry into the pool area enclosure shall be equipped with gates. The fence and
gates shall be four feet six inches (4'6") in height above the walk grade level and shall be constructed of a minimum
number 9-gauge woven wire mesh corrosion resistant material, or material approved by the building inspector. All
gates shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching devices placed at the top of the gate and made inaccessible
to small children. All fence posts shall be decay or corrosion resistant and shall be set in concrete bases. (1986 Code)
15.36.110: STEPS OR LADDERS:
Two (2) or more means of egress in form of steps or ladders shall be provided for all private residential swimming
pools. At least one such means of egress shall be located on a side of the pool at both the deep end and shallow end
of the pool. Treads of steps and ladders shall be constructed of nonslip material and at least three inches (3") wide for
their full length. Steps and ladders shall have a handrail on both sides. (1986 Code)
15.36.120: SKIMMERS:
In every private residential swimming pool, at least one skimming device shall be provided for each eight hundred
(800) square feet of surface area or fraction thereof. Skimmers shall be located at least thirty feet (30') apart.
Handholds shall be provided and consist of a bullnosed coping not over two and one-half inches (21/2") thick for the
outer two inches (2") or equivalent approved handhold. The handhold must be no more than nine inches (9") above
the normal water line. Skimming devices shall be built into the pool wall, shall adequately remove floating oils and
waste and shall meet the following general specifications:
A. Each skimmer shall be designed for a flow through rate of at least thirty (30) gallons per minute and a total capacity
of all skimmers on any pool shall be at least fifty percent (50%) of the required filter flow of the recirculation system.
B. They shall be automatically adjustable to variations in water level over a range of at least three inches (3").
C. An easily removable and cleanable basket or screen through which all overflow water must pass shall be provided
to trap large solids.
D. The skimmer shall be provided with a device to prevent airlock in the suction line. If an equalizer pipe is used, it
shall provide an adequate amount of makeup water for pump suction should the water of the pool drop below the
weir level. This pipe shall be at least two inches (2") in diameter and shall be located at least one foot (1') below
the lowest overflow level of the skimmer.
E. An equalizer line shall be provided with a valve that will remain tightly closed under normal operating conditions, but
will automatically open a differential of not more than four inches (4") between the pool level and the level of the
overflow tank.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 236/571
F. The overflow weir shall be of sufficient length to maintain a rate of flow of at least twenty (20) gallons per minute per
lineal foot of weir lip. (1986 Code)
15.36.130: WATER SUPPLY:
No source of water other than that secured from the city waterworks distribution system shall be used in private
residential swimming pools. (1986 Code)
15.36.140: INLETS:
A. Private residential swimming pool water recirculation system inlets shall be located so as to produce so far as
possible uniform circulation of water throughout the pool without the existence of dead spots and to carry pool
bottom deposits to the outlets, and shall discharge at a minimum depth of ten inches (10") below the pool overflow
level. A minimum of one recirculation system inlet shall be provided for every six hundred fifteen (615) square feet
of surface area of the pool.
B. Pools shall be equipped with suitable facilities for adding makeup water as needed. There shall be no physical
connection between the water supply line and the pool system. If the makeup water is added directly to the pool,
the outlet shall be at least six inches (6") above the upper rim of the pool. If the makeup water line discharges to a
surge or balancing tank, the point of discharge shall be at least six inches (6") above the rim of the tank. If a hose
connection from a sill cock or other plumbing fixture is to be used for supplying makeup water, then an approved
vacuum breaker shall be installed between the sill cock or control valve at the fixture and the hose connection. The
vacuum breaker shall be installed at a height not less than seven feet six inches (7'6") above the floor, platform or
ground upon which a person should stand when operating the sill cock or control valve.
C. The systems supplying recirculated water and makeup water to the pool shall be constructed in conformance with
the building code. (1986 Code)
15.36.150: OUTLETS:
A. In private residential swimming pools, thirty feet (30') in width or less, water circulation system outlets shall be
located so as to provide at least one outlet at the deepest point in the pool. If the pool width is more than thirty feet
(30'), multiple outlets shall be provided and spaced no more than thirty feet (30') apart, not closer than four feet (4')
to any wall. All pool drain outlets shall be equipped with gratings having an area of openings not less than four (4)
times the cross sectional area of the outlet pipe. The gratings shall be of such design so they cannot be readily
removable by bathers and will not injure bather's fingers. One outlet shall be provided for each eight hundred (800)
square feet of surface area.
B. Pools shall be equipped with facilities for completely emptying the pool and discharge of the pool water to the sewer
shall be at a rate not exceeding two hundred fifty (250) gallons per minute. No direct connection shall be made to
the sewer.
C. Water drained from the pool shall not be discharged to the sewer system during periods of rain or storms. At no
time shall the rate of drain water discharge exceed a flow of two hundred fifty (250) gallons per minute. (1986
Code)
15.36.160: RECIRCULATION SYSTEM AND APPURTENANCES:
A. Private residential swimming pools recirculation shall consist of pumping equipment, hair and lint catcher, filters,
together with the necessary pipe connections to the pool inlets and outlets, facilities and pipe connections
necessary for backwashing filters, and facilities and equipment for disinfecting the pool water.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 237/571
B. Every private residential swimming pool shall have a recirculating system with an hourly capacity equal to the pool
volume divided by eight (8).
C. The recirculation system pump shall have sufficient capacity to discharge the volume of water required for an eight
(8) hour turnover of the pool against the maximum head in the recirculating system.
D. The pump used for backwashing filters shall have sufficient capacity to provide a filter backwash rate of a least
twelve (12) gallons per minute per square foot of filter area.
E. A hair and lint catcher or strainer shall be installed on the suction side of the circulation pump to prevent hair, lint
and other extraneous matter from reaching the pump and filters. Hair and lint catchers shall be so designed that
they can be easily accessible for cleaning. The design features shall be as follows: water passes through the
strainer from the outside; the strainer is made of noncorrosive material; the width or diameter of the strainer
openings is not more than one-eighth inch (1/8"); the area of the strainer openings shall be at least five (5) times
the cross sectional area of the inlet pipe to the strainer.
F. Recirculating systems shall contain rapid pressure filters. Sufficient filter area shall be provided to filter the entire
contents of the pool in eighteen (18) hours at the rate of not more than three (3) gallons per square foot of filter
area per minute. The filter backwashing facilities shall be sufficient to backwash at a rate of twelve (12) gallons per
minute per square foot of filter area. All backwash water and effluents shall be discharged to the sewer through an
indirect connection. Pressure filters shall be equipped with readily accessible air relief valves, loss of head or
pressure gauges on the inlet and outlet pipes, and an access head or hole large enough to permit inspection,
maintenance and repair work. Sight glasses that can be easily removed for cleaning shall be provided in the
effluent line from the filter units.
G. Equipment shall be provided for the disinfection of all pool water. Any disinfection method using materials other
than chlorine compounds shall be subject to the approval of the building inspector. Disinfection equipment installed
for the use of chlorine compounds shall have sufficient capacity to maintain a minimum free chlorine residual of 0.5
parts per million. The disinfectant shall be introduced into the recirculation system ahead of the filters.
H. Gaseous chlorination systems shall not be made use of as a disinfection method for pool water. (1986 Code)
15.36.170: ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS:
Refer to international residential code (IRC) chapter 41. (1986 Code)
15.36.180: SAFETY PRECAUTIONS:
A. A skilled swimmer shall be present at all times that private residential swimming pools are in use.
B. Every private residential swimming pool shall be equipped with one or more throwing ring buoys not more than
fifteen inches (15") in diameter and having sixty feet (60') of three-sixteenths inch (3/16") manila line attached, and
one or more light but strong poles with blunted ends and not less than twelve feet (12') in length, for making reach
assists or rescues.
C. No diving board or platform more than three feet (3') above the water level shall be installed for use in connection
with any private residential swimming pool. (1986 Code)
15.36.190: OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 238/571
A. A suitable substantial protective cover shall be provided and installed over all private residential swimming pool
surfaces during the nonswimming season.
B. All private residential swimming pools shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and all equipment shall
be maintained in a satisfactory operating condition during periods the pool is in use.
C. No private residential swimming pool shall be used, kept, maintained or operated in the city if such use, keeping,
maintaining or operating shall be the occasion of any nuisance or shall be dangerous to life or detrimental to
health. (1986 Code)
15.36.200: INSPECTION:
The building inspector periodically shall inspect all private residential swimming pools to determine whether or not the
provisions of this code regarding health, sanitation and safety applicable thereto are being complied with. (1986 Code)
15.36.210: PERMIT FEES:
The fee for a permit for the erection or construction of a swimming pool shall be based on the cost of installation or the
contract building price. (Ord. 96-22)
Chapter 15.40
MOVING BUILDINGS
15.40.010: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
It is unlawful for any person to move any building through the streets of the city without permission of the police
department. (1986 Code)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2020-03 - FLOODPLAIN ORDINANCE. Go to new
ordinance.
Chapter 15.44
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2020-03 - FLOODPLAIN ORDINANCE. Go to new
ordinance.
15.44.010: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and
private losses due to flood conditions to specific areas by provisions designed:
A. To protect human life and health;
B. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 239/571
C. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense
of the general public;
D. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer
lines, streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;
F. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard
so as to minimize future flood blight areas;
G. To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and
H. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazards assume responsibility for their action. (1986
Code)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2020-03 - FLOODPLAIN ORDINANCE. Go to new
ordinance.
15.44.020: METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES:
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions for:
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards,
or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood
damage at the time of initial construction;
C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help
accommodate or channel floodwater;
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; and
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may
increase flood hazards in other areas. (1986 Code)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2020-03 - FLOODPLAIN ORDINANCE. Go to new
ordinance.
15.44.030: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give this chapter
its most reasonable application:
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent (1%) or
greater chance of flooding in any given year.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 240/571
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings
or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations located within the area of
special flood hazard.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): An official map of a community on which the federal emergency
management agency has delineated areas of special flood hazard designated as zones A and B.
FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land
areas from:
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters and/or
B. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface water from any source.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis
and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. This term also
includes park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than one hundred eighty
(180) consecutive days.
STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building or manufactured home that is principally aboveground.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure either:
A. Before the improvement or repair is started, or
B. If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purpose of this
definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of the building commences, whether or not the alteration affects the external dimensions of
the structure.
The term does not, however, include either:
A. Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with the existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety
code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
B. Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic
Places. (1986 Code)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2020-03 - FLOODPLAIN ORDINANCE. Go to new
ordinance.
15.44.040: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Lands To Which This Chapter Applies: This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of Mapleton City, Utah.
B. Basis For Establishing The Areas Of Special Flood Hazard: The areas of special flood hazard to which this chapter
applies shall consist of the territory designated as flood zones A and B as identified by the federal emergency
management agency in its flood insurance rate map (FIRM) dated December 16, 1980. Said map is hereby
adopted by reference and declared to be part of this chapter. The FIRM is on file at the Mapleton City offices, 35
East Maple Street.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 241/571
C. Compliance: No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, or altered without full
compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations.
D. Abrogation And Greater Restrictions: This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement,
covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restriction shall prevail.
E. Interpretation: In the interpretation of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
1. Considered as minimum requirements;
2. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
3. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
F. Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability: The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can
and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter
does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free
from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of Mapleton City, any officer or
employee thereof, or damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully
made thereunder. (1986 Code)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2020-03 - FLOODPLAIN ORDINANCE. Go to new
ordinance.
15.44.050: ADMINISTRATION:
A. Establishment Of Development Permit: A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins within any area of special flood hazard established in subsection 15.44.040B of this chapter. Application for
a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the city planning and zoning director and may include,
but not be limited to:
Plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question;
existing or proposed structures, fill, storage or materials drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing.
Specifically, the following information is required:
1. Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures;
2. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been floodproofed;
3. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing methods for any
nonresidential structure meet the floodproofing criteria in subsection 15.44.060B2 of this chapter; and
4. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed
development.
B. Planning And Zoning Director To Enforce Chapter: The city planning and zoning director is hereby appointed to
administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with
its provisions.
C. Duties And Responsibilities Of The Director: Duties of the planning and zoning director with respect to the
enforcement of this chapter shall include, but not be limited to:
1. Permit Review:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 242/571
a. Review all development permits to determine that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
b. Review all development permits to determine that all necessary permits have been obtained from those
federal, state or local governmental agencies from which proper approval is required.
c. Review all development permits to determine if the proposed development adversely affects the flood carrying
capacity of the area of special flood hazard. For the purposes of this chapter, "adversely affects" means
damage to adjacent properties because of rises in flood stages attributed to physical changes of the channel
and the adjacent overbank areas.
(1) If it is determined that there is an adverse effect, then technical justification (i.e., a registered professional
engineer's certification) for the proposed development shall be required.
(2) If the proposed development is a building, then the provisions for this chapter shall apply.
2. Use Of Other Base Flood Data: When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with
subsection 15.44.040B of this chapter the planning and zoning director shall obtain, review, and reasonably
utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source as criteria for
requiring that new construction, substantial improvements, or other development in zone A and B are
administered in accordance with subsection 15.44.060B, "Specific Standards", of this chapter.
3. Information To Be Obtained And Maintained:
a. Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement)
of all new or substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure contains a basement.
b. For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(1) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure has been
floodproofed.
(2) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in subsection A3 of this section.
c. Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of the ordinance.
4. Alteration Of Watercourses:
a. Notify adjacent communities and the state division of emergency management prior to an alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the federal emergency management
agency.
b. Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the
flood carrying capacity is not diminished.
5. Interpretation Of FIRM Boundaries: Make interpretations, where needed, as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a
mapped boundary and actual yield conditions). (1986 Code)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2020-03 - FLOODPLAIN ORDINANCE. Go to new
ordinance.
15.44.060: PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION:
A. General Standards: In all areas of special flood hazards, the following standards are required:
1. Anchoring:
a. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement of the structure and capable of resisting the hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 243/571
b. All manufactured homes (where permitted by the zone ordinance) must be elevated and anchored to resist
flotation, collapse or lateral movement and capable of resisting the hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads.
Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over the top or frame ties to ground anchors.
This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
Specific requirements may be:
(1) Over the top ties be provided at each of the four (4) corners of the manufactured home, with two (2)
additional ties per side at intermediate locations, with manufactured homes less than fifty feet (50') long
requiring one additional tie per side.
(2) Frame ties be provided at each corner of the home with five (5) additional ties per side at intermediate
points, with manufactured homes less than fifty feet (50') long requiring four (4) additional ties per side;
(3) All components of the anchoring system be capable of carrying a force of four thousand eight hundred
(4,800) pounds; and
(4) Any additions to the manufactured home be similarly anchored.
2. Construction Materials And Methods:
a. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment
resistant to flood damage.
b. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that
minimize flood damage.
c. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation,
plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located as to
prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
3. Utilities:
a. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
floodwaters into the system;
b. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
floodwaters into the systems and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and
c. On site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them
during flooding.
4. Subdivision Proposals:
a. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
b. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage;
c. All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage; and
d. Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed development which
contain at least fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres (whichever is less).
5. Encroachments: Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other
development shall be prohibited in any floodway unless a technical evaluation demonstrates that the
encroachments will not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
B. Specific Standards: In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set
forth in subsection 15.44.050C2, "Use Of Other Base Flood Data", of this chapter the following standards are
required:
1. Residential Construction: New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 244/571
2. Nonresidential Construction: New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or
other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to the level of the
base flood elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:
a. Be floodproofed so that below the base flood elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water;
b. Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy;
and
c. Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of construction are
in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this subsection B2. Such
certifications shall be provided to the official as set forth in subsection 15.44.050C3b of this chapter. (1986
Code)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2020-03 - FLOODPLAIN ORDINANCE. Go to new
ordinance.
15.44.070: PENALTY:
Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished as a class C misdemeanor, as defined by chapter 1.16 of
this code. (1986 Code)
Chapter 15.45
STANDARDS FOR BUILDING IN THE CE-1 ZONE
15.45.010: LEGISLATIVE INTENT:
The CE-1 zone includes those areas of the city which, as the result of the presence of steep slopes, unstable soil
characteristics, flood hazards, erosion, mudflow or earthquake potential, wildfire hazards or similar natural conditions
or environmental hazards, are considered environmentally sensitive and fragile.
It is the intent and purpose of the city council to establish unique building requirements for structures built in the CE-1
zone in order to implement the purposes and intents stated in the CE-1 zone ordinance. With the enactment of this
chapter, it is the intent of the municipal council to authorize a governmental function of regulation within the meaning of
sections 63-30-3 and 63-30-10(1), (3) and (4) of the Utah code, as amended. (Ord. 00-09)
15.45.020: PRELIMINARY DETERMINATION BY CITY ENGINEER:
All proposals to grade, fill, or excavate land or to erect a structure for human habitation shall be referred to the city
engineer who shall make a preliminary determination by reference to the maps and materials maintained in his office if
any of the unsafe physical conditions described in section 18.30.030 of this code appear to exist in relation to the real
property which is included in the proposal. (Ord. 00-09)
15.45.030: PRESUMPTION:
Conditions described on Utah County geologic hazard maps and aerial topographical maps maintained by the city
engineer, together with explanatory material appurtenant thereto, shall be presumed to exist. (Ord. 00-09)
15.45.040: APPROVAL PROCEDURE AND REQUIREMENTS:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 245/571
A. Site Plan: Wherever the terms of this zone require submission and approval of a site plan, said plan shall conform
with and be approved in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and section 18.84.320 of this code.
B. Technical Reports: In addition to other materials required for submission, the site plan shall be accompanied by
copies of the following technical reports. The following technical reports shall be completed and certified by an
engineer licensed by the state of Utah.
1. Geotechnical And Geology Report: The report shall include, but is not necessarily limited to, both a global
investigation and a site specific investigation, including trenching, and not just boring for identification and
mapping of the location of major geographic and geologic features such as fault traces, surface ruptures, zones
of deformation, potential slide and other high hazard areas such as mine shafts and avalanche paths,
conclusions and recommendations regarding the effect of geologic conditions on the proposed development,
recommendations covering the adequacy of sites proposed for development, and any potential adverse impact
on the natural environment.
2. Soils Report: The report shall include, but is not necessarily limited to, both a global soils investigation and a site
specific soils investigation with respect to slope analysis, general soils classification, suitability for development,
erosion potential, any recommendations for proposed methods of mitigating any constraints determined to be
present as part of the development plan, and any adverse impact on the natural environment.
3. Fire Protection Report: The report shall include, but not be limited to, identification of potential fire hazards,
mitigation measures, access for fire protection equipment and proposed fire flow capability.
C. Technical Plans: In addition to other materials required for submission, the site plan shall be accompanied by
copies of the following technical plans. The following technical plans shall be completed and certified by a
structural engineer licensed by the state of Utah.
1. Footing And Foundation Plans: A plan for footings and foundations, taking into consideration the results of the
geotechnical and geology report and the soils report, and designed for a seismic three (3) zone in accordance
with the building code. The footing and foundation plans must be submitted to and approved by the city engineer.
2. Grading And Drainage Plan: A plan shall address any collapsible soils in the immediate site as well as
collapsible soils in the global area, and shall include, but is not necessarily limited to, information on groundwater
levels, identification and mapping of drainage channels and systems, floodplains, existing details and contours
where modification of terrain is proposed, the direction of proposed drainage flow, proposed plans and the
location of all surface and subsurface drainage devices to be constructed as part of the proposed development,
erosion control measures during the course of construction, identification of any grading and drainage problems
such as the alteration of natural drainage patterns and any other problems of the proposed development, and a
plan to mitigate or eliminate such problems, and any adverse impact to the natural environment.
3. Natural Conditions And Vegetation Analysis And Preservation Plan: This report and plan shall include a survey
of existing trees, large shrubs and ground covers, a plan for the proposed revegetation of the site, detailing
existing vegetation to be preserved, new vegetation to be planted and any modifications to existing vegetation,
and the identification of any vegetation problems and recommendations as how to mitigate or eliminate such
problems and avoid potential adverse impact on the natural environment. (Ord. 00-09)
15.45.050: ENGINEER GEOLOGIST QUALIFICATIONS AND CERTIFICATE:
A. All reports shall be approved and signed by one of the following:
1. A geotechnical engineer who shall be a registered professional engineer in the state of Utah, qualified by
training and experience in the application of the principles of soil mechanics to foundation investigation, slope
stability, and site development; or
2. An engineering geologist who shall be a graduate in geology or engineering geology from an accredited
university with at least five (5) years of professional geologic experience of which at least three (3) full years
shall be in the field of engineering geology.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 246/571
B. A geologic report shall contain the following certificate:
CERTIFICATE
I hereby certify that I am a geotechnical engineer or an engineering geologist. I have examined the geologic
report to which this certificate is attached and the information and conclusions contained therein are, without any
reasonable reservation not stated therein, accurate and complete. All procedures and tests used in said geologic
report meet minimum applicable professional standards.
Signature
C. In addition to any applicable private civil remedies, it shall be unlawful to knowingly make a false, untrue, or
incomplete statement in a geologic report or to sign the certificate described above knowing the same to be
materially false or not true. (Ord. 00-09)
15.45.060: INSPECTIONS:
A. City Engineer Inspections:
1. Review Of Reports And Plans: All reports and plans required by subsections 15.45.040A and B of this chapter,
shall be delivered by the owner to the city planning and zoning director. When the planning and zoning director
determines the delivery of all reports and plans to be complete, he will deliver the same to the city engineer for
inspection. The city engineer shall review the reports and plans to determine if they are complete, if they comply
with the requirements of this chapter, are certified and stamped by a licensed structural engineer when required
by this chapter, and a licensed engineer where required by this chapter, and to determine if the city engineer
agrees with the conclusions and interpretation of the various tests, and the plans' proposed methods of
mitigating the geotechnical, geological, soils and other conditions contained in the reports.
2. Inspection During Construction: The city engineer shall conduct the following inspections:
a. Footings And Foundations: The city engineer shall be notified at the following stages of the installation of
footings and foundations to ensure that construction of the improvement is consistent with the approved plans:
(1) After excavation, forming and placement of reinforcement, immediately prior to pouring of concrete for
footings.
(2) After excavation, forming and placement of reinforcement, immediately prior to pouring of concrete for
foundations.
b. Excavation And Grading: The city engineer shall be notified when excavation and/or grading shall begin, again
prior to installation of any pipe, line, improvement, or surface within, on, or over the area excavated and/or
graded, and again prior to replacing any soil in an area excavated and/or graded to ensure that construction of
the improvements is consistent with the approved plans.
c. Final Inspection: No occupancy permit shall issue until the city has received a written report from the city
inspector and city engineer following their final inspections declaring the construction to be complete, without
additional work required, and that all work is in conformance with the city and the building code standards.
(Ord. 00-09)
15.45.070: POSTCONSTRUCTION INSPECTION AND CERTIFICATION:
For any real property with respect to which development has proceeded on the basis of a geologic report which has
been acknowledged by the city engineer, no final inspection shall be completed or certificate of occupancy issued or
performance bond released until a qualified engineer or geologist shall certify that the completed improvements and
structures conform to the descriptions and requirements contained in said report. Provided, however, that
improvements and structures may, with the consent of the city engineer, deviate from the descriptions and
requirements contained in the geologic report because of conditions which are discovered after acknowledgment by
the city engineer of the geologic report. (Ord. 00-09)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 247/571
15.45.080: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
A. In addition to the provisions of this chapter, all grading, filling, or excavation of land or erection of any structure shall
comply with all other applicable provisions of this code. (Ord. 00-09)
15.45.090: APPEAL FROM DECISION OF CITY ENGINEER:
Any person dissatisfied with a decision of the city engineer may appeal the same within thirty (30) days thereof to the
planning commission, which shall affirm or reverse, either in whole or in part the decision of the city engineer. A
person dissatisfied with a decision of the planning commission may appeal that decision within thirty (30) days thereof
to the city council. Appeals to the city council decision can be appealed within thirty (30) days to any court of
competent jurisdiction for administrative and not a de novo review. (Ord. 00-09; amd. Ord. 2003-04, 2-5-2003, eff. 3-5-
2003)
15.45.100: SCOPE OF APPLICATION:
No subdivision or other development plat or plan shall be approved without compliance with the provisions of this
chapter. Every proposal to grade, fill, or excavate land, and every proposal to erect a structure for human habitation
shall be subject to this chapter, including proposals related to land in subdivisions or any other development plans
which may have been approved prior to the adoption of this chapter. (Ord. 00-09)
15.45.110: RESTRICTIVE COVENANT REQUIRED:
A. If a geologic report has been submitted to the city engineer, no development plan shall be approved and no building
permit shall be issued for construction of a structure until the owner(s) of the subject real property have signed and
delivered to Mapleton City a restrictive covenant in a form suitable for recording containing not less than the
following:
1. A complete description of the geologic condition of the subject real property, including references to relevant
reports and studies;
2. A description of the grading, filling, or excavating or erection of a structure for human habitation approved in the
geologic report which has been acknowledged by the city engineer, together with the requirements and
restrictions imposed thereon;
3. A covenant and agreement enforceable by Mapleton City, adjoining landowners, and any subsequent owner of
the subject real property that only the grading, filling, or excavating or erection of a structure contained in the
acknowledged geologic report will be constructed or maintained without further compliance with this chapter, as
it may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 00-09)
15.45.120: COSTS AND CHARGES:
All costs for processing the application and for conducting all regular and special reviews including, but not limited to,
review of all plans and technical reports and inspections by the city engineer as required herein, shall be borne by the
applicant. The city council may, by resolution, establish fees for the administration of this chapter and provide for the
assessment and collection thereof. (Ord. 00-09)
15.45.130: VIOLATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the terms and requirements of chapter 18.30 of this code. Any
violation of the requirements of this chapter shall constitute a class B misdemeanor. In the event a person changes the
natural state of any land surface having a slope of thirty percent (30%) or greater or, on any portion of land situated in
the CE-1 zone grades, cuts slopes, begins development, or constructs in violation of the terms of sections 15.45.040
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 248/571
through 15.45.120 of this chapter, the person violating the terms, and the person at whose direction the actions were
taken are required to immediately restore and revegetate the area disturbed consistent with a plan approved by the
city engineer and shall bear all costs of restoration, including the costs of the city engineer's review of the plan, and
the restoration process. No subdivision application shall be processed or approved, and no building or grading permits
shall be issued to the person violating these terms, the person at whose direction the actions were taken, nor the
owner, or subsequent owners of the property, until the disturbed land is restored and revegetated. A grading permit
shall be issued after proper application, for work to be performed to restore and revegetate the area disturbed. (Ord.
00-09)
Title 16
DEVELOPMENT CODE, PART I; MUNICIPAL PLANNING
Chapter 16.01
ESTABLISHMENT OF CODE; TITLE; INTENT AND PURPOSE
16.01.010: ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT CODE; TITLE:
The provisions contained within this title, entitled "municipal planning", title 17, entitled "subdivisions" and title 18
entitled "zoning" of this code are hereby designated and shall be entitled the DEVELOPMENT CODE OF MAPLETON
CITY, UTAH. (1986 Code)
16.01.020: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
It is the intent and purpose of the city council of Mapleton City, Utah, to avail itself of the powers granted under 10-9-1
to 10-9-30; 57-5-1 et seq., 57-8-35; and 10-2-401 et seq., Utah Code Annotated, 1953, as amended, in a manner that
will promote the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity, and general welfare of the present and future
inhabitants of the city, and to this end:
A. To encourage and facilitate orderly growth and development within the city.
B. To secure economy in municipal expenditures and to facilitate adequate provision for transportation, water, sewage,
parks, schools and other public requirements.
C. To lessen congestion in the streets, prevent the overcrowding of land, and provide adequate light and air.
D. To secure safety from fires, floods, traffic hazards, and other dangers.
E. To stabilize and improve property values.
F. To protect the tax base.
G. To promote the development of a more attractive, wholesome and serviceable city.
H. To create conditions favorable to prosperity, civic activities, and recreational, educational, and cultural opportunities.
(1986 Code)
16.01.030: INTERPRETATION:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 249/571
In interpreting and applying the development code, the provisions thereof shall be held to be the minimum
requirements needed to promote the public health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity, and general welfare
of the present and future inhabitants of the city.
Where the provisions of this development code impose a greater restriction than is required by any ordinance, code,
regulation, standard or other provisions of law or by any easement, covenant or private agreement, the provisions of
this development code shall govern. (1986 Code)
16.01.040: WHEN A LAND USE APPLICANT IS ENTITLED TO APPROVAL:
A. An applicant is entitled to approval of a land use application if the application conforms to the requirements of the
applicable sections of the development code in effect when a complete application is submitted and all fees have
been paid, unless: 1) the applicable land use authority, on the record, finds that a compelling, countervailing public
interest would be jeopardized by approving the application; or 2) before the application is submitted, the city has
formally initiated proceedings to amend its ordinances in a manner that would prohibit approval of the application
as submitted.
B. The city shall process an application without regard to proceedings initiated to amend the city's ordinances if: 1)
one hundred eighty (180) days have passed since the proceedings were initiated; and 2) the proceedings have not
resulted in an enactment that prohibits approval of the application as submitted.
C. An application for a land use approval is considered submitted and complete when the application is provided in a
form that complies with the requirements of applicable ordinances and all applicable fees have been paid.
D. The continuing validity of an approval of a land use application is conditioned upon the applicant proceeding after
approval to implement the approval with reasonable diligence.
E. No party shall be entitled to approval of a request to amend the number, shape, boundaries, or area of any zoning
district or any regulation of or within the zoning district inasmuch as such decisions are legislative in character and
within the sound discretion of the city council. (Ord. 2006-20, 7-19-2006)
Chapter 16.02
CITY COUNCIL; POWERS AND DUTIES WITH RESPECT TO
PLANNING
16.02.010: APPOINTMENTS:
A. Planning Commission1: The mayor, with the advice and consent of the council shall appoint a planning commission
for the city of Mapleton City. The number of members, terms of office, mode of appointment and other details
relating to the organization and procedure of the commission shall be as set forth under chapter 16.03 of this title.
(1986 Code)
B. Board Of Adjustment: (Rep. by Ord. 2013-04, 2-19-2013, eff. 4-1-2013)
C. Planning And Zoning Director2: The city council may appoint and fix compensation for a planning and zoning
director. The powers and duties of said director shall be the same as set forth under chapter 16.05 of this title.
(1986 Code)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 250/571
16.02.020: ADOPTION OF COMPREHENSIVE PLAN; EFFECT OF ADOPTION:
The city council may adopt a comprehensive plan of the city or any part thereof. Upon the adoption of such plan any
acceptance, widening, removal, extension, relocation, narrowing, vacation, abandonment, change of use, acquisition
of land for, or sale or lease of any street or other public way, ground, place, property, or structure; or any authorization
or construction of any street, park or other public way, ground, place or space, or any public building or structure, or
public utility, whether publicly or privately owned, shall either: a) conform to said plan, as to the location and extent
thereof, or b) shall have been submitted to and approved by the planning commission, or in the instance of a
disapproval by such commission, overruled by the council, all in accordance with section 10-9-21, Utah Code
Annotated. (1986 Code)
16.02.030: ADOPTION AND IMPLEMENTATION OF OFFICIAL MAP:
The city council may establish an official map of streets for the whole or any part or parts of the city and may adopt
such map by ordinance. The content of such map and all actions relating to the preparation, adoption and
enforcement shall be in accordance with sections 10-9-23 and 10-9-24, Utah Code Annotated, and any other
applicable provisions of state law. (1986 Code)
16.02.040: ADOPTION AND ADMINISTRATION OF ZONING REGULATIONS3:
The city council, after receiving the recommendation of the planning commission, may enact and enforce zoning
regulations within the city and may divide the city into zones of such number, shape and area as may be deemed best
suited to carry out the purposes of the zoning regulations. Such regulations shall be for the purpose of promoting
health, safety, morals, and the general welfare of the community and in so doing may regulate and restrict the height,
number of stories and size of buildings and other structures, the height and location of trees and other vegetation, the
percentage of lot that may be occupied, the size of yards, courts and other open spaces, the density of population and
the location and use of buildings, structures, and land for trade, industry, residence, or other purposes within the area.
Such regulations shall be made in accordance with a comprehensive zoning plan designed to lessen congestion in the
streets, to secure safety from fire, panic and other danger, to promote health and the general welfare, to encourage
energy efficient patterns of development, the use of energy conservation, solar, and renewable energy sources, and to
assure access to sunlight for solar energy devices, to provide adequate light and air, to prevent the overcrowding of
land, to avoid undue concentration of population, to facilitate adequate provision for transportation, water, sewage,
schools, parks and other public requirements. Such regulations shall be made with reasonable consideration, among
other things, to the character of the zone and its peculiar suitability for particular uses, and with a view to conserving
the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the city. (1986 Code)
16.02.050: ADOPTION AND ADMINISTRATION OF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS4:
Upon receipt of the proposed subdivision regulations as prepared by the planning commission, the city council shall
hold a public hearing thereon after which the city council may adopt by ordinance said regulations for the municipality.
No plat of a subdivision of land within the city shall be filed or recorded until it shall have been submitted to and
approved by the city council and such approval entered in writing on the plat. The approval by the city council shall be
in addition to that required by the planning commission. The filing or recording of a plat of a subdivision without such
approval shall be null and void and the sale of lots in any such unapproved subdivision shall be considered a violation
for each lot sold. (1986 Code)
16.02.060: ADOPTION AND ADMINISTRATION OF REGULATIONS RELATING TO
CONDOMINIUM PROJECTS5:
Upon receipt of proposed condominium regulations as prepared by the planning commission, the city council may
adopt such regulations by ordinance.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 251/571
No condominium project or any record of survey map, declaration or other required material shall be recorded until it
shall have been submitted to and approved by the city council. The approval by the city council shall be in addition to
the approval required by the planning commission. (1986 Code)
16.02.070: ENFORCEMENT OF REGULATIONS:
The city council shall have the authority and responsibility for ensuring compliance with the adopted zoning,
subdivision and official map ordinances, and in carrying out such responsibility may:
A. Withhold the issuance of building permits when the proposed development is not in conformance with the adopted
regulations6.
B. Prosecute any violation of such regulations as a misdemeanor7.
C. Institute injunction, mandamus, abatement or any other appropriate action to prevent, enjoin, abate, or remove any
unlawful building use or act8. (1986 Code)
16.02.080: CONDITIONS PRECEDENT TO JUDICIAL REVIEW:
A. As provided by Utah Code Annotated section 10-9a-701(4), an adversely affected party of a land use decision shall
present to the applicable appeal authority every theory of relief that it can raise in district court.
B. Decisions regarding whether or not to amend the number, shape, boundaries, or area of any zoning district; any
regulation of or within the zoning district; or any other provision of the development code may be appealed directly
to the district court.
C. An adversely affected party may not appeal to the district court a decision of the planning commission under
subsection B of this section. Only final decisions of the city council regarding amendments to the zoning ordinance
of Mapleton City (title 18 of this code) or other provisions of the development code may be appealed to the district
court.
D. An adversely affected party shall have thirty (30) days to appeal a final decision of the city council under subsection
16.01.040B of this title to the district court. (Ord. 2006-20, 7-19-2006)
16.02.090: CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT APPLICATIONS:
The city council shall have the authority to hear and decide appeals from planning commission decisions regarding
applications for conditional use permits, in accordance with the conditions of the applicable zoning regulations.
A. The city council's review shall be a review of the record made before the planning commission. The city council
shall presume that the planning commission's decision is valid, and will determine only whether the decision is
arbitrary, capricious, or illegal.
B. A planning commission decision is illegal if it violates applicable state law or city ordinances at the time the decision
was made.
C. A planning commission decision is arbitrary or capricious if it is not supported by substantial evidence in the record.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 252/571
D. If the city council determines that the planning commission's decision was arbitrary, capricious, or illegal, may deny
or, in the alternative, approve, with any appropriate conditions, the request for a conditional use permit. (Ord. 2007-
09, 5-15-2007)
Chapter 16.03
PLANNING COMMISSION
16.03.010: ESTABLISHMENT; COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS:
Pursuant to authority granted in title 10-9a-301 Utah Code Annotated 1953, as amended, the city council hereby
creates a planning commission within and for the city to be known as the Mapleton City planning commission. The
planning commission shall consist of five (5) regular members, and up to two (2) alternate members. The regular and
alternate members shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council, from among the
qualified electors of the city. The members shall be selected without respect to political affiliations and shall serve
without compensation except for reasonable expenses. (Ord. 2013-08, 8-3-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
16.03.020: TERMS OF OFFICE OF MEMBERS; FILLING VACANCIES; REMOVAL OF MEMBERS:
The terms of the appointive members shall be for three (3) years. Members may be reappointed for a second term, but
shall not exceed two (2) consecutive terms. When possible, the terms should be staggered so that the term of no more
than two (2) members shall expire each year.
The terms of the alternate members shall be for a period of one year and until their successors have been appointed.
Alternate members shall be designated as first and second alternate, in accordance with their respective time of
appointment.
Vacancies occurring otherwise than through the expiration of terms shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired
term.
Members may be removed after a public hearing by a majority vote of the city council. (Ord. 2013-08, 8-3-2013, eff. 1-
1-2014)
16.03.030: ORGANIZATION; ADOPTION OF RULES; RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS:
The planning commission shall elect from its membership a chairman who shall serve for a term of one year. It shall
be the duty of the chairman to preside over and conduct all meetings of the commission. The chairman, with the
consent of the commission, shall make such assignments and delegations to the members of the commission and
their staff and consultants as are deemed necessary or desirable for the carrying out of the commission's business.
The commission shall adopt rules for its own organization and for the transaction of its business not in conflict with this
section or other ordinances, and shall keep an accurate record of disposition of all matters coming before it. (Ord. 00-
13)
16.03.040: QUORUM DEFINED; MINIMUM VOTE REQUIRED; ALTERNATE MEMBERS TO ACT:
A minimum of three (3) full and/or alternate members in attendance at the meeting is required to constitute a quorum.
The chairman will be a voting member. The minimum number of "yes" votes necessary to carry an action of the
commission shall be a majority of the members of the quorum in attendance, but shall never be less than three (3).
Alternate members shall be designated to sit as voting members of the commission at any time one or more regular
members are absent from the meeting. The designation of the alternate member to voting status shall be made by the
chairman at the commencement of the meeting in accordance with the seniority of the alternate members in
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 253/571
attendance at the time, and any alternate so designated shall serve as a voting member until the conclusion of the
meeting. If during the course of a meeting the number of voting members and alternate members designated to voting
status in attendance exceeds five (5) the membership of the commission shall, until the conclusion of the meeting, be
expanded to the number of voting members and designated alternate members in attendance. (Ord. 2013-08, 8-3-
2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
16.03.050: DUTIES AND POWERS:
The city planning commission shall have such powers as may be necessary to enable it to perform its functions and
promote municipal planning as follows:
A. Preparation Of Comprehensive Plan1: It shall be the function and duty of the planning commission, after holding
public hearings, to make and adopt and certify to the city council, a comprehensive plan for the physical
development of the city including any areas outside of its boundaries which, in the commission's judgment, bear
relation to the planning of the city. The comprehensive plan, with the accompanying maps, plats, charts and
descriptive and explanatory matter, shall show the planning commission's recommendations for the physical
development of the city and may include among other things, the general location and extent of street and other
methods of circulation and transportation; the general location and extent of public utilities for water, power,
sanitation, or other purposes; the general location and extent of parks, playgrounds, and drainage facilities; and the
use of land whether for residences, commerce, industry, agriculture, flood channels, or open space.
B. Prepare Reports And Recommendations, Entry Upon Land2: The planning commission may make reports and
recommendations relating to the plan and development of the city to public officials and agencies, other
organizations and citizens. It may recommend to the executive or legislative officials, programs for public
improvements and the financing thereof. The planning commission, its members, and employees, in the
performance of its functions, may enter upon any land at reasonable times to make examinations and surveys and
place and maintain necessary monuments and marks thereon.
C. Regulations Governing Subdivision Of Land3: It shall be the duty of the planning commission to prepare regulations
governing the subdivision of land within the city or amendment to such regulations and to submit said regulations
or amendments to the city council for public hearing and adoption.
D. Approve Subdivision Plans And Plats4: It shall be the duty of the planning commission to review and approve all
subdivision developments. No plat of a subdivision of land within the city shall be filed or recorded in the county
recorder's office until it shall have been submitted to and approved by the planning commission and such approval
entered in writing on the plat. The approval by the planning commission shall be in addition to the approval
required from the city council. The filing or recording of a plat of a subdivision without such approval shall be null
and void and the sale of lots in any such unapproved subdivision shall be considered a violation of the subdivision
ordinance for each lot sold.
E. Prepare And Recommend Amendments To The Zoning Regulations5: The planning commission through its own
initiative, may, or upon receipt of a petition from an affected property owner, or by order of the city council, shall
make and certify to the city council recommendations for the amendment of the zoning regulations and map.
No amendment to the text or map may be adopted by the city council unless the planning commission has
reviewed and made recommendations to the council regarding that amendment. The planning commission shall
have thirty (30) days from the date the request is made to the chairman to respond to any request from the council
for recommendation.
F. Preparation Of Regulations Governing Condominium Development6: The planning commission shall prepare
regulations governing the approval, construction and maintenance of condominium projects, or amendments to
such regulations and shall submit said regulations to the city council for adoption.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 254/571
G. Review and Approval Of Condominium Projects: It shall be the duty of the planning commission to review and
approve all condominium projects. The filing or recording of any record of survey map, declaration or other material
for condominium projects, without such approval, shall be null and void. The approval by the planning commission
shall be in addition to the approval from the city council.
H. Preparation Of A Capital Improvement Program7: The planning commission through its own initiative may, or by
order of the city council shall, make and recommend to the city council a capital improvement program which shall
set forth an orderly program for the acquisition of land, and/or the construction of buildings, utilities and other
facilities needed for city purposes.
I. Conducting Hearings And Meetings8: The planning commission may conduct hearings and meetings with interested
property owners, officials and citizens in the process of carrying out the functions and duties of their office.
J. Hearing And Granting Conditional Use Permits: The planning commission shall hear and decide requests for
conditional use permits based on compliance with standards and criteria set forth in the zoning ordinances for
those uses. (Ord. 00-13)
K. Appeal Of An Administrative Ruling: To hear and decide appeals in accordance with section 18.84.460 of this code.
L. Special Exception: To hear and decide applications for approval of special exceptions in accordance with section
18.84.360 of this code.
M. Variances: To hear and decide applications for variances from the terms of land use regulations in accordance with
section 18.84.360 of this code.
N. Interpretation Of Text Or Map: To make, upon appeal, an interpretation of the zone map regarding the location of
zone boundary lines, or decide the meaning of disputed terms or phrases within the text of the zoning regulations.
(Ord. 2013-04, 2-19-2013, eff. 4-1-2013)
Chapter 16.04
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
(Rep. by Ord. 2013-04, 2-19-2013, eff. 4-1-2013)
Chapter 16.05
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR
16.05.010: DIRECTOR APPOINTED:
There is hereby created the position of community development director (formerly known as planning and zoning
director). Said director is hereby charged with the administration and enforcement of the zoning regulations of the city
and other duties as set forth below.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 255/571
The community development director shall be appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council,
and shall report to the city administrator. (Ord. 2007-09, 5-15-2007)
16.05.020: POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR:
The community development director shall have the following powers and duties and may assign these powers and
duties:
A. Review all applications for building permits and certificates of zoning compliance and issue such permits or
certificates when all requirements of the zoning regulations have been met;
B. Enforce the zoning regulations within the city and refuse to issue any permit unless the plans for the proposed
development, construction, or use fully conform to all zoning regulations in effect within the city; (Ord. 2007-09, 5-
15-2007)
C. Keep the official zoning map current;
D. Perform research, preparation and presentation to the planning commission, citizen advisory commissions, and city
council on land use issues as needed;
E. Meet with developers on project proposals;
F. Receive and investigate ordinance violation complaints, contact violators and enforce the city zoning code, and
issue orders to comply with the zoning code so as to uniformly, tactfully and impartially enforce city ordinances and
resolve disputes and misunderstandings; and
G. Perform other related work as needed. (Ord. 2013-04, 2-19-2013, eff. 4-1-2013)
16.05.030: APPOINTMENT:
The position of community development director shall be filled in accordance with the current city personnel policies
and procedures manual. (Ord. 2007-09, 5-15-2007)
Title 17
DEVELOPMENT CODE, PART II; SUBDIVISIONS
Chapter 17.01
TITLE AND INTENT
17.01.010: TITLE:
This title shall be entitled the SUBDIVISION AND RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE OF MAPLETON
CITY, UTAH, and may be so cited and pleaded. In addition, the provisions of this title, as may, from time to time, be
amended, are hereby included in and shall constitute part of the development code of Mapleton City1. (Ord. 2002-25,
12-4-2002)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 256/571
17.01.020: INTENT:
The intent of this title is as follows:
A. To facilitate the orderly development of the city.
B. To implement the city's transportation and circulation element of the general plan.
C. To facilitate the development of a safe and efficient street system.
D. To facilitate the orderly transfer of the ownership of building sites in a manner consistent with state law.
E. To ensure adequate water, sewer, drainage, utilities, and other services to developing areas of the city.
F. To establish the rights, duties, and responsibilities of subdividers with respect to the development of subdivisions
within the city.
G. To facilitate the development of a trail system. (Ord. 2002-25, 12-4-2002)
Chapter 17.02
SUBDIVISION PLANS AND PLATS REQUIRED
17.02.010: SUBDIVISION PLATS REQUIRED; TO BE RECORDED:
No person shall subdivide, as defined by section 17.32.010 of this title, any tract of land within the incorporated limits
of the city; nor shall any person sell, exchange, purchase or otherwise convey a parcel of land which is part of a larger
tract, if such sale or agreement would have the effect of creating a "subdivision" as defined by this title, unless and
until a final plat, prepared in accordance with the provisions of this title, shall have been reviewed and approved by the
appropriate decision making body consistent with chapter 17.04 of this title and recorded in the office of the county
recorder. (Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
17.02.020: EXEMPTION FROM PLAT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Agricultural lot splits that comply with the following standards are exempt from plat requirements:
1. The property qualifies as land in agricultural use under section 59-2-502 of the Utah code; and
2. Each lot will comply with the minimum lot size requirement of the applicable zone in which the property is
located; and
3. The property does not contain any existing residential units and will not be used for nonagricultural purposes;
and
4. The boundaries of each lot or parcel shall be graphically illustrated on a record of survey map that is presented
to the city. Upon approval by the community development director or his/her designee the record of survey map
shall be recorded with the Utah County recorder.
B. Parcel boundary adjustments are exempt from plat requirements. A "parcel boundary adjustment" means a
recorded agreement between owners of adjoining properties adjusting their mutual boundary if:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 257/571
1. No additional parcel is created; and
2. Each property identified in the agreement is unsubdivided land, including a remainder of subdivided land. (Ord.
2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
17.02.030: LOTS CREATED BY METES AND BOUNDS DESCRIPTION:
A. In order to ensure the accurate location of property lines and the location of future construction and land uses within
those property lines; and in order to ensure the orderly dedication of rights of way for public thoroughfares; and in
order to facilitate the orderly transfer of ownership of buildable lots, no property created by a "metes and bounds"
description and recorded with the Utah County recorder shall be considered eligible for the issuance of a building
permit unless:
1. The property is recognized as a legal lot of record by the community development director or his or her
designee, meets all current zoning standards, and a plat describing such parcel of land is approved by the
community development director or his or her designee and recorded with the Utah County recorder; or
2. The property has been recognized by the community development director or his or her designee as a legal
nonconforming lot of record, a plat describing such parcel of land is approved by the community development
director or his or her designee and the plat is recorded with the Utah County recorder.
B. A plat authorized by this section shall be prepared in accordance with section 17.04.060 of this title and section
18.84.390 of this code.
C. If a property qualifies as a legal lot of record or a legal nonconforming lot of record and is already developed with a
dwelling unit, no plat shall be required. However, a street dedication may still be required. (Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-
2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
Chapter 17.03
CONDOMINIUMS
17.03.010: PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES:
The purpose of this chapter shall be to establish regulations governing the platting and construction of condominiums
and their associated common areas. (Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
17.03.020: APPLICABILITY:
For the purposes of this chapter, "condominiums" shall be defined as a building or complex in which individual units
within buildings are owned by individuals, and common areas such as grounds and common buildings are owned
jointly by the unit owners. (Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
17.03.030: ZONING REQUIREMENTS:
Condominium plats shall adhere to the zoning requirements of the zone where the condominium is to be located. The
condominium units shall follow the requirements of the individual zone regarding general types of uses allowed. For
example, residential condominium units would not be allowed in zones that do not allow any residential uses.
However, mixed use condominiums may be permitted if the individual zone allows for mixed uses. (Ord. 2016-01, 5-
18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
17.03.040: BUILDING STANDARDS; ALL CONDOMINIUMS:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 258/571
Each new condominium or conversion of an existing building to a condominium shall meet the following standards:
A. Each condominium shall conform to current international building code standards for condominiums.
B. Each plan shall be reviewed by the development review committee (DRC) and the building official for
recommendations to the planning commission and city council.
C. Each unit shall have a separate accessible meter and shutoff for natural gas and electrical services.
D. An existing building which was constructed prior to January 5, 2010, may share water meters. Buildings
constructed after January 5, 2010, shall have a separate water meter for each unit. However, common areas may
have a meter for both culinary and pressurized irrigation owned by the homeowners' association.
E. Units may share sewer laterals, based on the city's standards for pipe sizes and equivalent residential units
(ERUs), however each unit shall be charged the equivalent of one ERU per unit.
F. Each unit must have its own heating unit. Air conditioning, if present, shall be separate for each unit as well. (Ord.
2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
17.03.050: BUILDING STANDARDS; CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS:
Any existing building proposed to be converted into condominiums shall meet the following standards:
A. Each unit proposed for conversion shall be inspected by the building official. The requirements of the building
official shall be binding, for issues related to the life safety requirements of the international building code.
However, conversion into a condominium unit shall not be authorized until approval by the planning commission
and city council, and the issuance of a building permit.
B. Each project proposed for conversion to a condominium shall be inspected by the city building official or designee.
The city engineer shall prepare a list of any infrastructure problems that need correction. These recommendations
shall be forwarded to the planning commission and city council. (Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
17.03.060: PLAT REQUIREMENTS:
Each application for a condominium plat shall conform to all other provisions of this title and shall include:
A. A condominium plat prepared by a licensed surveyor, including existing and proposed building footprints, proposed
property lines. If multi-story buildings are proposed, elevations showing bench marks and property lines shall be
included on the plat.
B. A site plan showing building locations, landscaping, trash enclosures, and parking areas, and other site features.
C. Covenants, conditions, and restrictions (CC&Rs) for the condominiums, including information on who will be
responsible for the maintenance of the common areas. (Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
17.03.070: UTAH CONDOMINIUM OWNERSHIP ACT:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 259/571
Each application for a condominium plat shall conform to all other provisions of title 57, real estate, chapter 8,
condominium ownership act, Utah code. (Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
17.03.080: APPROVAL AUTHORITY:
Preliminary condominium plats shall be reviewed by the planning commission, which shall make a recommendation to
the city council. Upon approval of the preliminary plat by the city council, a final plat and construction drawings shall be
submitted for review and final approval by the development review committee. If an applicant contests any
requirements imposed by the DRC as part of the final plat approval, the applicant may request that the application be
referred to the city council for a final decision. (Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
17.03.090: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS:
Improvements shown on the approved plat shall be completed in a manner consistent with section 17.16.010 of this
title. (Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
17.03.100: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
Where there are any conflicts between this chapter and other sections of this code in relation to condominium plats
this chapter shall prevail. (Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
Chapter 17.04
PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF A SUBDIVISION
17.04.010: DEVELOPMENT REVIEW COMMITTEE:
The development review committee (DRC) is an internal city committee made up of staff representatives of the
community development department and the public works and engineering department. Staff from other city
departments may also attend as needed. The responsibilities of the DRC include, but are not limited to, the following:
A. To establish subdivision application forms and checklists;
B. To review development applications including concept plans, subdivisions, commercial site plans and project plans;
C. To provide recommendations to the planning commission and/or city council regarding development applications
that require their approval;
D. To review subdivision final plats and construction drawings, and to approve, approve with conditions or deny final
plats and construction drawings; and
E. To hold preconstruction meetings for approved subdivision plats and other applicable development projects. (Ord.
2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
17.04.020: PREPARE AND SUBMIT PLANS TO CITY:
The applicant shall prepare and submit a land use application, including fees, in accordance with this code and
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 260/571
community development department policy. The applicant may submit a concept plan. While the concept plan is
optional except under the circumstances stated below, a preliminary and a final plat are required. The submission shall
be in accordance with the following standards and guidelines:
A. Concept Plan:
1. The concept plan shall include the drawings and documentation set forth in the concept plan application
maintained by the community development department.
2. Where the applicant owns or controls more territory than he proposes to submit for preliminary or final approval,
or under circumstances where the proposed subdivision is part of a larger project or territory which the applicant
owns or controls and which includes property in more than one planning district or zone as defined in the
Mapleton City general plan, the city may require that a concept plan covering the larger area be submitted. The
concept plan for the larger area shall show how the immediate development relates: a) to possible development
of the remaining territory, b) to the city's major street plan, and c) to the provision of other public services, utilities
and facilities.
3. An applicant may submit a concept plan if the applicant desires to obtain input from city staff or the city council
prior to undertaking the preparation and submission of a complete preliminary plat.
4. If the community development director concludes that, because of the scope or complexity of a proposed
project, the proposal should be reviewed by the city council at the concept plan stage, he may direct that the
plan be forwarded for review by the city council prior to the preparation of the preliminary plat.
5. Any review of a concept plan by the city council shall be considered as advisory only and shall not constitute a
commitment of approval of a subsequent preliminary plat or final plat.
B. Preliminary Plat:
1. The preliminary plat shall include the drawings and documentation set forth in the application form provided by
the community development department as well as the requirements set forth in this title.
2. Where a subdivider proposes to submit a final plat containing less territory than shown on the preliminary plat
(phased development) the preliminary plat shall identify each of the proposed phases. Any such final plat
phasing scheme shall occur at logical "break points" in the project and provide access and utility services which
will be adequate in the event that subsequent phases do not occur. The phasing scheme shall also incorporate
the provisions of chapter 17.12 of this title.
3. No phasing scheme shall have the effect of leaving a residual lot for which the required subdivision
improvements have not been previously constructed or for the proposed subdivision. For purposes of this code a
"residual lot" shall be defined as a zoning lot, created by the proposed subdivision, but which is not shown as a
lot on the final plat of the subdivision project or as future development. A future development parcel must be
developable into multiple lots meeting the area standards for the applicable zone. (Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff.
6-16-2016)
17.04.030: SUBMISSION OF PRELIMINARY PLAT APPLICATION:
A. An applicant shall submit a preliminary plat application to the community development department.
B. The application will then be reviewed by the DRC for completeness and consistency with Mapleton City standards.
Multiple reviews and submittals may be required based on the completeness and accuracy of the application.
C. Upon a determination that the application is complete, the DRC shall schedule the application for review by the
planning commission. (Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
17.04.040: PLANNING COMMISSION REVIEW OF PRELIMINARY PLAT:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 261/571
A. The city shall provide notification to all property owners within three hundred feet (300') of the proposed subdivision.
The city may require the applicant to reimburse the city for any expenses incurred by the notification.
B. The planning commission shall be the final decision making body for all preliminary plat applications of three (3) lots
or less (including all proposed phases) that do not include: 1) a legislative request (rezone, general plan
amendment, TDR overlay, etc.), and/or 2) a request to amend or waive certain public improvement requirements
per subsection 17.12.040B of this title. For all other subdivisions, the planning commission shall make a
recommendation to the city council to: 1) approve the plat, 2) approve the plat with conditions, or 3) deny the plat.
The commission may also continue review of the plat with a request for changes and/or additional information.
C. In reviewing the proposed subdivision, the planning commission shall consider the following:
1. Are the plans, documents and other submission materials (including technical reports where required)
sufficiently detailed for proper consideration of the project?
2. Do the submitted plans, documents and submission materials conform to applicable city standards?
3. Does the proposed development conform to city zoning ordinances and subdivision design standards?
4. Do any natural or manmade conditions exist on or in the vicinity of the site defined in the preliminary plat that,
without remediation, would render part or all of the property unsuitable for development? Does the preliminary
plat address these conditions?
5. Does the preliminary plat provide for safe and convenient traffic circulation and road access to adjacent
properties under all weather conditions?
6. Does the preliminary plat impose an undue financial burden upon the city?
7. Are the location and arrangement of the lots, roads, easements and other elements of the subdivision
contemplated by the preliminary plat consistent with the city's general street map and other applicable elements
of the general plan? Does the preliminary plat recognize and accommodate the existing natural conditions?
8. Are the public facilities, including public utility systems serving the area defined in the preliminary plat adequate
to serve the proposed development?
9. Will the project contemplated in the preliminary plat conform to the intent of this title as stated in chapter 17.01 of
this title?
D. The planning commission may direct that changes be made in the preliminary plat so that it conforms to the
objectives of the applicable zone and this title, including, but not limited to, redesign of the road system, future
extension of the road system into adjacent properties, relocation of lot boundary lines, and increase in water line
size and other utilities if necessary for the proposed development or future development.
E. All preliminary plat approvals shall be valid for two (2) years unless otherwise specified by the final decision making
body. (Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
17.04.050: CITY COUNCIL REVIEW:
A. After the planning commission has made a formal recommendation, the preliminary plat shall be scheduled for
review by the city council.
B. The city council shall consider the recommendations from the DRC and the planning commission and shall review
the application for consistency with applicable federal, state and local standards.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 262/571
C. The city council shall take action to: 1) approve the preliminary plat, 2) approve the preliminary plat with conditions,
3) continue review of the plat with a request for changes and/or additional information, or 4) deny the preliminary
plat. (Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
17.04.060: PREPARE AND SUBMIT FINAL PLAT, ENGINEERING DRAWINGS, AND DOCUMENTS
TO THE DEVELOPMENT REVIEW COMMITTEE (DRC):
A. After receiving preliminary plat approval, the applicant shall submit a final plat and construction drawings consistent
with the final plat application checklist provided by the community development department.
B. The DRC shall review the final plat and engineering drawings for consistency with applicable standards and with
any conditions required by the final decision making body for the preliminary plat.
C. Upon a determination that the application is consistent with applicable standards and conditions, the DRC shall
provide a written letter of approval to the applicant.
D. If an applicant is proposing substantial changes to the preliminary plat, the applicant shall be referred to the
decision making body that approved the preliminary plat for final approval. Substantial changes shall include an
increase in the number of proposed lots, changes to the location and/or configuration of streets including stub
streets, and/or other changes deemed substantial by the DRC.
E. If an applicant contests any requirements imposed by the DRC as part of the final plat approval, the applicant may
request that the application be referred to the city council for a final decision. (Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-
2016)
17.04.070: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
17.04.080: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
17.04.090: AMENDING AND VACATING A SUBDIVISION PLAT:
A petition to vacate, alter or amend an entire plat, or to vacate a street in a subdivision shall conform to Utah code.
Petitions to adjust lot lines between adjacent properties, or petitions to combine lots in a platted and recorded
subdivision shall require approval from the community development director, and the plat shall be signed by the
planning commission chairperson, mayor, and all other applicable signatures. Said amendment shall be drawn in final
plat format to meet Mapleton City code. The plat shall include the lot or lots to be vacated. If adjusting a lot line or
combining lots, the previous lot(s) shall be considered "vacated" and the new lot(s) in their new configuration shall be
shown on the amended plat. The plat shall be given the same name as the subdivision that is affected, and shall be
given the next available plat alphabetical designation. Said amendments and lot line adjustments as herein defined,
shall not create a new building lot, and the amendment or lot line adjustment shall not violate the lot requirements in
the underlying zone. Appeals to decisions made to approve an amended subdivision plat shall be the same as
described in section 18.84.460 of this code. (Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
17.04.100: NUISANCE STRIPS AND REMNANT PARCELS:
No subdivision or platting of a lot shall create a nuisance strip or remnant parcel of property less than the minimum lot
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 263/571
size for the zone in which it is located. If a remnant parcel is proposed, a phasing plan must be submitted
demonstrating how the remnant parcel can be developed in the future. Remnant land not included in the proposed
subdivision or platting of a lot can be deeded to adjacent property by "quitclaim", recorded at the same time as the
subdivision or recording of a plat. (Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
17.04.110: APPLICANT COMPLETES IMPROVEMENTS OR SUBMITS PERFORMANCE
GUARANTEE:
After final plat approval by the appropriate land use authority, the applicant shall either complete the required
improvements or post a performance guarantee in accordance with section 17.16.010 of this title. A preconstruction
meeting with the DRC shall be required prior to the commencement of construction. (Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-
16-2016)
17.04.120: FINAL PLAT RECORDED IN OFFICE OF COUNTY RECORDER:
The final plat shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder when either:
A. The required improvements have been completed in accordance with section 17.16.010 of this title; or
B. A performance guarantee and a durability bond have been submitted in accordance with chapter 17.20 of this title.
(Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
17.04.130: AVAILABILITY OF ADEQUATE PUBLIC FACILITIES:
A. Approval of all development that requires development review approval shall be governed by this chapter.
B. The public facilities to which this section applies shall include the following:
1. The city culinary water system, including quantity, quality, treatment, storage capacity, transmission capacity,
and distribution capacity;
2. The city sanitary sewer system, including treatment, overall capacity, outfall lines, laterals, and collector lines;
3. The stormwater system, including drainage and flood control facilities;
4. Streets and roads, including arterial and collector roads, sidewalks, curb and gutter, and related transportation
facilities;
5. City pressurized irrigation system, including transmission and distribution capacity.
C. Approval shall not be granted until such time as the applicant has provided information, to the satisfaction of the city
engineer, that adequate public facilities exist in the areas affected by the development to accommodate the
development.
D. The adequacy of public facilities shall be determined as of the date of application. Upon application for a
development which requires development review, the city engineer, or his designee, shall calculate the public
facilities existing as of the date of the application based on adopted utility master plans. Additional evaluation may
be required for areas not covered in the master plans. (Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
17.04.140: UNAVAILABILITY OF ADEQUATE PUBLIC FACILITIES:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 264/571
A. In the event that the city engineer determines that adequate public facilities are not available and will not be
available by the time of approval, so as to assure that adequate public services are available at the time of
occupancy, the following alternatives may be elected, at the discretion of the city council:
1. Allowing the developer to voluntarily construct those public facilities which are necessary to service the
proposed development and provide adequate facilities as determined by the city engineer, and by entering into
an appropriate development agreement and/or reimbursement agreement consistent with section 13.20.060 of
this code, which may include, as deemed appropriate by the city engineer, provisions for recoupment of any
expenses incurred above and beyond those reasonably necessary for or related to the need created by or the
benefit conferred upon the proposed development, and the method and conditions upon which recoupment is to
be obtained;
2. Requiring the timing, sequencing, and phasing of the proposed development consistent with the availability of
adequate public facilities;
3. Denying approval and allowing the applicant to reapply when adequate public facilities are available. (Ord. 2016-
01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
Chapter 17.08
DOCUMENTATION REQUIREMENTS
17.08.010: DOCUMENT SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS:
All subdivision applications shall include the documents identified in the subdivision application packet provided by the
community development department. (Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
17.08.020: TECHNICAL REPORTS REQUIRED; CE-1 ZONE AND OTHER ZONES AS MAY BE
REQUIRED:
The technical reports are required for all subdivision applications in the CE-1 zone, floodplain zones A or B as defined
by the U.S. department of housing and urban development flood insurance rate map and all other property in the fault
buffer areas or debris flow areas indicated on the Utah County hazard map.
A. Technical Report: In addition to other materials required for submission, the preliminary plat shall be accompanied
by copies of the following technical reports prepared by a professional engineer licensed by the state of Utah.
1. Geotechnical And Geology Report (Global And Site Specific): The report shall include, but is not necessarily
limited to, identification and mapping of the location of major geographic and geologic features such as fault
traces, surface ruptures, zones of deformation, potential slide and other high hazard areas such as mine shafts
and avalanche paths, conclusions and recommendations regarding the effect of geologic conditions on the
proposed development, recommendations covering the adequacy of sites proposed for development, and any
potential adverse impact on the natural environment. This report shall be completed by a geotechnical engineer
or an engineering geologist. The geotechnical report shall contain a certification in accordance with section
18.30.090 of this code.
The geotechnical investigation shall include soil borings extended to a depth sufficient to define the soil
stratigraphy, water table and other features within the zone of significant stress of the proposed structural
footings of the proposed development. If the development needs evaluation of slope stability then the soil
borings will extend deep enough to define all soil layers in the zone of possible slippage.
If published geologic maps show possible faults in the area or a surface geologic examination reveals signs of
faulting then the geotechnical investigation will be supplemented by trenching in addition to the soil borings. The
trenches will be so located as to intercept the apparent fault at a perpendicular angle to the trend of the fault.
The trenching will extend a minimum of twenty feet (20') each side of the located fault. Developments of two (2)
acres or more will require at least two (2) trenches to define the fault. One trench will be approximately where the
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 265/571
fault enters the property and the other where it leaves the property. The trenches will be excavated to a depth
that will define the fault and allow physical observation and measurement to be taken.
2. Soils Report: The report shall include, but is not necessarily limited to, information with respect to slope analysis,
general soils classification, suitability for development, erosion potential, any recommendations for proposed
methods of mitigating any constraints determined to be present as part of the development plan, and any
adverse impact on the natural environment.
3. Stormwater, Grading And Drainage Plan: The plan shall include, but is not necessarily limited to, information on
groundwater levels, identification and mapping of drainage channels and systems, floodplains, existing details
and contours where modification of terrain is proposed, the direction of proposed drainage flow, proposed plans
and the location of all surface and subsurface drainage devices to be constructed as part of the proposed
development, erosion control measures during the course of construction, identification of any grading and
drainage problems such as the alteration of natural drainage patterns and any other problems of the proposed
development, and a plan to mitigate or eliminate such problems and any adverse impact on the natural
environment.
4. Natural Conditions And Vegetation Analysis And Preservation Plan: This report and plan shall include a survey
of existing trees, large shrubs and ground covers, a plan for the proposed revegetation of the site, detailing
existing vegetation to be preserved, new vegetation to be planted and any modifications to existing vegetation,
and the identification of any vegetation problems and recommendations as how to mitigate or eliminate such
problems and avoid potential adverse impact on the natural environment.
5. Fire Protection Report: The report shall include, but not be limited to, identification of potential fire hazards,
mitigation measures, access for fire protection equipment and proposed fire flow capability.
The scope and content of these required technical reports and plans shall be in accordance with city standards.
The planning commission, subject to the prior recommendation of the city engineer, may waive the necessity for
submitting one or more of the technical reports or any elements of a report where, in its opinion, conditions
associated with the proposed development do not require consideration of the subject matter covered. Also,
where the lot is contained within an approved subdivision and the technical reports previously submitted as part
of the subdivision approval process are sufficient in scope and detail to adequately address the issues required
under this chapter, this requirement may be waived. (Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
Chapter 17.12
DESIGN STANDARDS AND CRITERIA
17.12.010: SUBDIVISION DESIGN TO CONFORM TO STANDARDS:
The layout and design of all subdivision developments shall be in accordance with the standards as contained herein
or as may be adopted by the city pursuant to the provisions of chapter 17.24 of this title. (Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff.
6-16-2016)
17.12.020: STREETS AND ROADS; GENERAL CRITERIA:
A. Subdivision Plans To Be Consistent With Transportation And Circulation Element Of The General Plan: Subdivision
plans shall be consistent with the transportation and circulation element of the general plan as adopted by the city,
as follows:
1. Arterial And Collector Streets (Feeder): Where the area of a proposed subdivision includes any arterial or
collector class streets, as shown on the transportation and circulation element of the general plan, the
subdivision plan shall incorporate such streets in the location shown on the transportation and circulation
element of the general plan and the approval of the final plat shall include the dedication of the right of way and
its improvement in accordance with the applicable city standards.
2. Minor Streets (Local Service): Where the area of a proposed subdivision includes any minor class streets, as
shown on the transportation and circulation element of the general plan, the subdivision plan shall provide for
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 266/571
such streets in the approximate location shown and the approval of the final plat shall include the dedication of
the right of way and its improvement in accordance with the applicable city standards.
3. Modifications: Subdivisions may include modifications to the locations and designations of streets shown on the
transportation plan provided the modifications do not inhibit the implementation of the goals and policies of the
plan.
B. Relationship To Adjacent Streets: The proposed street system shall properly align and be compatible with adjacent
streets.
C. Access To Adjacent Properties: In order to facilitate the development of an adequate and convenient circulation
system within the city and to provide access for the logical development of adjacent vacant properties, the city
may, as a condition of approval, require the subdivision plan to include one or more temporary dead end streets
(stub streets) which extend to the boundary of the subdivision. All such stub streets shall be fully developed to the
boundary of the subdivision. Any plan for the subsequent development of the adjacent property shall provide for
the continuation of any such stub street.
D. Temporary Dead End (Stub Streets): Where a final plat includes a dead end stub street which is intended to be
continued into adjacent property in the future and which serves as the primary access for one or more adjacent
lots, said final plat shall make provision for temporarily accommodating vehicular movement and the extension of
utility services by designating temporary cul-de-sacs, turnaround areas, travel easements connecting the end of
the stub street with other streets in the vicinity or such other temporary measure as may be approved by the
planning commission. Such temporary facilities required pursuant to this provision shall remain until such time as
the street has been extended into the adjacent property and the improvements accepted by the city. (Ord. 2016-01,
5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
17.12.030: STREETS AND ROADS; RIGHT OF WAY WIDTH:
Subject to the provisions adopted under section 17.12.040 of this chapter:
A. The minimum width of right of way for streets shown on the transportation circulation element of the general plan
shall conform to the width as designated on the plan and/or based on the approved street cross sections for the
subdivision. (Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
17.12.040: STREETS AND ROADS; WIDTH OF PAVEMENT; OTHER IMPROVEMENTS:
A. All streets within and adjacent to the subdivision shall be hard surfaced. The width of the hard surfacing and the
location and type of other required street improvements shall be as set forth on the applicable street cross section
standard adopted by the city council.
B. As part of the preliminary plat review process, if approved by the city council, the curb, gutter, and sidewalk
improvements otherwise required may be modified and specifically tailored to more effectively achieve the policies,
goals, and objectives of Mapleton City. The modification shall be consistent with appropriate engineering measures
to protect public safety and shall be made after the recommendation of the city engineer, the city staff, and the
planning commission. (Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
17.12.050: STREETS AND ROADS; DESIGN STANDARDS:
A. Reverse Curves: Reverse curves shall have a tangent of at least one hundred feet (100'), unless in the opinion of
the planning commission such is not necessary.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 267/571
B. Street Intersection: Streets shall intersect each other as nearly as possible at right angles. Minor streets shall
approach the major or collector streets at an angle of not less than eighty degrees (80°). Offsets in street alignment
of more than fifteen feet (15') or less than one hundred twenty feet (120') shall be prohibited.
C. Street Grades: The maximum grade of any street in the subdivision shall be eight percent (8%) unless the street
design has been approved by the city engineer.
D. Street Curves: Where the street lines within a block deflect from each other at any one point more than ten degrees
(10°), there should be a connecting curve. The radius of the curve for the inner street line should be not less than
three hundred fifty feet (350') for arterial and collector class streets, two hundred fifty feet (250') for an important
minor class street, and one hundred feet (100') for minor streets.
E. Curbs: Where curbs are required said curbs at intersections shall be rounded with curves having a minimum radius
of twenty feet (20') for minor streets, and twenty five feet (25') for collector and major streets. Property lines at
street intersections shall be parallel to the curve where necessary to fit the curb radius.
F. Street Names: New street names should not duplicate those already existing. A street obviously a continuation of
another already in existence should bear the same name. Before the street is named, the proposed name must be
submitted to and approved by the city.
G. Cul-De-Sacs: Cul-de-sacs shall be discouraged. Cul-de-sacs may be appropriate in cases where the possibility of
future adjacent development does not exist due to topography or existing development, where an additional
through street would be unnecessary, or other special circumstances as determined appropriate by the final
decision making body. When permitted, permanent cul-de-sacs shall be designed in accordance with adopted
standard drawings, each cul-de-sac stem shall meet the standard street requirement including right of way,
pavement width, gutter, curb, and sidewalk within residential subdivisions. The maximum length of a cul-de-sac
street shall be four hundred feet (400') from the center of the cul-de-sac to the centerline of the intersecting street.
The planning commission may allow a five hundred foot (500') maximum cul-de-sac length if the applicant of such
can demonstrate one or both of the following requirements:
1. That a road cannot be extended through the property to connect to another street elsewhere.
2. That development has occurred on at least three (3) sides of the surrounding property.
H. Easements: Easements of not less than ten feet (10') on each side of all rear lot lines and side lines will be required
where necessary for poles, wire, conduits, storm or sanitary sewers, gas and water mains, and other public utilities.
Easements of greater width may be required along property lines where necessary for surface overflow or for the
extension of main sewers or similar utilities.
I. Road Edge Curbing: All Mapleton City streets shall be curbed. In zones which do not require high back curbs, the
pavement shall be curbed with a two foot (2') wide concrete roll curb.
J. Street Thickness: All Mapleton City streets shall be hard surfaced (asphalt) with a minimum of three and one-half
inch (31/2") bituminous coat even with the lip of the curb applied over eight inches (8") of road base consistent with
the Mapleton City addendum to APWA standard drawings and specifications. In addition, the developer shall be
required to pay a fee to be determined by the City Engineer, for a slurry seal. The City will then be responsible for
the application of the slurry seal.
K. Vehicle Access: Subdivision projects of thirty (30) lots or more shall provide at least two (2) points of vehicular
access. (Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
17.12.055: ALL LOTS TO ABUT ON AN APPROVED STREET:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 268/571
A. Each lot in a subdivision shall abut upon and have access to a street which is:
1. Dedicated to the City by the subdivision plat, or
2. An existing publicly dedicated street, or
3. An existing private street that has been approved by the City prior to 2016, or
4. A private street that has been approved under the criteria outlined in subsection B of this section.
B. The City Council may approve a request for a private street that complies with the following criteria: (Ord. 2016-01,
5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
1. The street must be part of a planned unit development in the Planned Development (PD), Specific Development
Plan (SDP), or Residential (R-2) Zones. (Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016; amd. Ord. 2019-03, 3-6-2019,
eff. 4-2-2019)
2. Private streets will only be allowed for streets that have no public interest for traffic circulation and connectivity.
3. The final design and cross section of any private street shall be determined by the City Council based on
recommendations from the DRC and Planning Commission. Unless otherwise authorized by the City Council,
private streets shall be no less than twenty feet (20') in width.
4. The maximum length of a dead end private street shall not exceed five hundred feet (500').
5. A note on the plat shall be included indicating that Mapleton City has no responsibility to improve or maintain the
private streets contained within, or private streets providing access to, the property described in the plat, nor
does the City have responsibility for any of the infrastructure associated with the roadway such as sidewalks,
drainage facilities, streetlights, curbs, and/or landscaping.
6. The applicant shall provide a maintenance plan outlining how the private streets will be maintained. (Ord. 2016-
01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
17.12.060: BLOCKS; DESIGN STANDARDS:
A. Length: The maximum length of blocks, generally, shall conform to the current transportation and circulation
element of the general plan.
B. Width: The width of blocks, generally, shall be sufficient to allow two (2) tiers of lots. Double frontage lots, except for
corner lots, shall be discouraged.
C. Use: Blocks intended for business or industrial use shall be designed especially for such purposes with adequate
space set aside for off street parking and delivery facilities. (Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
17.12.070: LOTS; DESIGN STANDARDS:
A. Building Sites: The lot arrangement, design, and shape shall be such that lots will provide satisfactory and desirable
sites for buildings, be properly related to topography and conform to requirements set forth herein. Lots shall not
contain peculiarly shaped elongations solely to provide necessary square footage which would be unusable for
normal purposes.
B. Size Of Lots: All lots shown on the subdivision plat must conform to the minimum requirements of the zone in which
the subdivision is located.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 269/571
C. Corner Lots: Wherever possible corner lots shall have ten feet (10') extra width to accommodate the additional
setback requirements.
D. Angle Of Lot Lines: Side lot lines should be approximately at right angles, or radial to the street line, except where
topographic conditions make it advisable to have side lot lines deflect at sharper angles.
E. Parts Of Lots: All remnants of lots below minimum size left over after subdividing of a larger tract must be attached
to adjacent lots rather than allowed to remain as unusable parcels.
F. Multiple Ownership Of Lots: Where the land covered by a subdivision includes two (2) or more parcels in separate
ownership and the lot arrangement is such that a property ownership line divides one or more lots, the subdivision
shall be considered as a joint project and the final plat shall be signed by all affected property owners.
G. Conformance To Standards: Any lot that contains a portion of ground within the CE-1 Zone shall conform to the CE-
1 Zone standards. (Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
17.12.080: SPECIAL DESIGN STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISIONS IN THE CE-1 ZONE:
The following design standards shall apply to subdivisions within the CE-1 zone. Provided that where the provisions of
this section conflict with other provisions of this chapter these provisions shall prevail:
A. General Design Criteria:
1. Each lot in the subdivision shall comply with the minimum requirements for a zoning lot as set forth under the
zoning ordinance including, but not limited to, the minimum size, width, buildable area, frontage, access, utility
and special requirements.
2. The design shall recognize and accommodate all significant environmental conditions known or identified in the
technical reports.
B. Streets:
1. Wherever possible street alignments should be parallel to contours, in valleys or along ridges and the street
system should be designed to produce minimal impact with environmental constraints (i.e., large cut faces,
extensive removal of natural vegetation, concentration of drainage waters).
2. Streets shall not be located on land having a slope greater than thirty percent (30%), except that the city may
approve the placement of streets in such locations provided:
a. It has been demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city that the placement of the roadway in the proposed
location is necessary for the proper development of the area and there is no feasible alternate alignment which
conforms with the slope requirement,
b. No cut or fill slope created as part of the construction of the street shall exceed the critical angle of repose,
and
c. It has been demonstrated that the plan provides adequate measures to ensure that all disturbed surfaces will
be stabilized, erosion hazard eliminated, vegetation restored and other environmental hazards
accommodated.
3. No street shall have a grade of more than eight percent (8%), unless the street design has been approved by
the city engineer.
4. All minor streets shall have a minimum pavement width of thirty four feet (34') and collector streets shall have a
minimum pavement width of forty four feet (44'). All streets shall be bordered by curbs and gutters or other
suitable edging.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 270/571
5. Sidewalks of not less than four feet (4') in width shall be constructed adjacent to all streets. Provided, that on
minor streets which provide access to lots on one side only the city may waive the requirement for the
construction of a sidewalk on the nonaccess side.
6. Where the road is located in a cut or fill area the graded roadbed shall extend not less than three feet (3')
beyond the curb face or edge of sidewalk, as applicable, on the fill side and two feet (2') on the cut side.
7. Cul-de-sac shall have a maximum length of one thousand feet (1,000') and shall be terminated with a suitable
turnaround having a diameter of not less than one hundred sixty eight feet (168') in accordance with standard
drawing S-04.
C. Grading:
1. All land surface having a slope of thirty percent (30%) or greater shall remain in its natural state and shall not be
graded or otherwise disturbed except for the planting of additional vegetation, the addition of sprinkler irrigation
systems, the establishment of required fire breaks or access easements, or when such disturbance is specifically
provided for under the approved plan.
2. No grading, filling or excavation of any kind shall be commenced without first having obtained a grading permit
from the public works director who shall not issue such permit until the final grading and drainage plan is
endorsed by a licensed civil engineer, and approved by the city engineer.
3. Fill areas shall be prepared by removing organic material such as vegetation, rubbish and other material which
is determined by the city engineer to be detrimental to proper compaction or otherwise not conducive to stability.
No rock or similar irreducible material with a maximum diameter greater than twelve inches (12") shall be used
as a fill material in fills that are intended to provide structural strength.
4. All rough street and site grading shall be completed prior to the installation of utilities.
5. Fills shall be compacted to at least ninety five percent (95%) of AASHTO T180 density for those areas intended
as structural foundations, including roadways.
6. The surface of cut slopes shall be no steeper than two and one-half (21/2) horizontal to one vertical. Subsurface
drainage shall be provided as necessary for stability.
7. The surface of fill slopes shall be not steeper than two (2) horizontal to one vertical.
8. Slope easements shall be provided of sufficient width on both sides of a street so that tops and toes of cut and
fill slopes shall be set back from the slope easement boundary a distance of ten feet (10').
9. Borrowing for fill shall be prohibited unless the material is obtained from a cut permitted under an approved
grading plan obtained for some purpose other than to produce fill material, or imported from outside the hillside
area of the zone.
10. Cut slopes shall be constructed to eliminate sharp angles of intersection with the existing terrain and shall be
rounded and contoured as necessary to blend with existing topography to the maximum extent possible.
D. Drainage:
1. Required storm water run off collection facilities shall be designed so as to retain on site the storm water runoff
resulting from a 25- and 100-year frequency storm for a sufficient length of time so as to prevent flooding and
erosion.
2. Required storm water run off collection facilities shall be so designed as to divert surface water away from cut
faces or sloping surfaces of a fill. French drains are not acceptable.
3. Curb, gutter and pavement designs shall be such that water on roadways is prevented from flowing off the
roadways.
4. Natural drainage shall be riprapped or otherwise stabilized to the satisfaction of the city engineer below drainage
and culvert discharge points for a distance sufficient to convey the discharge without channel erosion.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 271/571
5. Waste material from construction, including soil and other solid waste materials, shall not be deposited within a
natural or manmade drainage course nor within irrigation channels.
6. Sediment catchment ponds shall be constructed downstream from each development, unless sediment retention
facilities are otherwise provided.
E. Vegetation And Revegetation:
1. Every effort shall be made to conserve topsoil which is removed during construction for later use on areas
requiring vegetation or landscaping, e.g., cut and fill slopes.
2. New planting shall be protected with organic cover.
3. All disturbed soil surfaces shall be stabilized and revegetated. Plans for the revegetation of all disturbed slopes
shall be submitted as part of the grading and drainage plan.
F. Fire Protection:
1. The placement of buildings on lots shall be such that adequate clearance of hazardous, flammable vegetative
cover may be accomplished.
2. The city may require the dedication of easements for firebreaks for safety of built up areas. Such easement shall
provide access for firefighting personnel and equipment and shall be dedicated for this specific purpose by being
recorded in the office of the Utah County recorder.
3. The inability to provide fire line water pressure and fire flows consistent with the standards set by the Insurance
Service Organization shall be justification for denial of a subdivision request. However, there shall be a minimum
fire flow requirement of at least five hundred (500) gpm with a twenty five (25) psi residual pressure.
G. Access Easements:
1. The city may require the dedication of easements adjacent to the borders of lots adjoining public lands for the
purpose of providing public access to said public lands. Said easements may be combined with those required
for fire safety purposes as set forth under subsection F2 of this section. (Ord. 2002-04, 3-20-2002)
17.12.090: DESIGN STANDARDS FOR MULTI-FAMILY AND SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT PLAN
(SDP) ZONES:
The following minimum standards shall apply to all proposed multi-family and specific development plan (SDP) zone
projects. This section may apply to other zones and developments as dictated by a development agreement prior to
the rezoning of a property. Additional design standards may be added during the execution of a development
agreement.
A. Single-family detached homes shall have the following design standards:
1. A variety of architectural styles shall be required. No two (2) homes of the same exterior architectural design
shall be situated next to, or across the street from, another.
2. The developer/builder shall provide Mapleton City with no less than five (5) different home designs with differing
exterior elevations, rooflines, colors and materials. Exceptions shall be granted if the lots or pads are sold to
individuals who will build custom homes. If the lots are purchased by one builder or multiple builders who have
purchased a "block" of lots or pads, then these design standards shall apply.
B. Attached buildings, such as duplexes, twin homes, condominium units, or similar, shall be approved by the planning
commission and city council as part of the project plan approval.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 272/571
C. Building materials shall be approved by the Mapleton City council, with recommendation from the planning
commission.
D. Colors shall reflect the natural surroundings in Mapleton City. Bright colors shall not be permitted.
E. Building height shall be the same as allowed in the original zone.
F. Garages shall not be the main feature of the home. Garages shall either be detached to the rear of the home, set
back from the facade of the home, flush with the home, or extended out from the home no more than four feet (4').
Garages may be located off of an alleyway in the rear of the home. Said alleyway may only be allowed as part of
the overall design, and shall be sufficient to allow for one-way traffic, or two-way traffic if the alley does not connect
to another public street.
G. Carports shall only be allowed in the SDP zone, but shall not be permitted in front of the building. Therefore, it is
the intent of this section to have carports, for attached buildings only, located in back of the home or building. Other
appropriate locations may be permitted with recommendation from the planning commission to the city council.
H. Orientation:
1. The front elevation of every building shall face a street or small park or be visible and directly accessible from a
street. Where units are across the street from a park, the front elevation shall face the park. Rear yards which
occur along local or collector streets shall be buffered by nonsee-through barriers of a permanent structure with
a minimum of six feet (6') in height pending compliance with a fencing ordinance.
2. The front elevation and primary entrance of every building shall face:
a. A street, or
b. A plaza, or
c. A small park, or
d. A landscaped walkway that is visible and directly accessible from a street.
e. Buildings used to meet the minimum frontage requirements must have front elevations and primary entrances
facing a street.
3. Orientation for all multi-unit buildings:
a. At least seventy five percent (75%) of the front yard frontage shall have buildings within the minimum and
maximum setback.
b. Buildings that are located within thirty feet (30') of a side property line facing a street shall have at least twenty
five percent (25%) of the wall in window or door areas.
c. Parking areas shall not be located between buildings and the street. Parking lots may be located on one side
and behind the buildings.
d. Buildings shall be directly accessed from the street and the sidewalk.
e. Ground floor pedestrian entrances must be oriented toward the street and an open space accessible from a
street.
4. Setback requirements:
a. Porches may project up to six feet (6') into required setbacks. Bay windows, fireboxes and balconies may
extend up to three feet (3') into required setbacks.
b. Every primary entry shall be accompanied by a porch or covered area. (Ord. 2003-02, 1-15-2003, eff. 1-29-
2003)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 273/571
Chapter 17.14
STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS
17.14.010: ADOPTED:
The city hereby adopts by reference the standard specifications and drawings regulations as if fully set forth herein.
(Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
Chapter 17.15
LANDSCAPE STANDARDS1
(Rep. by Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
Chapter 17.16
SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS
17.16.010: IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED:
A. The improvements hereinafter set forth shall be required to be constructed for all areas shown on the final plat and
at all off site locations designated at the time of final approval. All subdivision improvements shall meet minimum
city standards and specifications as directed by the city engineer.
B. The following two (2) options are available to an applicant regarding the installation of the improvements required
by this chapter:
1. The improvements shall be completed prior to the plat being recorded in the office of the county recorder. The
following requirements apply to this option:
a. No construction activity shall begin until:
(1) Final construction drawings have been approved by the city engineer that address any and all outstanding
issues as identified by the development review committee and any and all conditions of approval as adopted
by the land use authority;
(2) A preconstruction meeting to include the city engineer and the applicant has been held. During the
preconstruction meeting the city engineer shall outline the city standards that will be used during the
inspection of the improvements;
(3) The applicant has submitted the following bonds:
(A) A site restoration bond shall be in cash equal to the amount of the durability bond. This bond shall be
released upon plat recording.
(B) A right of way (ROW) excavation bond for any work that may be required in an existing city ROW. The
amount shall be based on the city engineer's estimate for the work to be done in the ROW. This bond shall
be released upon acceptance of the work by the city;
(4) All engineering inspection fees have been paid;
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 274/571
(5) The applicant has obtained approval of a stormwater pollution prevention plan and a land disturbance
permit; and
(6) The applicant has submitted a utility notification form signed by all applicable utility companies.
b. If the improvements do not comply with city standards, the plat shall not be recorded in the office of the county
recorder until such time as all deficiencies are corrected.
c. A durability bond in accordance with the provisions of section 17.20.050 of this title shall be established prior
to plat recording.
d. Prior to plat recording, the applicant has submitted a lien waiver release for each contractor, subcontractor
and supplier.
2. A performance guarantee and a durability bond securing the installation of any required improvements shall be
submitted to the City in accordance with the provisions of chapter 17.20 of this title prior to recording of the final
plat at the Office of the County Recorder. The following requirements apply to this option:
a. No construction activity shall begin until:
(1) Final construction drawings have been approved by the City Engineer that address any and all outstanding
issues as identified by the DRC and any and all conditions of approval as adopted by the decision making
body;
(2) A preconstruction meeting to include the City Engineer and the applicant has been held. During the
preconstruction meeting the City Engineer shall outline the City standards that will be used during the
inspection of the improvements;
(3) All project fees have been paid; and
(4) The applicant has obtained approval of a stormwater pollution prevention plan and a land disturbance
permit. (Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
C. Exemption to the requirement for improvements:
1. Upon application by the landowner, the City Engineer may waive the requirement for curb, gutter, sidewalks
and/or pressurized irrigation lines as a one-time exception provided the following findings can be made:
a. The subdivision would create no more than one additional lot; and
b. There are no more opportunities to create additional lots in the future based on the current zoning.
2. If multiple lots are proposed on an existing street that does not include curb, gutter and sidewalk within six
hundred sixty feet (660') of the proposed lots, the applicant may request a waiver from the installation of these
improvements. The waiver may be granted for only existing streets designated as "minor local" or "major local"
according to the current Mapleton Transportation Plan. New streets to be constructed within the project area are
not eligible for a waiver. The waiver must be approved by the final decision-making body reviewing the
preliminary plat. In granting the waiver, the decision-making body should consider the development potential of
other properties within six hundred sixty feet (660').
3. Any waiver or modification of the requirements must be based on a determination that the waiver more
effectively achieves the policies, goals, and objectives of Mapleton City. The modifications shall be consistent
with appropriate engineering measures to protect public safety.
4. No other waiver of any of the minimum level of improvements required by section 18.84.390 of this Code is
authorized under this subsection. (Ord. 2019-01, 1-16-2019, eff. 2-20-2019)
17.16.020: STREETS AND ROADS:
All streets shown on the final plat for dedication to the City and any existing street, whether or not shown on the final
plat, which is contiguous and provides access to any lot in the subdivision shall be improved in conformance with the
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 275/571
applicable cross section and construction standards as adopted by the City Council. (Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-
16-2016)
17.16.025: STREETS TO BE DEDICATED; PARTIAL WIDTH STREETS; RETAINER STRIPS NOT
PERMITTED:
All streets within and adjacent to the subdivision shall have been previously conveyed to the City by deed or
dedication or shall be shown on the final plat for dedication to the City for street purposes. All streets shown on the
final plat for dedication to the City shall conform to the minimum standards for both street right-of-way width and street
improvements for the entire width of street, except that the City Council, subject to the prior recommendation of the
Planning Commission, may accept the dedication and/or improvement of a partial width street provided:
A. That the proposed partial width street is located at the border of the subdivision and the land abutting the
uncompleted side is not owned by the subdivider;
B. That the width of right-of-way of the proposed partial street shall be not less than one-half (1/2) of the total width for
the class of road, plus an additional seven feet (7') of width;
C. That the improvements constructed on the partial width street shall include:
1. The curb, gutter and sidewalk improvements on the side abutting lots in the subdivision, where applicable,
2. All required utilities, and
3. A hard surfaced travelway portion having a width not less than one-half (1/2) that required for the specific road
classification plus an additional seven feet (7');
D. That there are no existing conditions which would have the effect of preventing the subsequent development of the
remaining portion of the street;
E. That, in the opinion of the City, construction of a partial width street at the proposed location will not create an
unsafe or hazardous condition; and
F. No final plat shall be approved where access to a proposed or existing street from adjacent property is proposed to
be prohibited through the use of an access retainer strip. (Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
17.16.030: CULINARY WATER:
A. The subdivider shall be responsible for installing all off site and on site water mains. All on site mains shall be
installed in such a way that each lot may be served therefrom. All mains shall extend to the boundaries of the
subdivision.
B. All water mains shall be sufficient in size to provide a volume of flow and level of pressure adequate for culinary use
(in accordance with State and City standards) and fire protection purposes, provided, that no water main shall be
less than eight inches (8") in diameter.
C. Water service laterals shall be installed from the main line to the outer edge of any road proposed to be dedicated
to the city. The service laterals shall be not less than one inch (1") diameter and shall consist of: 1) the corporation
stop adjacent to the main line, 2) the lateral pipe running from the main to the edge of the adjacent lot, and 3) the
stop and waste valve, meter box and meter setter located adjacent to the public right of way immediately adjacent
to the property line.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 276/571
D. All mains and laterals shall be constructed prior to the installation of road base and hard surfacing of the road and
the construction of curb, gutter and sidewalk improvements.
E. Each lot shall be served by a water lateral connected to an in service city water trunk line.
F. Prior to final plat approval, the project plans shall be submitted to the city engineer or designee to be included in the
city's water model. Based on the water model results, the applicant may be required to make system upgrades to
ensure reliable water service. (Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
17.16.035: PRESSURIZED IRRIGATION:
A. The subdivider shall be responsible for installing all on site pressurized irrigation mains. If an existing pressurized
irrigation main lies within three hundred (300) linear feet of the subdivided property, following the course of any city
street the subdivider shall also be responsible to install off site mains and to connect them with the existing
pressurized irrigation main.
B. All pressurized irrigation systems shall conform to the pressurized irrigation engineering plan of the city, provided
that no main shall be less than eight inches (8") in diameter.
C. Pressurized water service laterals shall be installed from the main irrigation line to the lot line proposed. The service
laterals shall be not less than one inch (1") in diameter and shall consist of: 1) the stop and waste valve adjacent to
the main line, 2) the lateral pipe running from the main to the edge of the adjacent lot, 3) the stop and waste valve,
located on the public right of way immediately adjacent to the property line. The stop and waste valve adjacent to
the main line is part of the city's pressurized irrigation system, and may not be accessed, or used by the property
owner without prior approval of the city.
D. All mains and laterals shall be constructed prior to the installation of road base and hard surfacing of the road and
the construction of curb, gutter and sidewalk improvements. (Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
17.16.040: FIRE HYDRANTS:
All subdivisions shall have fire hydrants installed at locations approved by the city after being reviewed by the fire chief
and city engineer. No hydrant shall be placed more distant than five hundred feet (500') from the next closest hydrant.
Also, a fire hydrant shall be placed within two hundred fifty feet (250') of each building lot, as measured within the
public right of way. (Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
17.16.050: SEWAGE DISPOSAL:
A. The subdivider shall be responsible for installing all off site and on site sewer mains. All on site mains shall be
installed in such a way that each lot may be served therefrom. All mains shall extend to the boundaries of the
subdivision.
B. All sewer mains shall be sufficient in size to provide an adequate flow. No sewer main shall be less than eight
inches (8") in diameter.
C. Sewer service laterals shall be installed from the main line to the outer edge of any road proposed to be dedicated
to the city. The service laterals shall be not less than four inches (4") in diameter, and shall be located ten feet (10')
inside the property line.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 277/571
D. All mains and laterals shall be constructed prior to the installation of road base and hard surfacing of the road and
the construction of curb, gutter and sidewalk improvements.
E. Each lot shall be served by a sewer lateral connected to an in service city sewer trunk line. (Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-
2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
17.16.060: PERMANENT SURVEY MONUMENTS:
Permanent survey monuments shall be installed in each subdivision. The minimum number of monuments shall be
determined by the city engineer. (Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
17.16.070: ELECTRIC POWER, TELEPHONE AND NATURAL GAS:
Electric power, telephone and natural gas shall be provided to each lot. All lines and appurtenant facilities shall be
located underground. (Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
17.16.080: STREET SIGNS:
Street signs shall be installed at all locations indicated on the preliminary plat. All required signs shall conform to city
standards and be provided and installed by the city, at the expense of the subdivider in accordance with the current
fee schedule. (Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
17.16.085: STREET LIGHTING:
A. Prior to plat recording, the applicant shall pay a streetlight fee based on the adopted fee schedule to allow for the
installation of streetlights within the subdivision. The city will coordinate the purchase and installation of the
streetlights with the applicable power company.
B. Streetlights will typically be installed at the entrances to the subdivision, at street intersections, at mid block, within
a cul-de-sac and other locations deemed appropriate by the city engineer and the power company. (Ord. 2016-01,
5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
17.16.090: ENVIRONMENTAL HAZARDS:
If any of the following conditions exist, technical reports in accordance with section 17.08.020 of this title will be
required. Adverse environmental conditions must be eliminated or accommodated as follows:
A. Soils:
1. The placement of streets, buildings and the designation of building sites on areas of unstable soil shall be
prohibited.
2. Soils with a significant erosion hazard shall be protected. Revegetation or other erosion control measures may
be imposed as a condition of subdivision approval.
B. Stormwater Disposal:
1. To the maximum extent possible stormwater produced from the subdivision development shall be properly
disposed of within the limits of the subdivision.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 278/571
2. Pipes, sumps and other facilities for the collection and disposal of stormwater shall be installed where required
by the city. The location, size, and design of said facilities shall be in accordance with the city's stormwater
disposal plans and standards or as directed by the city engineer.
C. Flooding:
1. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
2. The subdivision layout shall make adequate provision for natural drainage channels and floodways.
3. All water, sewer and other utility systems and facilities located in designated flood areas shall be designed and
constructed to minimize flood damage including the infiltration of floodwater into the system, or discharge of the
system into the floodwaters.
4. Base flood data shall be provided by the developer as part of the preliminary plat.
D. Other: Where applicable, other adverse environmental conditions must also be eliminated or adequately
accommodated. The additional conditions shall include, but not be limited to, seismic, landslide, groundwater, and
noise or blasting impact. (Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
17.16.100: IRRIGATION WATER SYSTEM:
A. All subdivision plans shall recognize and accommodate the irrigation system within the city, including, as necessary,
the installation of culverts and pipes, the rerouting of ditches and the reconstruction of headgates. All canals,
ditches and other watercourses which lie within or are contiguous to a proposed subdivision shall not be interfered
with by the subdivider without complying with the requirements of section 73-1-15, Utah Code Annotated (1953, as
amended), and the applicable provisions of this code.
B. Whenever any canal, ditch or similar watercourse, which is owned and/or maintained by an established irrigation
water company or receives water therefrom, lies within or is contiguous to a proposed subdivision, the subdivider
shall, prior to submission for preliminary approval, consult with irrigation company officials and shall obtain from
them recommendations regarding the appropriate means of reducing safety hazards associated with the
watercourse, maintaining flows, reducing damage to private property, and otherwise complying with the
requirements of Utah Code Annotated 73-1-15.
C. The city may, as a condition of subdivision approval, require the fencing or piping of the watercourse and the
installation of appurtenant entrance works and grating or other improvements. The final plat of any subdivision
containing elements of the irrigation system shall designate appropriate easements.
D. Performance bonds required pursuant to section 17.16.010 of this chapter shall include the cost of required
irrigation improvements to irrigation system owned and operated by Mapleton City, and release of said guarantee
shall, in addition to the requirements set forth under chapter 17.20 of this title, require written notification of
acceptance of the improvements by the owner or owners. (Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
17.16.110: MAIL DELIVERY BOXES:
In subdivisions where a monolithic curb, gutter and sidewalk (no planter strip) is to be installed, provision for the
permanent placement of mail delivery boxes shall be made as follows:
A. For subdivisions containing eight (8) or more lots cluster mailboxes shall be installed at designated locations within
the subdivision as shown on the preliminary plat.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 279/571
B. Where the final plat of the subdivision contains seven (7) lots or less the subdivider may, in lieu of cluster boxes,
install connecting brackets or sleeves on the top of the curb for the placement of individual mailbox stands.
Placement of mailboxes within the gutter is prohibited. (Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
Chapter 17.18
TRAIL LOCATION AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
17.18.010: GENERAL GUIDELINES:
The following guidelines provide specific recommendations for how trails should be routed and/or constructed to
reduce maintenance and environmental impacts and should be followed in the construction of trails:
A. Trails should be located and constructed in such a manner as to minimize maintenance and maximize access.
B. Trails should follow natural contours where possible and respect surrounding landforms. For example, trails
crossing steep sites should flow with the landform.
C. Drainage features, such as water bars, should be constructed where appropriate to reduce erosion.
D. Trail slopes should match expected user volumes and types. Refer to AASHTO "Guide For The Development Of
Bicycle Facilities" for further guidance. (Ord. 2002-04, 3-20-2002)
17.18.020: LOCATION, BONDING, PHASING, AND LIABILITY FOR TRAILS:
A. Location: Where feasible, trails should be separated from vehicle traffic.
B. Bonding For Trail Improvements: Where trails are required as part of a development project, a security or bond will
be posted for the full cost of the trail improvements prior to plat recording, or the trail shall be installed prior to the
recording of the plat in accordance with section 17.16.010 of this title.
C. Phasing Of Trail Improvements: When trails are part of a phased project, the phasing of various trail segments will
follow a logical sequence for trail users. Some trail construction may be required through an entire project to
provide completed trail connections at an early phase in the project.
D. Trail Rights Of Way And Easements: All trails that are open to the public should be located on publicly dedicated
property, or dedicated easements for such purposes. There are a variety of mechanisms for this to occur. Public
street rights of way and dedicated easements are the most common and acceptable forms of access rights. The
trails map provides recommended right of way widths for the various trail types.
E. Trail Easement Liability: In cases where public easements are dedicated, or lease agreements are negotiated for
public use with private landowners, the jurisdiction should assume general liability responsibility in the same
manner as assumed for streets and other public areas. (Ord. 2014-04, 3-19-2014, eff. 4-13-2014)
17.18.030: RECOMMENDATIONS FOR ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE SITES:
A. Special location or construction methods may be necessary to reduce impacts and minimize disturbance in
environmentally sensitive areas. Examples of visually or environmentally sensitive sites include: flood zones, highly
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 280/571
visible hillsides, significant vegetation areas, highly erodible soils, unstable slopes, and ridgelines.
B. Techniques, such as site specific trail routing, erosion control measures, site specific adjustment of construction
standards, and site specific construction practices should be implemented to minimize environmental, visual or
construction impacts. Construction methods that should reduce impacts include installing retaining walls to reduce
cut and fill slopes on a visually prominent hillside, hand construction of the trail, stabilizing a mine hazard that is
located within or adjacent to a trail corridor or installing a tree well around a significant tree to be preserved.
C. Each environmentally sensitive site is unique, specific trail proposals through such locations need to be considered
on a case by case basis. (Ord. 2002-04, 3-20-2002)
17.18.040: GUIDELINES FOR SENSITIVE SITES:
A. Construction Practices For Sensitive Sites: Disturbance fencing limits should be implemented to minimize
construction impacts. Construction limits should be as small as practical to construct the trail. Significant vegetation
root zones should be considered when locating the trail and establishing construction limits.
B. Erosion Control: Methods should be employed to protect areas adjacent to the trail from impacts both during and
after construction. (See Drainage Planning and Slope Management Guidelines sections.)
C. Indigenous Materials: Indigenous construction materials should be used for retaining walls, bridges, and barriers
wherever possible.
D. Existing Vegetation: Existing significant vegetation should be preserved wherever possible. Trees, riparian
vegetation, scrub oak, and rare plants are considered significant. Root zones, as well as aboveground vegetation
require protection when preserving plants. In general, the area within the drip line of trees, especially on the down
slope side of the vegetation, is sensitive to disturbance. If root zones are impacted or grades are changed
significantly, temporary irrigation may be necessary.
E. Revegetation: Native and/or self-sustaining plant materials should be used for revegetation of all disturbed areas
where trails pass through native or nonirrigated sites. Revegetation can be used to provide screening. Construction
techniques to preserve vegetation and trail routing techniques should be used to minimize visual intrusion.
F. Natural Considerations: Where significant wildlife or other natural features exist, special trail routing, construction
methods and trail use should be considered.
G. Visually Sensitive Areas: Locations that are visually sensitive, such as tallus slopes, may require reduced cut and
fill slopes, hand construction, and low retaining walls to minimize site disturbance and visual intrusion.
H. Environmentally Hazardous Areas: Where environmental hazards are present, special trail construction techniques
or locations should be used to mitigate the hazard. Hazardous areas can be abandoned mine sites, where mine
tailings should be stabilized, top soiled and revegetated. Other hazardous locations, such as lightning prone areas,
rockslide and avalanche areas should either be avoided or be closed seasonally when hazardous conditions are a
problem.
I. Microclimatic Trail Use Opportunities: Locate the trails for both summer and winter activities, where possible, given
the terrain and climatic considerations. Identify snow retention areas for possible cross country ski trails. In open
areas, place trail alignment to take advantage of wind protection and shaded canyon areas. (Ord. 2002-04, 3-20-
2002)
17.18.050: UTILITIES:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 281/571
The routing of utilities within trail corridors is generally encouraged. Many trail managers have allowed colocation of
utilities in consideration for appropriate fee payments by the utility company. Locations that are visually or
environmentally sensitive may restrict or preclude sharing utilities with trails. The following guidelines for placement,
site disturbance and access should be followed:
A. Placement: Utility lines that run parallel to the trail should be placed under the trail bed where possible to minimize
site disturbance. Utility lines that are perpendicular to the trail and lateral lines should be located to minimize site
disturbance and removal of significant vegetation. Physical obstructions, such as utility pedestals, transformers and
the like should be located out of the clear zone so they are not hazards to trail users. Access points which are not a
physical obstruction, such as manhole covers should be located flush with the trail surface and where they do not
pose a hazard to trail users.
B. Site Disturbance: Construction of utility lines within naturally vegetated areas should minimize site disturbance
wherever possible. All disturbances should be revegetated according to the requirements for trail construction.
Bonding for this work should be required.
C. Utility Access: Access for utility maintenance vehicles will be evaluated on a case by case basis and provided for as
part of the trail construction. Visually or environmentally sensitive sites may preclude full access to trail/utility
corridors. (Ord. 2002-04, 3-20-2002)
17.18.060: VERTICAL CLEARANCE GUIDELINES:
A ten foot (10') vertical clearance from the trail surface is recommended. The vertical clearance to obstructions will be
a minimum of eight feet (8') across the clear width of the path.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 282/571
(Ord. 2002-04, 3-20-2002)
17.18.070: TRAIL SURFACING GUIDELINES:
Asphalt, concrete and base specifications will meet those set forth in this document. The six foot (6') crushed rock trail
surfaces may be substituted with a compacted two inch (2") dolomite limestone material meeting the following
specifications:
Passing 1/2" screen - 100%
Passing 3/8" screen - 97-99%
Passing #4 screen - 75-80%
Passing #8 screen - 50-55%
Passing #16 screen - 30-35%
Passing #30 screen - 20-25%
Passing #50 screen - 17-20%
Passing #100 screen - 13-17%
Passing #200 screen - 12-15%
Maximum water absorption - less than 3%
A six inch (6") compacted road base subgrade should be placed under the dirt surface in areas with a high water table
or with poor drainage conditions. If a wood or other edging material is used along any of the trail surfaces, care will be
taken to assure trail surface drainage. Edging is not recommended along soft surface trails because the soft surface
changes over time causing the hard edge to impede drainage. Weed or root barriers also may be necessary.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 283/571
(Ord. 2002-04, 3-20-2002)
17.18.080: DRAINAGE PLANNING:
Careful study of topography adjacent to the trail may yield insight to maximize protection of the trail, while minimizing
trail structures. General drainage should be studied at fifty (50) stations with provisions made to protect the trail.
A. Swells And Culverts: Drainage swells or culverts should be installed on trails at locations where the normal cross
slope will not allow for adequate drainage. Drainage swells are not allowed on paved trails. Drains are best located
at low points or bends in the trail along existing natural drainageways.
Wherever water is concentrated into new locations or in heavier concentrations, erosion protection needs to be
evaluated and installed if necessary. Native stone is the preferred material.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 284/571
B. Drainage Grates: Drainage inlet grates on bikeways will have openings narrow enough and short enough to assure
bicycle tires will not drop into the grates (e.g., reticular type), regardless of the direction of bicycle travel.
C. Bicycle Safe Drainage Grates: Drainage grates should be installed where necessary to allow drainage and safe
passage for bicycles.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 285/571
D. Water Bar: Water bars will likely need to be installed at regular intervals on soft surface trails that are steeper than a
five percent (5%) gradient for more than five (5) vertical feet. Rubber water bars should be used since they are the
safest for multiple use trails, also construction is more economical, faster and easier than other construction
methods.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 286/571
(Ord. 2002-04, 3-20-2002)
17.18.090: SLOPE MANAGEMENT GUIDELINES:
When sloped areas are disturbed, the area needs to be stabilized and revegetated as part of the trail construction
process to prevent subsequent soil erosion and frequent maintenance problems. (Ord. 2002-04, 3-20-2002)
A. Permanent Slope Stabilization:
1. Retaining Walls: Permanent slope stabilization includes native stacked rock or wood retaining walls, rock filled
gabions, wire baskets, wattling, planting or placing plant materials, and slope serration.
Where necessary for safety, retaining walls should be installed to prevent erosion of cut or fill slopes, to reduce
cut and fill slopes or to minimize disturbance on environmentally or aesthetically sensitive sites. Retaining walls
should be constructed of indigenous or natural materials. Walls located on visually sensitive sites should be
designed to blend with the natural surroundings. Materials, texture, color, and height all affect the visual
prominence of a retaining wall. Walls exceeding a height of four feet (4') must conform to the requirements set
forth in the international building code. (Ord. 2013-05, 6-18-2013, eff. 7-12-2013)
Following are some guidelines for various techniques. All uninterrupted cut or fill slopes will not exceed six (6)
vertical feet unless a site specific analysis is performed to justify otherwise. Some method of permanent slope
stabilization should be required for all slopes in excess of two to one (2:1) vertical unless a site specific soils
analysis is performed to justify otherwise.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 287/571
2. Cut And Fill Slopes: Combined cut and fill slopes should not exceed twelve (12) vertical feet and individual cut or
fill slopes should not exceed six (6) vertical feet (less in environmentally and visually sensitive areas). Slopes
that exceed these parameters should consider low retaining walls or alternate routing of the trail to a more
acceptable location.
Cut or fill finish grades should not exceed a two to one (2:1) vertical unless a site specific soil analysis is
performed to justify the stability of steeper slopes. All cut and fill slopes will be stabilized and revegetated as per
the revegetation and slope stabilization guidelines.
3. Existing Vegetation Protection: Existing significant vegetation that is to be saved will be protected with temporary
fencing along the limits of disturbance. Trees that are to be saved should not be disturbed within the drip line of
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 288/571
the tree, if possible, and the protective limits of disturbance fencing should extend to the drip line. Where this is
not possible, all work within the drip line should be done by hand and mechanical equipment should not be
allowed within the drip line. If filling is necessary above the root zone, perforated pipe along the drip line and
vertical air wells should be installed. If cutting of roots or interception of natural drainage to the root zone is
necessary, temporary irrigation may be required to compensate for the disturbance.
4. Temporary Runoff Management: During construction and establishment of revegetation, techniques, such as
temporary erosion control, runoff measures, and slope stabilization may be necessary. Techniques, such as
hydro mulching, straw mulch, jute matting, wood excelsior matting, tackifiers, straw bales, siltation fences,
matting in drainage channels and stone mulching are examples of temporary runoff management. The following
treatment guidelines provide some direction for the use of these measures. All are temporary measures and are
intended to last from one to two (2) years until permanent stabilization techniques are effective.
5. Wattling: Bundles of branches are used to both stabilize and revegetate slopes that are nearly stable but
continue to erode. Wattling is only recommended after initial methods have failed and where the unstable areas
are minor.
6. Slope Serration: Small steps or indentations are cut in the slope face and are useful for providing small favorable
sites for vegetation establishment. This technique should be used only on soils that are fairly cohesive. Sites that
have severe exposure to heat, sun or wind and have slopes that are excessively steep benefit most from this
method.
7. Switchbacks: Switchbacks are expensive to construct but are necessary when steep slopes are encountered.
When switchbacks are required, they should be designed to discourage crosscutting and subsequent erosion.
Locate switchbacks where natural barriers exist: installing physical or visual barriers or providing sufficient
separation between the switchbacks all help to discourage crosscutting. If crosscutting cannot be discouraged
through design or construction then the installation of stairs or relocation of the trail should be considered.
8. Revegetation: Revegetation consists of seeding and planting operations. Seed and plant species and application
rates will be submitted and approved with the construction plans. In general the revegetation of natural sites will
match that of the undisturbed areas in species, density and vegetation patterns. Revegetation will be
accomplished as soon as grading work is completed and weather permits. Unless the site is irrigated, native
plant species indigenous to the site should be used. All revegetation work on nonirrigated sites will be done
between October 15 and April 15 unless approval is granted otherwise. Sites that are revegetated between June
1 and September 1 will require temporary irrigation.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 289/571
a. Seedbed Preparation: Subgrade soils should be scarified to a depth of three to four inches (3_4") and topsoil
placed to a minimum depth of four inches (4").
b. Seeding: Seeds will be broadcast or hydro seeded and raked into topsoil before the application of mulch,
matting or other surface stabilization materials. Seeding can be used for grasses and forbs, but container
stock should be used for all trees and shrubs.
c. Planting: Planting of container grown materials on nonirrigated sites will be confined to tubling stock unless
there is sufficient natural moisture present to sustain larger plants.
d. Maintenance: Revegetated sites will be maintained until sufficient establishment has occurred to reasonably
stabilize the site. Security bond will be posted for all revegetation work for a minimum of one year at which
time it will be reviewed and released if it meets the above requirements.
B. Temporary Slope Stabilization:
1. Hydro Mulching: Hydro mulching is a mechanized, rapid method for mulching large areas and is generally used
with seeding to revegetate disturbed areas. Use may be limited on sites where equipment access is limited. Only
one hundred percent (100%) wood fiber mulch will be used and applied at a rate of three thousand (3,000)
pounds per acre.
2. Straw Mulching: Straw mulching can be used over small areas where it is applied by hand or on large sites
where it is installed mechanically. Straw mulching is generally used in combination with seeding to revegetate
disturbed sites. Straw must be held in place by matting, crimping or other method. Apply at a rate of two (2) tons
per acre or a uniform depth of two to three inches (2_3").
3. Jute Matting: Jute matting can be used alone or in combination with hydro mulching or straw mulching for
erosion control and slope stabilization. It is generally used in combination with seeding to revegetate disturbed
areas. Apply up and down the slope, never along the slope. Overlap edges a minimum of four inches (4") and
use wire staples that are a minimum of six inches (6") long and spaced approximately five feet (5') apart down
the sides and middle of the role. Extend the mat a minimum of three feet (3') beyond the top and bottom of the
slope and bury the mat end in an eight inch (8") deep trench at the top of the slope. Uniform contact of the mat to
the slope underneath is critical.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 290/571
4. Wood Excelsior Matting: Wood excelsior matting is used for erosion control generally in combination with
revegetation. Care must be taken during installation to prevent concentrated flows under the mat. Apply up and
down the slope, never along the slope. Edges should butt snugly together and held down with wire staples, a
minimum of eight inches (8") long spaced approximately two feet (2') along the edges and four (4) down the
center. Extend the mat a minimum of three feet (3') beyond the top and bottom of the slope and bury the mat end
in an eight inch (8") deep trench at the top of the slope.
5. Tackifiers: Generally, tackifiers are mixed with mulches to provide better adhesion to steep and/or windy slopes.
Tackifiers should be applied at a rate of eighty (80) pounds dry ingredients per acre or two hundred (200) gallons
wet ingredients per acre.
6. Straw Bales: Straw bales can be used in a variety of ways to protect areas from impact, straw bales reduce
uninterrupted flow in low and intermittent flow channels. Straw bales also provide a siltation device for slopes or
gullies until revegetation can be established. When installing, anchor bales in place with steel rebar stakes,
driven a minimum of twelve inches (12") into the subgrade, in a six inch (6") deep trench which has soil tamped
firmly along the uphill side.
7. Siltation Fences: Siltation fences are used to protect undisturbed down slope areas from up slope erosion.
8. Matting In Drainage Channels: Jute matting or fiberglass roving are typically installed in open drainage channels
for temporary erosion control. Use this technique only where flow velocities do not exceed two feet (2') per
second. Apply from the top and overlap edged a minimum of four inches (4"). Secure the top and bottom ends in
an eight inch (8") deep trench secured with steel staples every twelve inches (12"). Edges should be stapled
every two inches (2").
9. Stone Mulching: Stone mulching may be used during construction to control erosion, mud or dust.
10. Gabions: Gabions are rock filled wire baskets used to retain steep slopes or stabilize drainageways and may
be preferable to stacked rock walls where the native rock is too small or too rounded for effective stacking. They
are particularly effective when seepage is anticipated. Empty gabions are placed in position, wired together and
filled with rock that is a minimum of four to six inches (4_6") in diameter. When used as a retaining wall the
bottom basket should be buried a minimum of six inches (6") at the toe. Gabions should be keyed into the slope
and laid back at a maximum of six inches (6") vertical to one inch (1") horizontal.
11. Bollards And Barriers: Barriers should be installed at trailheads to control access of motor vehicle traffic and to
direct and/or protect trail users from steep or hazardous areas along the trail.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 291/571
Three (3) types of barriers are generally used: large boulders, timber barriers and wood bollards. All three (3) types of
barriers are effective in stopping motorized access when placed at the trailhead. The location of such barriers is
usually where trails intersect or cross streets and where trails parallel roads at points where access is likely. Rock
barriers can also be used along portions of a trail where the downslope grades are hazardous, where switchback
cutting can be a problem and along outside edges are exposed to steep slopes. The placement and spacing of
barriers are dependent upon unique trail site characteristics and use requirements.
12. Fencing: Fencing should be installed only where physical separation is necessary for safety and/or to preserve
adjacent landowner privacy. Fences should not create a narrow corridor effect for long stretches along the trail.
Where possible fencing should be located only on one side of the trail at a time.
Fences should be no closer than five feet (5') from the trail edge. Where fences are necessary along both sides
of a trail, the minimum width should be twenty feet (20').
Gates are required for trails that cross stock grazing area. They will be a self-closing lever latch type gate, such
as those manufactured by Powder River or another manufacturer with similar design characteristics.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 292/571
(Ord. 2002-04, 3-20-2002)
13. Stairways: Trails in excess of the slopes indicated on the trails matrix should consider stairways. Stairways may
be required to conform to the requirements set forth in the international building code. Stairs should not be used
on trails that are used by horses, road bikes or the disabled. (Ord. 2013-05, 6-18-2013, eff. 7-12-2013)
a. Wooden Stairs: Will be constructed of pressure treated or approved rot resistant timber.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 293/571
b. Stone Stairs: Can be used where trail grades exceed the maximum allowable slopes and where the grade
must be gained quickly. Stone stairs should be built with the intent that intensive use should not impact the
stairs in the slightest.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 294/571
14. Boardwalks: All wood used in boardwalk construction will be pressure treated or approved rot resistant timber.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 295/571
15. Root Barriers: Root barriers should be installed along the edges of trails where riparian or vegetation that
aggressively seeks out water is present. Willows, Gamble's oak, aspens and cottonwoods are examples of
aggressively spreading plants. In situations where irrigated land is on one side of the trail and nonirrigated land
is on the other, water seeking vegetation in the nonirrigated side may send roots to the irrigated side, a root
barrier should be installed. (Ord. 2002-04, 3-20-2002)
17.18.100: AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT INFORMATION AND STANDARDS:
In 1990, congress passed the Americans with disabilities act. Among other provisions, the act prohibits state and local
governments from discriminating on the basis of disability and requires government services, programs, and activities
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 296/571
to be accessible to people with disabilities. Technical assistance concerning the law's application is available by calling
1-800-USA-ABLE. Where potential use and/or ADA access needs warrant, provide trail access through, around, over
or under major barriers. For pedestrians, add or improve sidewalks, create safe crossings, add ADA compliant ramps,
and modify signalization and intersections where needed.
Almost fifteen (15) years ago, William Whyte wrote, "If circulation and amenities are planned with (the disabled) in
mind, the place is apt to function more easily for everyone".
ADA guidelines recommend that to accommodate people in wheelchairs and with other disabilities, each street corner
should include two (2) curb ramps. Midblock crossings should have curb ramps at each end. The city of Seattle now
installs about four hundred (400) wheelchair ramps at pedestrian crossings per year.
Alternatively, the crosswalk area can be raised to the level of the sidewalk. Such a raised crosswalk will have
additional traffic calming benefits, serving as "speed tables" that will slow traffic speed at intersections.
A. Access For The Disabled: While it is clearly not practical for all types of trails in a mountainous environment to be
fully accessible to the disabled, where reasonably appropriate, the trail system should comply with the standards
set forth in this law. Until such time as more definitive standards are set forth, this section of the master plan will
provide a policy as to what trails are required to comply with this law and how Mapleton City will approach the
improvement of trails. All new trails that provide access between new parking lots and new public facilities, such as
recreation or institutional facilities, clubhouses, resort facilities, and commercial or business facilities are required
to comply with ADA. All new trails providing access to new public, private and institutional transportation facilities
also need to comply with ADA requirements. Trail renovation or new trails located in existing developed areas of
the community should comply with the ADA standards.
A trail is considered ADA accessible if it meets the following criteria:
1. Five foot (5') minimum width.
2. Hard surfaces: Asphalt and concrete are the most accessible. Compacted crushed stone also works well,
provided that the stones' diameter is less than three-eighths inches (3/8"). Loose gravel is not recommended.
3. Trail gradient should be no greater than five percent (5%).
4. Ramps, not stairs, should be provided for grades exceeding the five percent (5%) maximum.
5. Ramp grades should not exceed eight percent (8%) and have a level landing for every thirty inches (30") of
vertical rise and have a slip resistant surface.
6. Thirty two inch (32") high handrails should be installed on all ramps and bridges.
7. Fully accessible trails should have a rest area every three hundred feet (300'), preferably cleared with a bench
outside of the trail path with the distance between rest areas posted at the trailhead.
8. One or more accessible parking space should be provided at trail parking lots.
9. If gate or bollards are planned to prevent motorized vehicle access to the trail, maintain thirty two inch (32")
clearance to ensure or provide wheelchair access.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 297/571
(Ord. 2002-04, 3-20-2002)
17.18.110: SIGNS AND PUBLIC MAPS:
Locations for signs need to be evaluated on a case by case basis and signs should only be posted where necessary
to avoid visual pollution. These guidelines provide general direction for signs and their placement.
Signage on privately constructed trails will be purchased by local cities, Mapleton City or UDOT, and given to the
contractor constructing the trail for installation. The building department should maintain a stock of commonly used
signs. Contractors should notify the building department a minimum of thirty (30) days prior to trail completion to
assure the signs they need are available.
A. Regulatory Signs: Requirements for the use and placement of signs, including regulatory signs at intersections, will
follow the standards set forth in the "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" (MUTCD) section on "Traffic
Control Devices For Bicycle Facilities" and will apply to all multiuse paved trails. Bicycle crossing signs near a road
approaching a crossing will conform to MUTCD standards. The following information lists the types of regulatory
signs and describes where they should be located:
Examples of other signs available. Copy and graphics can be altered to fit your needs and size.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 298/571
1. Stop Signs: Stop signs will be installed wherever paved multiple use trails cross public streets, unless traffic is
required to stop at trail intersections or at other potentially hazardous locations.
2. Speed Limit, Steep Grade, Danger Warning, And Slow Signs: These signs should be installed where trails
approach maximum slopes, areas with limited sight distance and areas with dangerous conditions ahead, such
as "Moose Crossings".
3. Curve Signs: Trail users should be cautioned by signs when a curve has a smaller than recommended travel
radius and/or limited sight distance. Curve signs should be posted at points along the trail where travel at a
moderate rate would cause a trail user to leave their lane.
4. Dismount Signs: Such signs should be posted in areas where slope exceeds recommended standard and where
trail width or vertical clearance is less than the recommended standard.
5. School Zone Signs: For the safety of school children and trail users, school signs should be posted near
schools.
6. Private Property Signs: Signs identifying private property should be located on an "as needed" basis.
All regulatory signs should have engineer grade reflective coating and be graffiti proof. Sign size and letter height
should conform to the speed of traffic along the trail.
B. Informational Signs:
* Signs indicating allowed uses should be posted at trailheads.
* At high volume multiple use trailheads, informational signs indicating user etiquette should be posted.
1. Trail User Information Sign: This sign should be placed at all major trailhead facilities and city parks where trails
are accessed. It should be located where it is clearly visible and where it does not impede trail use or present a
hazard to trail users.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 299/571
2. Yield Hierarchy Sign: This sign should be placed at all major access points of multiple use trails. It should be
located where it is clearly visible and where it does not impede trail use or present a hazard to trail users.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 300/571
3. Trail Courtesy Sign: Trail courtesy signs should be posted at all trailheads. A shortened user courtesy sign
should be installed at trail access points. This sign can be placed on the same post as the "Yield Hierarchy
Sign", wherever the trail user information sign is not located. The trail courtesy sign should also be located on
"Stop" and "Private Property Signs".
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 301/571
(Ord. 2002-04, 3-20-2002)
Chapter 17.20
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEES
17.20.010: PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE REQUIRED:
Wherever a performance guarantee is required under the terms of this title, the performance guarantee shall be
submitted:
A. In conformance with this chapter; and
B. Prior to the commencement of any improvements. (Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
17.20.020: TYPE AND AMOUNT OF GUARANTEE:
A. The amount of the performance bond for street, grading, or utility improvements shall be established by the city
engineer's original estimated cost of completion.
B. The amount of the performance bond for landscaping improvements, driveway installation, sidewalk repairs and
early occupancy shall be established by the community development director or his designee as follows:
1. For all new single-family residential units, an improvement performance bond paid at the issuance of the building
permit is required in the amount of a minimum of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00).
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 302/571
C. The performance bond shall be in the form of cash and/or an irrevocable letter of credit.
D. A performance bond agreement shall be entered into by and between Mapleton City and the applicant:
1. The performance bond agreement shall include a provision that the performance bond shall expire within
thirteen (13) months from the date issued.
2. If the project has not been completed by that date, then the performance bond shall be considered foreclosed
upon.
3. All remaining funds shall be thereafter remitted to the city as set forth in the performance bond agreement.
4. A performance bond may be extended only if special circumstances warrant an extension, as determined by the
city engineer.
E. A performance bond may be partially released if the performance to which it relates has been satisfactorily
completed, except that not less than twenty percent (20%) of the performance bond shall be retained to ensure
completion of the entire performance. Beginning with the third partial release of a performance bond, a service
charge of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be charged in addition to the actual cost of processing the partial
release.
F. The community development director or designee may establish objective procedures consistent with this section
relating to the administration of performance bonds, including fund management, default and collection. (Ord.
2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
17.20.030: FINAL DISPOSITION AND RELEASE:
A. Upon completion of the work for which a performance bond has been posted, the developer shall submit to the city
one copy of a written request for release.
B. After receipt of the notice and request under subsection A of this section, the city engineer shall make a preliminary
inspection of the improvements and shall submit a report to the community development director setting forth the
condition of the facilities.
C. The community development director shall receive the report and authorize release of the remainder of the
performance bond except for that portion to be held as a durability bond under section 17.20.050 of this chapter if
the city finds, based on objective inspection standards, that the condition of the improvements are satisfactory.
D. The performance bond may not be released if the city finds:
1. That the condition of material or workmanship shows unusual depreciation or does not comply with the
acceptable standards of durability; or
2. That any other terms of the performance bond have not been satisfied.
E. In the case of a dispute over the release of a performance bond under this section, the city administrator may refer
the matter to the city council for subsequent action to secure performance. (Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-
2016)
17.20.040: DEFAULT:
A. Upon substantiating a finding under subsection B of this section, the community development director with approval
of the city administrator may, with due notice to the developer:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 303/571
1. Declare the performance bond forfeited; and
2. Install or cause the required improvement to be installed using the proceeds from the performance bond to
defray the costs.
B. A performance bond may be forfeited under subsection A of this section if the city finds that a developer has failed
or neglected to:
1. Satisfactorily install the required improvements;
2. Make required corrections;
3. Make payment to the city for administration and inspections; or
4. Otherwise failed to carry out the activity for which the performance bond was required.
C. The developer is responsible for work beyond the limits of the bond amount.
D. Any funds remaining after completion of the required improvements will be returned to the developer. (Ord. 2014-
04, 3-19-2014, eff. 4-13-2014)
17.20.050: DURABILITY BOND:
A. The city shall retain a durability bond in the amount of not less than ten percent (10%) of the initial amount of the
performance bond in the form of cash. The durability bond shall be for the purpose of warrantying the
improvements and shall be for a period of:
1. One year after final acceptance of the improvement or warranty work; or
2. Two (2) years after final acceptance of the improvement or warranty work, if the city:
a. Determines for good cause that a lesser period would be inadequate to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare; and
b. Has substantial evidence of:
(1) Prior poor performance of the applicant;
(2) Unstable soil conditions within the subdivision or development area; or
(3) Extreme fluctuations in climatic conditions that would render impracticable the discovery of substandard or
defective performance within a one year period.
B. A determination under subsection A2 of this section shall be made by the city engineer in consultation with the city
administrator.
C. If, after the warranty period, the durability of said improvements are found to be satisfactory, the retainage may be
released following the procedure outlined under section 17.20.030 of this chapter.
D. The city engineer may authorize a release of fifty percent (50%) of the improvement durability bond prior to the
warranty period, if determined appropriate based on a finding of:
1. The project has been completed and found acceptable and all monies have been released except for the
durability bond;
2. An error in the initial amount of the performance bond or the original calculation of the durability bond; or
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 304/571
3. Fact that was previously unknown to the city that is material in a determination that the city's public health,
safety, and welfare would still be adequately protected.
E. The person giving the durability bond shall correct the improvements if at any time during the warranty period:
1. Any required improvement fails or shows unusual depreciation;
2. Certain work has not been completed or it becomes evident that certain work was not completed; or
3. The materials or workmanship used in constructing the improvements do not otherwise comply with accepted
standards of durability.
If the corrections are not made within a reasonable time, the community development director, with review from
the city administrator, in accordance with section 17.20.040 of this chapter, may declare the person in default
and use the retainage to defray the cost of any required work. (Ord. 2014-04, 3-19-2014, eff. 4-13-2014)
Chapter 17.24
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
17.24.010: STREETS TO BE EXCAVATED TO THE FULL WIDTH:
All streets shall be excavated to the full width shown on the final plat after obtaining an excavation permit in
accordance with the city's requirements as set forth in chapter 12.08 of this code. (Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-
2016)
17.24.020: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
17.24.030: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
17.24.040: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
17.24.050: WORK TO BE DONE BY ENGINEER OR SURVEYOR:
All engineering work must be done by, or under direction of, a professional engineer registered in the state of Utah. All
land survey work must be done by, or under the direction of, a professional land surveyor registered in the state of
Utah. (Ord. 2002-04, 3-20-2002)
17.24.060: AS BUILT DRAWINGS OF RECORD REQUIRED:
Plans showing the location and size of all sewer and water lines, valves and other subsurface utility and service lines
and facilities shall be required prior to plat recording or the release of performance guarantees. (Ord. 2014-04, 3-19-
2014, eff. 4-13-2014)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 305/571
17.24.070: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2002-04, 3-20-2002)
17.24.080: DEDICATION OF WATER RIGHTS TO THE CITY:
A. Water Rights Dedication And Conveyance Requirements: Any applicant requesting approval ("applicant") for a
development, subdivision, annexation, or any other new connection to the city's culinary or secondary water
system ("development"), which increases the need for water service from the city, shall dedicate and convey to the
city water rights ("water rights"), in a sufficient quantity and type to satisfy the anticipated culinary water and
secondary irrigation water needs of the proposed development. Satisfaction of this water rights dedication section
and the accompanying conveyance requirements shall be a condition precedent to and requirement for approval of
all development applications.
B. Water Rights Required To Be Conveyed:
1. The city may, in its discretion, accept any water right, water company share, or water interest, it determines
meets the dedication requirements of this section.
2. With respect to the water to satisfy the culinary needs of the proposed development, the water must be legally
authorized to be diverted from city's municipal wells or other sources of municipal water supply, on a year round
basis, for municipal and industrial purposes in the entire service area of the city ("municipal rights").
3. With respect to the water to meet the secondary water needs of the proposed development, the water must be
legally authorized to be diverted from city's sources of irrigation water, on a seasonal basis, for outside irrigation
use in the entire service area of the city ("irrigation rights").
4. A change application is required if a change in the nature of use, point of diversion, period of use, or place of
use of water rights or shares is necessary to meet the dedication requirements of this section. If a change
application must be filed with the Utah division of water rights to make any water right or share able to meet the
dedication requirements herein, the following shall apply:
a. If an applicant is dedicating water rights or water shares from an irrigation company outside the area, the
applicant shall process the change application prior to plat recording.
b. If an applicant is submitting water shares from inside the area from an acceptable source, as determined by
the city engineer, prior to the recording of a final plat the applicant shall either process a change application or
submit the shares in the name of Mapleton City in a sufficient amount to meet the requirements outlined in
subsection B5 of this section after any reduction which the state engineer may require to be returned to the
hydrologic system. The applicant shall submit a fee to the city based on the most current fee schedule
adopted by the city council for the city to process a change application to convert the shares to municipal use.
5. The amount of water rights to be conveyed to the city shall be determined as follows:
a. Water Rights For Municipal Use:
(1) Inside Residential Use: The amount of water rights to be conveyed to provide an adequate supply of water
for inside residential use based on the needs of the development, shall be 0.45 acre-feet per equivalent
residential unit ("ERU").
(2) Industrial And Other Municipal Uses: The amount of water rights to be conveyed in order to provide an
adequate supply of water for industrial and other municipal uses based on the needs created by the
development, shall be determined by the city engineer on a case by case basis according to the anticipated
demand of the development.
b. Water Rights For Outdoor Secondary Irrigation Uses: The amount of water rights to be conveyed to provide an
adequate supply of outdoor secondary irrigation water based on the needs of the proposed development, shall
be 2.5 acre-feet per maximum potentially irrigable acre within the proposed development. The maximum
irrigable acreage shall be determined by deducting the maximum allowed building coverage allowed in the
zone in which the development is proposed from the total lot size of each lot included in the project area. Any
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 306/571
common open space or conservation easement property shall also be included in the irrigable land when
calculating the water dedication requirement.
6. The city shall have the authority to require the transfer of more residential or secondary irrigation water than is
required herein when the city engineer determines that the development will consume more water than is
required herein.
C. Approval Of Water Rights By The City: Water rights proposed by the applicant to be dedicated to the city must first
be reviewed and formally accepted by the city. Prior to acceptance of such water rights, the city shall evaluate the
rights proposed for conveyance based on any relevant criteria, and may, in its sole discretion, refuse to accept any
water right, water company share, or water interest as enumerated in subsection B of this section which it
determines to be: 1) defective with respect to legal title, 2) insufficient with respect to annual quantity, priority,
reliability, or flow rate, 3) unsuitable for municipal use, 4) not reasonably likely to be approved for change by the
state engineer for municipal and secondary irrigation purposes within the entire service area of the city, or 5)
defective in any other respect that makes the water rights unusable by the city to deliver water to the development.
The city's refusal to accept a proposed water right shall not constitute a waiver of, and shall not relieve the
applicant from its obligation of complying with the requirements of this section as a condition to development
approval.
D. Conveyance Of Water Rights To The City:
1. Subsequent to review and approval of the water rights proposed to be dedicated by applicant to the city, the
developer shall convey the water rights to the city, without cost, by deed, assignment, water dedication
agreement and/or such other applicable and appropriate instrument of conveyance in form and substance as
shall be approved by the city.
2. All conveyances of water rights shall be free and clear of all liens, encumbrances and adverse claims, except as
may be expressly approved and accepted by the city in writing.
3. The water rights shall be conveyed to the city prior to the recording of a final plat in connection with each phase
of the development. An approved final plat shall not be signed or recorded prior to conveyance of the accepted
water rights.
E. Effective Date: The city hereby specifically finds that it is necessary for the immediate preservation of the health,
safety, and welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the city that this section shall take effect July 25, 2014.
(Ord. 2014-09, 7-1-2014, eff. 7-25-2014)
17.24.090: AMENDMENTS TO SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE:
The provisions of this title may from time to time be amended in accordance with the following:
A. Any person seeking an amendment to the provisions of this title shall submit a written petition designating the
change desired and the reasons therefor. The planning commission shall consider the request and within a
reasonable time thereafter shall forward its recommendation to the city council. The planning commission or city
council may also initiate amendments to this subdivision ordinance.
B. Amendments shall be adopted by ordinance duly passed by the council. Before adopting any proposed amendment
the council shall hold a public hearing in relation thereto, at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an
opportunity to be heard. Notice of the time and place and subject matter of the hearing shall be published in a
newspaper of general circulation within the city at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the hearing. No
material change in or departure from the proposed amendment as recommended by the planning commission shall
be made after the hearing unless such change or departure be first resubmitted to the planning commission for its
consideration and recommendation.
C. All amendments to the ordinance shall be published or posted and recorded in accordance with the applicable
provisions of Utah Code Annotated 10-3-701 et seq., as may be amended. (Ord. 2002-04, 3-20-2002)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 307/571
17.24.100: LEVEL OF IMPROVEMENTS TO BE INSTALLED BEFORE BUILDING PERMITS MAY
BE ISSUED:
A. No building permit for the construction of a dwelling or other structure intended for human occupancy may be
issued for any lot in a subdivision unless and until said lot is served by the following minimum level of subdivision
improvements:
1. The required culinary water main and lateral connection, extending from its point of connection to the existing
city supply main, to the lot and fire hydrants where applicable.
2. The permanent water service line including the service tap, pipe and meter housing and assembly.
3. The required basic road improvements (required subbase and untreated road base) extending from the existing
city street system to and across the lot.
4. The required sewer main and lateral connection extending from its point of connection to the existing city supply
main, to the lot.
B. Notwithstanding the above, in no case shall more than fifty percent (50%) of the available building permits in any
subdivision plat be issued prior to the completion of one hundred percent (100%) of all the required improvements
agreed to be provided by the developer, as bonded for and set forth on the preliminary plat of the recorded
subdivision.
C. In no case shall a certificate of occupancy be issued for any dwelling until such time as all required improvements
are installed and accepted by the city. (Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
Chapter 17.28
FEES AND CHARGES
17.28.005: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable even though the construction of outstanding subdivision
improvements is secured through a performance guarantee. (Ord. 2002-04, 3-20-2002)
17.28.010: PROJECT APPLICATION AND REVIEW FEES:
A. All costs for the processing of subdivision proposals and the administration of this title shall be borne by the
subdivider. The city council may, from time to time, establish by resolution a schedule of fees for that purpose and
provide for the assessment and collection thereof. Such schedule of fees shall be on file in the city recorder's office
and open to public inspection during normal office hours.
B. In addition to the regular review and processing charges provided for under subsection A of this section, all cost for
conducting the regular and special reviews required pursuant to section 17.08.020 of this title shall be borne by the
applicant. (Ord. 2002-04, 3-20-2002)
17.28.020: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2002-04, 3-20-2002)
17.28.030: DEVELOPMENT COSTS TO BE BORNE BY SUBDIVIDER; CITY MAY PARTICIPATE:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 308/571
All costs and charges in connection with the planning and development of subdivisions shall be borne and paid by the
subdivider, provided that in instances where oversized improvements are required by the city, the city may pay a
portion of the excess cost for such oversized improvements in an amount as determined by negotiations between the
subdivider and the city. (Ord. 2002-04, 3-20-2002)
17.28.040: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2006-01, 1-4-2006)
17.28.050: REIMBURSEMENT FOR ON SITE OR OFF SITE IMPROVEMENTS PERMITTED;
CONDITIONS AND LIMITATIONS:
A. Reimbursements may be available for eligible improvements based on the requirements outlined in section
13.20.060, "Reimbursement", of this code. (Ord. 2013-07, 8-20-2013, eff. 9-13-2013)
Chapter 17.32
DEFINITIONS
17.32.010: LIST OF DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this title there are certain terms and phrases which require specific definitions of meaning. These
are as follow:
BUILDABLE AREA: A portion of a building site which conforms to all minimum criteria required for the placement of a
structure in accordance with section 18.08.010 of this Code.
BUILDING ENVELOPE: Area prescribed on the plat where the building(s) will be located.
OFF SITE: Of or pertaining to land, area or facilities not located within the boundaries of a subdivision.
RETAINER STRIP: A parcel of land less than the minimum depth required for a building lot bordering the boundary of
a subdivision and a street within the subdivision for the purpose of controlling the access of the property owners
abutting the subdivision to the street.
SUBDIVISION: A. Any land that is divided, resubdivided or proposed to be divided into two (2) or more lots, parcels,
sites, units, plots or other division of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, for offer, sale, lease or
development either on the installment plan or upon any and all other plans, terms and conditions of sale or of building
development;
B. The division or development of land whether by deed, metes and bounds description, devise and testacy, lease
map, plat or other recorded instrument; and
C. Divisions of land for all residential and nonresidential uses, including land used or to be used for commercial,
agricultural and industrial purposes. (Ord. 2002-04, 3-20-2002)
Chapter 17.36
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
17.36.010: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 309/571
Any person, firm or corporation who transfers or sells land in a subdivision without first preparing and having approved
a final plat thereof in accordance with the provisions of this title shall be deemed guilty of a violation for each lot
transferred or sold and the description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in
the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt such transaction from such violation.
Further, any person, firm or corporation, whether as principle, agent, employee or otherwise who, in the process of
creating a subdivision, performs any action in violation of the provision of this title or the standards adopted pursuant
to this title, shall be guilty of a violation for each such offense.
Violation of this title shall be punishable as a class C misdemeanor, as defined by chapter 1.16 of this code. Each
person, firm or corporation found guilty of violation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for every day during
which such violation is committed, continued or permitted. (Ord. 2002-04, 3-20-2002)
17.36.020: OTHER REMEDIES FOR VIOLATION:
The city council, city attorney, planning and zoning director or any owner of real estate within the city may, in addition
to other remedies provided by law, institute injunction, mandamus, abatement or any other appropriate action or
proceeding to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove any violation of this title. (Ord. 2002-04, 3-20-2002)
Chapter 17.37
CONSTITUTIONAL TAKINGS APPEAL PROCEDURE
17.37.010: POLICY CONSIDERATIONS:
There is an underlying policy in Mapleton City, strongly favoring the careful consideration of matters involving
constitutional taking claims, in fairness to the owner of private property bringing the claim and in view of the
uncertainty and expense involved in defending law suits alleging such issues. At the same time, the legitimate role of
government in lawfully regulating real property must be preserved and the public's right to require the dedication or
exaction of property consistent with the constitution. Consistent with this policy, it is desired that a procedure be
established for the review of actions that may involve the issue of a constitutional taking. These provisions are to
assist governments in considering decisions that may involve constitutional takings. It is intended that a procedure for
such a review be provided, as well as guidelines for such considerations. This chapter is further intended and shall be
construed to objectively and fairly review claims by citizens that a specific government action should require payment
of just compensation, yet preserve the ability of the city to lawfully regulate real property and fulfill its other duties and
functions. (Ord. 2002-04, 3-20-2002)
17.37.020: DEFINITIONS:
A. "Constitutional taking" means actions by the city involving the physical taking or exaction of private real property
that might require compensation to a private real property owner because of:
1. The fifth or fourteenth amendment to the constitution of the United States;
2. Article I, section 22, of the Utah constitution;
3. Any court ruling governing the physical taking or exaction of private real property by a government entity. (Ord.
2002-04, 3-20-2002)
17.37.030: GUIDELINES ADVISORY:
The guidelines adopted and decisions rendered pursuant to the provisions of this chapter are advisory, and shall not
be construed to expand or limit the scope of the city's liability for a constitutional taking. The reviewing body or person,
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 310/571
shall not be required to make any determination under this chapter except pursuant to section 17.37.040 of this
chapter. (Ord. 2002-04, 3-20-2002)
17.37.040: REVIEW OF DECISION:
Any owner of private real property who claims there has been a constitutional taking of their private real property shall
request a review of a final decision of any officer, employee, board, commission, or council. The following are specific
procedures established for such a review:
A. The person requesting a review must have obtained a final written determination, from an authorized representative
of the city, relative to the decision from which they are requesting review.
B. Within thirty (30) days from the date of the final decision that gave rise to the concern that a constitutional taking
has occurred, the person requesting the review shall file in writing, in the office of the city recorder, a request for
review of that decision. A copy shall also be filed with the city attorney.
C. After a request for review has been filed with the city recorder the city council shall set a time to review the decision
that gave rise to the constitutional takings claim at their next regularly scheduled council meeting or within fourteen
(14) days, whichever is sooner.
D. In addition to the written request for review, the applicant must submit, prior to the date of the review, the following:
1. Name of the applicant requesting review;
2. Name and business address of current owner of the property, form of ownership, whether sole proprietorship, for
profit or not for profit corporation, partnership, joint venture or other, and if owned by a corporation, partnership
or joint venture, name and address of all principal shareholders or partners;
3. A detailed description of the grounds for the claim that there has been a constitutional taking;
4. A detailed description of the property taken;
5. Evidence and documentation as to the value of the property taken, including the date and cost at the date the
property was acquired. This should include any evidence of the value of that same property before and after the
alleged constitutional taking, the name of the party from whom purchased, including the relationship, if any,
between the person requesting a review and the party from whom the property was acquired;
6. Nature of the protectable interest claimed to be affected, such as, but not limited to, fee simple ownership,
leasehold interest;
7. Terms (including sale price) of any previous purchase or sale of a full or partial interest in the property in the
three (3) years prior to the date of application;
8. All appraisals of the property prepared for any purpose, including financing, offering for sale, or ad valorem
taxation, within the three (3) years prior to the date of application;
9. The assessed value of the ad valorem taxes on the property for the previous three (3) years;
10. All information concerning current mortgages or other loans secured by the property, including name of the
mortgage or lender, current interest rate, remaining loan balance and term of the loan and other significant
provisions, including, but not limited to, right of purchasers to assume the loan;
11. All listings of the property for sale or rent, price asked and offers received, if any, within the previous three (3)
years;
12. All studies commissioned by the petitioner or agents of the petitioner within the previous three (3) years
concerning feasibility of development or utilization of the property;
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 311/571
13. For income producing property, itemized income and expense statements from the property for the previous
three (3) years;
14. Information from a title policy or other source showing all recorded liens or encumbrances affecting the
property; and
15. The city council may request additional information reasonably necessary, in their opinion, to arrive at a
conclusion concerning whether there has been a constitutional taking.
E. An application shall not be deemed to be "complete" or "submitted" until the reviewing body certifies to the
applicant, that all the materials and information required above, have been received by the city. The reviewing body
shall notify the applicant of any incomplete application within five (5) business days of receipt of the application.
F. The city council shall hear all the evidence related to and submitted by the applicant, city, or any other interested
party.
G. A final decision on the review shall be rendered within twenty eight (28) days from the date of the complete
application for review has been received by the city recorder. The decision of the city council regarding the results
of the review shall be given in writing to the applicant and the officer, employee, board, commission or council that
rendered the final decision that gave rise to the constitutional taking claim.
H. If the city council fails to hear and decide the review within twenty eight (28) days of receipt of a completed
application, the decision of the authorized representative of the city shall be deemed to be approved by the city
council. (Ord. 2002-04, 3-20-2002)
17.37.050: REVIEWING GUIDELINES:
The city council shall review the facts and information presented by the applicant to determine whether or not the
action by the city, constitutes a "constitutional taking" as defined in this chapter. In doing so, they shall consider:
A. Whether the physical taking or exaction of the private real property bears an essential nexus to a legitimate
governmental interest.
B. Whether a legitimate governmental interest exists for the action taken by the city.
C. Is the property and exaction taken, roughly proportionate and reasonably related, on an individual property basis,
both in nature and extent, to the impact caused by the activities that are the subject of the decision being reviewed.
(Ord. 2002-04, 3-20-2002)
17.37.060: RESULTS OF REVIEW:
After completing the review, the reviewing body shall make a determination regarding the above issued and where
determined to be necessary and appropriate, shall make a recommendation to the officer, employee, board,
commission or council that made the decision that gave rise to the constitutional takings claim. (Ord. 2002-04, 3-20-
2002)
Chapter 17.42
CLEANUP, PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY
17.42.010: REQUIREMENTS:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 312/571
A. This chapter shall apply to all construction activities or any other debris or obstruction in the public right of way. The
provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the building official for those holding building permits, and by the
public works director for those holding excavation permits.
B. Each holder of a building or excavation permit shall be responsible to see that vehicles used in the process of
carrying out the work authorized by the permit shall not track any mud, dirt, or debris of any kind upon any streets
or sidewalks within the corporate limits of Mapleton City. The permit holder shall be responsible to see that the
wheels of the equipment are clean prior to its leaving the job site and entering the streets of Mapleton City.
C. All trucks and equipment leaving the site with earthen materials or loose debris shall be loaded and covered in such
a manner as to prevent dropping of materials on city streets or sidewalks or adjoining property. An on site gravel
cleanup and parking area shall be required for all sites that have no paved areas. Neither city streets nor adjoining
property shall be used as the required cleanup area.
D. Ramps constructed over curbs and gutters shall not interfere with or block passage of water along the gutter and
shall be constructed of a material that will not erode or deteriorate under adverse weather conditions. Dirt shall not
be used for ramping material.
E. The permit holder shall install erosion and water runoff controls sufficient to ensure that no storm water, surface
water, sediments or debris from the construction site shall drain or wash or be tracked into any public right of way
or other adjacent properties, including curb and gutter. For construction pursuant to a building permit the building
official may require an erosion control plan to be submitted for approval. For construction in the public rights of way
or easements, an erosion control plan shall be submitted for approval. Every erosion control plan submitted shall
be sufficient to cover any contingency, including, but not limited to, seasonal storms, unseasonable storms, or
methods of construction. Such plans may be required anytime during construction and must be submitted within
five (5) days of the request. The building official and/or the public works director may suspend all work until the
plan requested is approved. The permit holder will maintain all erosion control plan facilities throughout the life of
the construction project. The building official and/or the public works director or designated city official will monitor
their effectiveness after storms and enforce the necessary adjustments to ensure they function correctly.
F. The curb, gutter, street and sidewalk shall not be used for storage of debris, dirt or excavated materials. In addition,
the sidewalks shall not be removed, blocked or otherwise rendered unusable by either the storage of construction
equipment or materials or the construction procedures used, unless a safe, usable alternate walkway along the
same side of the street is provided. All alternate walkways shall be ramped in accordance with ADA handicap ramp
requirements and so constructed as to provide an all weather walking surface four feet (4') wide that is as sound
and smooth as the normal concrete sidewalk.
G. The permit holder, contractor, or individual shall be responsible for the immediate removal of mud, dirt or debris
deposited on city streets, curb, gutter and sidewalks by equipment leaving the site or by the permit holder's
construction procedures. Any curb, gutter or sidewalk, or other utility such as a secondary water line, that is broken
shall be replaced immediately. If no work has been done to replace or repair broken or damaged utilities, no
occupancy permit or final inspection will be granted.
H. A one thousand dollar ($1,000.00) bond shall be required for a building permit for all undeveloped sites. The
purpose of the bond is to ensure that the site is kept in accordance with this code. If it becomes necessary for the
city street crews to remove any mud, dirt, or debris which has been deposited upon a street or sidewalk of
Mapleton City, the total cost to the city of such removal will be charged to the permit holder, contractor, or individual
including legal fees, if any, from the bond. Any cost associated with the cleanup or administrative costs above and
beyond the bond amount, may be subtracted from any additional bonds (if applicable). The city may also pursue
other legal remedies to recoup additional costs and legal fees. Payment of such charges will be made to the city
upon billing or prior to certification of final inspections, and/or issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
I. The building official and/or public works director or designated city official is empowered to suspend a building or
excavation permit until the permit holder installs necessary cleaning equipment or erosion control facilities
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 313/571
approved by the building official and/or public works director to ensure that no dust/dirt or debris is deposited upon
the streets and sidewalks of Mapleton City.
J. Each permit holder, contractor, or individual shall be responsible to see that all construction sites are kept free of
construction waste that would be subject to being blown onto adjoining properties, and shall remove or place
construction waste in a garbage dumpster daily.
K. All construction materials and waste shall be removed from the property and legally disposed before an occupancy
permit shall be issued. (Ord. 2003-06, 3-5-2003, eff. 3-12-2003)
Title 18
DEVELOPMENT CODE, PART III; ZONING
Chapter 18.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
18.04.010: TITLE:
This title shall be known as, and shall be entitled THE ZONING ORDINANCE OF MAPLETON CITY, UTAH, and may
be so cited and pleaded. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
18.04.020: PURPOSE:
The purposes of this title shall be to promote the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity and general
welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the city:
A. To encourage and facilitate the orderly growth and development of the area;
B. To protect the tax base;
C. To promote safety from fires, floods, traffic and natural hazards, and other dangers;
D. To minimize congestion in the streets and prevent the overcrowding of land;
E. To secure economy in governmental expenditures and to facilitate adequate provisions for transportation, water,
sewage, schools, parks and other public requirements;
F. To stabilize and improve property values and promote a more attractive and wholesome environment;
G. To encourage the most appropriate use of land; and
H. To provide adequate light and air quality. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
18.04.030: DECLARATION:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 314/571
In establishing the zones, the boundaries thereof, and regulations and restrictions applying within each of the zones,
due and careful consideration was given, among other things, to the suitability of the land for particular uses, and to
the character of the zone, with a view to conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use
of land throughout the area. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
18.04.040: INTENT:
It is the intent of the city council that the regulations and restrictions as set forth in this title shall be so interpreted and
construed as to further objectives and purposes of this title. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
18.04.050: INTERPRETATION:
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this title, the requirements contained herein are declared to be the
minimum requirements for the purposes set forth. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
18.04.060: FRACTIONAL NUMBERS:
In determining the requirements of this title, measurements which result in fractions shall not be rounded in order to
meet minimum requirements. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
Chapter 18.08
DEFINITIONS
18.08.010: TERMS DEFINED:
ACCESSORY APARTMENT: Means a subordinate portion of a single-family dwelling, and is a "dwelling unit" as
defined in the International Residential Code (IRC), under this section, and under section 18.84.410 of this title, which
includes provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
ACCESSORY BUILDING/STRUCTURE: Means a detached subordinate building or structure, the appropriate use of
which is subordinate and customarily incidental to that of the main building or to the main use of the land and which is
located on the same lot or parcel of land with the main building or use. An accessory building/structure does not
include a dwelling unit, guesthouse or separate apartment unit if located in a residential zone.
ACCESSORY USE: Means a related use which is incidental to the prescribed and permissible use.
AGRIBUSINESS: Means the businesses associated with agriculture, such as the processing and marketing of
agricultural products, manufacturing of farming equipment, and the production and sale of products used in
agriculture.
AGRICULTURE: Means the science and art of farming; work of cultivating the soil, producing crops, and raising
livestock.
ALLEY: Means a public way primarily for utility use and for servicing the property adjacent thereto.
AMATEUR RADIO ANTENNA: Means an antenna which is used for transmitting and receiving radio signals from a
radio station controlled by an operator licensed by the Federal Communications Commission.
AMATEUR RADIO ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE: Means a lattice or pole structure which acts as a support to
the amateur radio antenna. Typical support structures are triangular or square in cross section, crank up, or guyed,
and are constructed with galvanized steel or aluminum.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 315/571
ANIMAL UNIT: An "animal unit" shall be one or a proportionate combination of the following:
A. Two (2) cows, or two (2) horses, or two (2) pigs, or two (2) llamas, or two (2) other similar large animals.
B. Eight (8) adult sheep or feeder lambs, or four (4) alpacas (similar to llama).
C. Four (4) goats.
D. Thirty six (36) chickens, or thirty six (36) pigeons, or thirty six (36) similar small fowl. For regulations regarding
the keeping of chickens, see section 18.84.240 of this title.
E. Thirty six (36) rabbits, or thirty six (36) similar small animals.
F. Four (4) large birds such as ostriches, or emus, or peacocks.
G. Sixteen (16) turkeys.
H. One deer, or one elk, or one moose, or one bison, or one other such wild animal.
For the purpose of determining compliance, said definition shall not include the unweaned offspring of any
residing animal which is less than six (6) months in age.
ANTENNA: Means a transducer, attached to a support structure, designed to transmit or receive electromagnetic
waves.
APARTMENT: Means a dwelling unit within a multi-unit dwelling with exclusive living, cooking, sleeping and bathroom
areas.
APARTMENT BUILDING AND MULTI-UNIT DWELLING: Means any building or portion thereof which is designed,
built, rented or leased, let or hired out to be occupied or which is occupied as the home or residence of three (3) or
more families living independently of each other and doing their own cooking within the premises.
APIARY: Means the assembly of one or more colonies of bees at a single location.
ASSEMBLY USE: Means a business where finished parts are put together to develop a final product. These uses
include computer and electronic assembly, and similar uses, but do not include vehicle or manufacturing type uses.
ATHLETIC CLUBS, BODYBUILDING STUDIOS, SPAS, AEROBIC CENTERS: Means an establishment that provides
for aerobic exercises, running and jogging, exercise equipment, game courts, swimming facilities, and saunas, spas,
showers and lockers.
AUDITORIUM: Means a large room to accommodate an audience in a building such as a school or theater.
"Auditorium" also includes a large building for public meetings, performances, or receptions.
BED AND BREAKFAST INN: Means a business, located in a dwelling, in which two (2) or more bedrooms are rented
nightly or weekly, and where one or more meals are provided to the guests only, the price of which is usually included
in the room rate.
BOARDING HOUSE: Means a building containing not more than one kitchen, where for compensation, meals are
provided pursuant to previous arrangements on a daily, weekly or monthly basis as distinguished from a hotel, cafe,
lodging or rooming house.
BOARDING SCHOOL: Means a building or facility used for the housing, accommodation, boarding, lodging,
instruction and supervision of persons or patrons on a day and night basis.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 316/571
BUILDABLE AREA: Means a lot or portion thereof possessing all of the following physical characteristics:
A. The area contains no territory having a slope of thirty percent (30%) or greater.
B. The area contains no territory which is located in any identified floodplain or within any recognized inundation
zone, mudflow zone or zone of deformation, or lands subject to earth slippage, landslide or rockfall.
C. The engineering properties of the soil provide adequate structural support for the intended use.
D. The area does not possess any other recognized natural condition which renders it unsafe for building
purposes.
E. Engineered to mitigate the hazards.
BUILDING: Means any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of
any kind.
BUILDING ENVELOPE: Means a designated area shown on the preliminary and final subdivision plat, or building
permit site plan that shows the required area a structure must be built within to comply with setback requirements.
BUILDING, MAIN: Means the principal buildings upon a lot. Garages, carports and other buildings which are attached
to a dwelling or other main building or which are situated closer to the main building than the minimum distance
specified in the zone requirements shall be considered as a part of the main building.
CAFE: Means a coffeehouse or small restaurant where drinks and snacks are sold.
CAMPING: Means the temporary establishment of living facilities such as tents, RVs, travel trailers, recreational
coaches, or any other temporary living or dwelling for any period of time. Camping on public property, including
streets, parks and publicly owned lots, is prohibited. Camping on private property is prohibited except as allowed in
this title.
CAMPING UNIT: Means any trailer, recreational vehicle, or similar vehicle or device established or maintained and
operated as temporary living quarters for recreation, education, or vacation purposes.
CAR WASH: Means a facility used to clean the exterior, and sometimes the interior, of passenger vehicles.
CARETAKER DWELLING: Means a dwelling which is occupied by a person whose function is to watch or take care of
a business, industry, or public school which is located on the same premises as the dwelling.
CHECK CASHING: Means cashing a check for consideration or extending a deferred deposit loan and shall include
any other similar types of businesses licensed by the State pursuant to the Check Cashing Registration Act.
CHILD CARE, COMMERCIAL: Means an establishment that provides regular shelter, care, activity and supervision for
eight (8) or more children.
CHILD CARE, RESIDENTIAL: Means a child care business operated within a dwelling and subject to section
18.84.380 of this title.
CLINIC, ANIMAL: Means a building used for the diagnosis and treatment of ill, infirm and injured animals, but which
building does not provide board, room, or regular veterinarian care and services.
CLUB: Means a building used, occupied and operated by an organized association of persons for social, fraternal,
religious or patriotic purposes, whose activities are confined to the members and their guests, but shall not include any
organization, group or association, the principal activity of which is to render a service usually and ordinarily carried on
as a business.
COLLOCATION: Means the use of a wireless telecommunications facility by more than one wireless
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 317/571
telecommunications provider.
COMMERCIAL CONVENIENCE STORE: Means those commercial establishments known as convenience stores,
food marts, or c-stores and includes any retail establishment characterized by a rapid turnover of customers and high
traffic generation, offering for sale a relatively limited line of prepackaged food products and snacks, household items,
newspapers and magazines, and sandwiches and other freshly prepared foods, such as salads, for on or off-site
consumption. A commercial convenience store may be co-located with a gas station, drive through restaurant or other
use only when that additional use is also specifically permitted by the applicable zoning district.
COMMERCIAL KENNEL: Means a shelter for or a place where more than five (5) dogs or cats are bred, boarded, or
trained for monetary gain.
COMMERCIAL MIXED-USE: Means development which incorporates a mix of uses, including retail commercial,
and/or offices and residential.
COMMERCIAL NURSERY: Means a business where young plants or trees are raised for experimental horticultural
purposes, for transplanting, or for sale.
COMMERCIAL PARKING LOT: Means a parking lot or structure primarily used for parking motor vehicles for a fee, for
a use that is not located on site, or for intermodal transfer facilities such as park and ride lots or transit stations.
COMMERCIAL REPAIR SERVICES: Means repair of products, not to include vehicles or heavy equipment. These
uses include consumer repair services for individuals and households for items such as household appliances,
musical instruments, cameras, household electronic equipment, and similar uses. Any other uses specifically listed
within each particular zoning district shall not be construed as falling within this generic definition.
COMPREHENSIVE MENTAL HEALTH TREATMENT: Means a facility used to treat people with mental illnesses of all
ages and genders in a comprehensive manner.
CONDITIONAL USE: Means a use which requires approval of the Planning Commission before the Community
Development Director may issue a permit therefor; generally, those uses which require individual consideration of
surrounding conditions and circumstances to carry out the intent and purpose of the zoning plan; a use for which a
conditional permit is required by this title.
CONDITIONAL USE AGRICULTURE: Means commercial types of agriculture that due to their nature may create a
public nuisance without adequate measures being taken. These types of agriculture can only be engaged in under the
conditional use provisions of this title. This shall include, but not be limited to, the following types of agriculture:
A. Breeding and raising of fur animals.
B. Commercial aviaries.
C. Breeding and raising of fowl, squab, rabbits and other small animals to be utilized as food or sold as pets.
D. Breeding and raising of deer, elk, moose, bison, and other such naturally wild animals.
E. Breeding and raising of exotic animals.
F. Greenhouses and other crops grown within structures.
CONDOMINIUM: Means any structure or parcel that has been submitted to fractionalize ownership under the
provisions of the Utah Condominium Ownership Act.
CONVALESCENT HOME, REST HOME AND NURSING HOME: Means any building or structure designed for the
licensed care of persons recovering from illness or requiring nursing or similar care.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 318/571
CONSTRUCTION/CONTRACTOR OFFICES: Means a portable trailer used as an office in conjunction with an
ongoing, on site construction project.
CONVENTIONAL CONSTRUCTION: Means a structure which is constructed in compliance with the provisions of the
International Residential and Commercial Code, International Mechanical Code, National Electrical Code, and
International Plumbing Code as adopted by the City.
COOP: Means a freestanding building for the sheltering of fowl.
CURB CUT: Means a cut in the curb line for the passage of vehicles.
DELI/DELICATESSEN: Means an establishment where food is sold for consumption off-premises and no counters or
tables for on-premises consumption of food are provided, but excludes groceries and supermarkets.
DESIGNATED CITY STREET: Means an existing designated Federal or State highway or an existing, or proposed
City street which is shown on the transportation and circulation element of the General Plan of the City.
DISABILITY: Is defined in section 57-21-2 of the Utah Code Annotated.
DISABLED CARE FACILITY: Means a long-term care residential facility for disabled persons, persons suffering from a
physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of a person's major life activities, including a person
having a record of such an impairment or being regarded as having such an impairment.
DRIVE-THROUGH RESTAURANT: Means a restaurant that includes a window or similar feature which allows food to
be ordered and taken from the premises for consumption elsewhere without leaving a vehicle.
DUPLEX: Means a building designed as a single structure, containing two (2) separate living units, each of which is
designed to be occupied as a separate permanent residence for one family.
DWELLING: Means any building which is used for residential purposes, except a hotel, tourist court, boarding or
rooming house, rest home, childcare home or trailer house and the like.
DWELLING UNIT: Means one or more rooms in a residential building or residential portion of a building that are
arranged, designed, used, separated, or intended for use as a complete, independent living facility for a single family
and that includes permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation.
ELDERLY HOUSING, ASSISTED LIVING: See definition of "convalescent home, rest home and nursing home".
ELDERLY HOUSING, CONGREGATE CARE FACILITY: See definition of "convalescent home, rest home and nursing
home".
ELDERLY HOUSING, LIFECARE OR CONTINUING CARE SERVICES: See definition of "convalescent home, rest
home and nursing home".
ELDERLY HOUSING, RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY: See definition of "residential facilities for elderly persons".
ELDERLY HOUSING, RETIREMENT HOUSING: See definition of "senior housing".
ENTERTAINMENT CENTER: Means an establishment or enterprise for the purpose of amusing or entertaining
persons for profit or nonprofit and generally contained within a structure. Such uses include, but are not limited to,
theater, playhouse, cinema, performing arts, planetarium, discovery center, museum, amusement house, or bowling
alley. This use does not include "sexually oriented business entertainment".
EXOTIC ANIMALS: Means any animal, including fowl, reptiles, etc., that is not native to this area. This does not
include animals that are not native to this area but by tradition and time are now common to this area.
FAMILY: A. Means one of the following groups of individuals, but not more than one group at the same time:
1. An individual living alone; or
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 319/571
2. Two (2) or more people, all of whom are related to one designated occupant of the dwelling by blood,
marriage, adoption, or legal guardianship and their foster children and up to two (2) other unrelated persons
who do not pay rent; or
3. Up to four (4) related or unrelated individuals who live and cook together as a single housekeeping unit; or
4. Two (2) unrelated individuals and any children of either of them living as a single housekeeping unit.
B. 1. Family includes up to two (2) guests if the guests live and cook together with the family in a single dwelling
unit and do not pay rent or give other consideration for the privilege of staying with the family.
2. A "guest" under this subsection B is defined as a person who stays with a family for a period of less than thirty
(30) days within any rolling one year period and does not utilize the dwelling as a legal address for any
purpose.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS: Means a trust company, savings bank, industrial bank, savings and loan association,
building and loan association, commercial bank, credit union, Federal association, investment company, or other
business association, which is chartered under Federal or State law, solicits, receives, or accepts money or its
equivalent on deposit and loans money as a regular business. "Financial institutions" does not include "check
cashing", "pawn shops" or other similar uses.
FLAG: A fabric, banner, or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns, or symbols, used as a symbol.
FLOOR AREA: The "floor area" of a building is the sum of the areas of the several floors of the building, including
basements, mezzanines and penthouses, of headroom height, measured from the exterior walls or from the centerline
of walls separating buildings. The floor area does not include unoccupied features such as pipe trenches, decks,
steps, chimneys, roof overhangs, etc. Garage area is considered separately.
FUNERAL HOME: Means a building used for the preparation of the deceased for burial and the display of the
deceased and rituals connected therewith before burial or cremation.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: Means a detached accessory building or portion of a main building designed for the parking or
temporary storage of automobiles of the occupants of the premises.
GAS STATION: Means a facility limited to retail sales to the public of gasoline, motor oil, lubricants, motor fuels, travel
aides, and minor automobile accessories. A gas station may be co-located with a commercial convenience store, drive
through restaurant or other use only when that additional use is also specifically permitted by the applicable zoning
district.
GAS STATION, CARDLOCK FUELING STATION: Means an automated vehicle fuel sales facility without an attendant.
GAS STATION WITH VEHICLE REPAIR: Means a "gas station" that offers substantial vehicle repair services in
addition to other accessory sales. See definition of "vehicle repair".
GRADE, FINISHED: Means the topographic elevations where the earth meets the building, upon project completion.
Excluded from this definition are window wells serving basement rooms. Also referred to as "final grade".
GRADE, NATURAL: Means the topographic elevations representing the surface of the ground prior to grading, filling,
or other site alterations for a project. When natural grade is not readily apparent, an approximation of preexisting
conditions using grades on adjacent sites, retaining walls, prior survey maps, etc., may be used as a reference for
determining natural grade. All such grade approximations shall require the concurrence by the Community
Development Director. Also referred to as "existing grade".
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 320/571
GUEST: Means a person paying for staying or receiving services at a hotel, motel, boarding house, rooming house or
rest home, or similar facility.
HEIGHT, BUILDING: The height of a building shall be measured as the plumb vertical distance from any point on the
roof to the existing or final grade, whichever is more restrictive.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 321/571
HOME OCCUPATION: Means any gainful occupation, service, profession, manufacturing or similar activity conducted
in a consistent and ongoing manner within a dwelling. Home occupations are subject to section 18.84.380 of this title.
HOSPITAL, MEDICAL CENTER: Means an institution specializing in clinical, temporary or emergency medical
services to humans and/or licensed by the State to provide diagnosis, treatment, surgery, obstetrics and general
medical practice.
HOTEL/MOTEL: Means an establishment with temporary lodging in rooms, for less than one month, that has interior
common corridor access to rooms, may include a restaurant, and may contain accessory uses and services, including,
without limitation, newsstands, gift shops, and similar incidental uses conducted entirely within the principal building
but excludes a "bed and breakfast", as defined in this section.
KENNEL: Means any lot or premises on which three (3) or more dogs over four (4) months old are kept.
LAND USE APPLICATION: Means an application required by the Development Code.
LAND USE AUTHORITY: Means the person, board, commission, agency or other body designated by the Mapleton
City Council to act upon a land use application.
LAND USE DECISION: Means any final decision of the City Council, Planning Commission, or final administrative
decision of the Community Development Director or other official responsible for the enforcement of Development
Code regulations.
LAND USE PLAN: Means a Comprehensive Plan adopted and maintained by the City which shows the most
appropriate use of land within the City; an element of the General Plan.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 322/571
LANDSCAPING: Means some combination of planted trees, shrubs, vines, ground cover, flowers or lawns. In addition,
the combination or design may include rock and such structural features as fountains, pools, artworks, screens, walls,
fences, or benches but such objects alone shall not meet the requirements of this title.
LATTICE TOWER: Means a support structure constructed of vertical metal struts and cross braces forming a
triangular or square structure which often tapers from the foundation to the top.
LODGING HOUSE OR ROOMING HOUSE: Means a building where sleeping accommodations are provided for
compensation pursuant to previous arrangement on a daily, weekly or monthly basis as distinguished from a hotel,
tourist home, motel, or boarding house.
LOT: Means a tract of land, which may or may not be for sale or intended to be; land occupied by a building together
with such open spaces as required under this title and having its principal frontage on a street; also a tract of land
which is contained in a planned unit development under separate ownership.
LOT, CORNER: Means a lot situated at a junction of two (2) streets, or situated on a curved street or way whose
radius is thirty five feet (35') or less, and where the angle formed by the intersection of the tangents is one hundred
five degrees (105°) or less.
LOT, INTERIOR: Means a lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT: Means the front boundary line of a lot bordering on the street.
LOT LINE, REAR: Means a lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line. In the case of an irregular
shaped lot, the rear lot line shall be that lot line which is generally parallel to and at the maximum distance from the
front lot line, having a length of at least ten feet (10').
LOT LINE, SIDE: Means any lot boundary line not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
LOT, THROUGH: Means a lot having frontage on two (2) streets which are parallel or nearly so.
MACHINE SHOP: Means shops where lathes, presses, grinders, shapers, and other wood- and metal-working
machines are used such as blacksmith, tinsmith, welding, and sheet metal shops; plumbing, heating, and electrical
repair shops; and overhaul shops.
MANUFACTURED HOME: Means a dwelling unit, constructed in accordance with the Federal Manufactured Home
Construction and Safety Standards (HUD Code); fabricated in one or more sections at a location other than the
placement site; designed to be transported, after fabrication, and designed and intended for permanent occupancy as
an independent dwelling unit upon connection to required utility systems. The term "manufactured home" shall also
include any structure meeting the above description which is used for office, classroom, laboratory, processing,
manufacturing, retail sales, or other such use.
MANUFACTURING, HEAVY: The manufacture or compounding process of raw materials. These activities or
processes would necessitate the storage of large volumes of highly flammable, toxic matter or explosive materials
needed for the manufacturing process. These activities may involve outdoor operations as part of their manufacturing
process.
MANUFACTURING, LIGHT: Means an establishment primarily engaged in the production, fabrication, processing or
assembly of goods and materials using processes that ordinarily do not create noise, smoke, fumes, odors, glare, or
health or safety hazards outside of the building or lot where such activities take place and are located entirely within a
building. Such uses include research and development facilities and testing laboratories. These uses do not include
refineries, rock crushers, incinerators, and similar uses.
MOBILE HOME: Means a dwelling unit designed to be transported, after fabrication, on its own wheels designed and
intended for permanent occupancy as an independent dwelling unit, upon connection to required utility systems; but
which is not constructed in compliance with the City's adopted Building, Mechanical, Electrical, and Plumbing Codes
or the Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards (HUD Code). The term "mobile home" shall
also include any structure meeting the above description which is used for an office, classroom, laboratory,
processing, manufacturing, retail sales, or other such uses.
MOBILE HOME PARK: Means an area or tract of land used to accommodate two (2) or more mobile homes intended
to be occupied as residences connected to required utility systems.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 323/571
MODULAR HOME: Means a dwelling unit constructed in compliance with the provisions of the International
Residential and Commercial Code, Mechanical Code, National Electrical Code, and Plumbing Code as adopted by the
City; fabricated at a location other than the intended placement site; designed to be transported after fabrication; and
designed and intended for permanent occupancy as an independent dwelling unit following placement upon a
permanent foundation and connection to required utility systems.
MONOPOLE: Means a support structure constructed of a single, self-supporting hollow metal tube securely anchored
to a foundation.
NATURAL CONDITIONS ANALYSIS MAP: Means a contour map showing all territory within the proposed project and
identifying: a) the location and extent of all areas having an undisturbed slope of more than thirty percent (30%), b) the
location of other natural feature or conditions including, but not limited to, intermittent and perennial stream channels
and ponds, spring areas, significant drainage channels, wetlands, floodplain or inundation zones, mudflow areas,
major fault segments, zones of deformation, etc., including, but not limited to, all hazards shown on the Utah County
hazard and FEMA maps, and c) the location of all territory meeting the qualification for buildable area.
NONCOMMERCIAL AGRICULTURE: Means agriculture on residential lots generated solely for the benefit and use of
the residents of the lot.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE: Means a building, structure, or portion thereof, which does not conform to the
regulations of this title applicable to the zone or district in which such structure is situated, but which existed prior to
the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title.
NONCONFORMING USE: Means a use of premises which does not conform to the regulations of this title, but which
was in existence at the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title.
OCCUPANCY, CHANGE OF: Means any change in the character or use of a building or premises, not including
change of tenants, proprietors or occupants.
OFF STREET PARKING SPACE: Means an area approved for the parking of automobiles which does not include a
public street, but has convenient access to it.
OFFICE, GENERAL: Means a building offering executive, administrative, professional, or clerical services, or portion
of a building wherein services are performed involving predominately operations with limited client visits and limited
traffic generated by employees and/or clients.
OFFICE, INTENSIVE: Means a business offering executive, administrative, professional or clerical services with a
high level of client interaction and traffic generated; and/or a business which employs five (5) or more persons per one
thousand (1,000) square feet of net leasable office space.
OFFICE, MEDICAL: Means a building used by physicians, dentists, and similar personnel for the treatment and
examination of patients solely on an outpatient basis, provided that no overnight patients shall be kept on the
premises.
OFFICIAL ZONE MAP: Means an up to date map on display in the Planning and Zoning Office, which shows the
territory covered by the various zones as officially adopted by the City Council.
OPEN SPACE: Means land devoted to conservation or recreational purposes and/or land designated by a municipality
to remain undeveloped (may be specified on a zoning map).
OUTDOOR DINING: Means an area of designated size used as a seating area with table and chair for the contiguous
restaurant.
OUTDOOR STORAGE: Means the accessory location of any goods, wares, merchandise, commodities, or any other
item outside of a completely enclosed building for a continuous period longer than twenty four (24) hours. The area
used for outdoor storage shall not constitute more than fifteen percent (15%) of the lot area. With the exception of
retail sales displays in an approved commercial area, outdoor storage shall be screened from public view by a
minimum six foot (6') high opaque fence or, when outdoor storage occurs in a front yard, side yard, or any other
location within the public view, a fence or screening of a height and material determined by the Planning Commission.
The presence of hazardous materials, junk, junk cars, or debris not usually appurtenant to permitted on-site uses is
prohibited. "Outdoor storage" as defined herein does not include construction yards, storage yards, or other storage
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 324/571
uses where the storage of items outside of an enclosed building is a primary characteristic of the use. See definition of
"storage yard".
PARK AND PLAYGROUND: Means an open space which has been dedicated, designed for, or used for outdoor
recreation activities, not including outdoor theaters and similar commercial recreational activities.
PARKING SPACE: Means space within a building or parking area, exclusive of driveways, ramps, columns, office and
working areas, for the parking of a motor vehicle, not less than twenty feet (20') in length and not less than nine feet
(9') in width.
PAWN SHOP: Means any person, firm, corporation, or business which loans money on deposit of personal property,
or deals in the purchase, exchange or possession of personal property on condition of selling the same back again to
the pledgor or depositor, or loans or advances money on personal property by taking chattel mortgage security
thereon, and takes or receives such personal property.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: Means a lot or tract of land which is planned and developed as a single entity
within the zone wherein the requirements applying to individual buildings are modified in accordance with the
approved plan.
PRIVATE KENNEL: Means a shelter for or a place where over three (3) and no more than five (5) dogs and cats are
bred, boarded, or trained for no monetary gain.
PROHIBITED USE: Means a use that is not permitted or allowed to be established in a zone. Any use not specifically
listed as an allowed use, an administrative conditional use or a conditional use is prohibited in that zone.
PUBLIC PARKS: Means parks which are maintained by a public agency.
PUBLIC SCHOOL: Means a school established under the laws of the State and administered by local authorities
which is maintained at the public expense by taxation and is open to the children of all residents of the community.
QUADRANT: Means a quarter area of the City bounded and separated by Main Street and Maple Street dividing the
area of the City into four (4) sections namely the northeast, northwest, southeast and southwest sections.
RECREATION FACILITY, COMMERCIAL: Means recreation facilities operated as a business on private or public
property and open to the public for a fee.
RECREATION FACILITY, PRIVATE: Means a recreation facility operated on private property and not open to the
public, including recreation facilities owned by a homeowners' or property owners' association for private use.
RECREATION FACILITY, PUBLIC: Means a recreation facility operated by a public agency and open to the public with
or without a fee.
RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES FOR ELDERLY PERSONS: Means a residence in which more than one elderly person
resides in a residential setting. Such uses are subject to subsection 18.84.370A of this title.
RESIDENTIAL PET OR HOUSEHOLD PET: Means animals or fowl customarily permitted in the house and kept for
company or pleasure, including dogs, cats, canaries and similar pets.
RESTAURANT: Means a structure in which the principal use is the preparation and sale of food and beverages.
RETAIL AND SERVICE COMMERCIAL: Means a business primarily engaged in the sale or rental of goods,
merchandise, or services directly to the consumer, and includes no outdoor storage. These uses do not include
sexually oriented businesses, vehicle or large equipment rental, sales, repair or assembly. Uses include department,
grocery, variety and drug stores; art galleries; bakeries; barbershops; jewelry stores; florists; auto parts stores;
business, personal and social services; and similar uses. These uses may include twenty four-hour uses and drive-up
windows subject to chapter 18.92 of this title.
SALVAGE YARD: Means a place where scrap, waste, discarded or salvaged materials is brought, sold, exchanged,
baled, packed, disassembled or handled or stored, including auto wrecking yards, house wrecking yards, used lumber
yards and places or yards for storage of salvage, house wrecking and structural steel materials and equipment; but
not including such places where such uses are conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building or yard, and
not including pawnshops and establishments for the sale, purchase or storage of used furniture and household
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 325/571
equipment, used cars in operable condition, or salvaged materials incidental to manufacturing operations conducted
on the premises.
SCHOOL: Means a building, structure or facility used and employed primarily for the instruction, training or tutoring of
persons, students or patrons without providing board, room or living accommodations.
SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY: Means a building or group of buildings consisting of separate, individual and
private units of varying sizes leased or rented to individuals, organizations or businesses for the self-service storage of
personal property for varying periods of time. A self-service storage facility may include outdoor storage in conjunction
with storage buildings. In no case shall storage spaces be used for manufacturing, retail, office, commercial service, or
residential uses.
SENIOR HOUSING: Means any age restricted development which may be in any housing form, including detached
and attached dwelling units, apartments, and residences, offering private and semiprivate rooms.
SETBACK: Means the shortest distance between the property line and any portion of a building or structure.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: Means any establishment that is an adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty
store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, exotic dance service, or semi-nude
model studio as defined in this Code, as well as any other establishment that regularly features or regularly shows any
sexually oriented entertainment activity, including any dual-purpose business.
SHOPPING CENTER: Means a group of commercial establishments planned, constructed, and managed as a total
entity, with customer and employee parking provided on-site, provision for goods delivery separated from customer
access, aesthetic considerations and protection from the elements, and landscaping and signage in accordance with
an approved plan.
SHORT TERM RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY: Means property which is used by any person or entity, for
transient lodging uses where the term of occupancy, possession or tenancy of the property by the person or entity is
for less than thirty (30) consecutive calendar days, for direct or indirect remuneration. For this definition,
"remuneration" means compensation, money, rent or other consideration given in return for occupancy, possession or
use of real property. This definition does not include uses such as a hotel, motel, bed and breakfast or timeshare.
SIGN, MONUMENT: Means a freestanding sign that is supported by a solid base (other than poles) such that the
bottom of the sign face is three feet (3') or less above grade and does not exceed eight feet in height and ten feet in
width (8' x 10').
SIGN, OFF PREMISES: Means a sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment,
conducted, sold, or offered elsewhere than on the premises, and only incidentally on the premises, if at all.
SIGN, ON PREMISES: Means a sign directing attention to a use conducted, product or commodity sold, service
performed or business name upon the premises on which it is located.
SINGLE ADULT LIVING UNIT: Means a dwelling unit having one or more rooms in a building for living or sleeping
purposes and having one kitchen or set of cooking facilities.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING: Means one dwelling unit contained within a single structure intended to be occupied by
a "family", as defined in this section.
SPORTS FACILITY: Means a facility or facilities, both indoor or outdoor, for the teaching, practicing and/or playing of
sporting activities.
STEALTH DESIGN: Means the use of alternative support structures to blend or hide the communication equipment
with the design, shape, or color of the structure. Examples of stealth design are, but not limited to, field lights, clock
towers, bell towers, water towers, flagpoles, windmills, monuments, etc.
STORAGE YARD: Means the location of goods, wares, merchandise, commodities, equipment, materials or any other
item outside of a completely enclosed building for a continuous period longer than twenty four (24) hours when such
storage is a primary characteristic of a permitted use or constitutes more than fifteen percent (15%) of the lot area.
The presence of hazardous materials, junk, junk cars, or debris not usually appurtenant to permitted on-site uses is
prohibited. Storage yards shall be screened from public view by a minimum six foot (6') high masonry fence and, when
outdoor storage occurs in a front yard, side yard, or any other location within the public view, additional screening of a
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 326/571
height and material determined by the Planning Commission. For the purposes of this title, construction yards, lumber
yards, and like uses are considered to be storage yards as regulated herein. Compare with the definition of "outdoor
storage".
STORY: Means that portion of a building included between the surface of a floor and the ceiling next above it.
STREET: Means a public thoroughfare other than an alley or a trail.
Arterial Class Street: Means one of the principal streets in the City, as shown and designated on the
transportation and circulation element of the General Plan of the City as an arterial class street.
Local Class Street: Means one of the principal streets in the City, as shown and designated on the transportation
and circulation element of the General Plan of the City as a local street.
Major Collector Class Street: Means one of the principal streets in the City, as shown and designated on the
transportation and circulation element of the General Plan of the City as a major street.
Rural Local Class Street: Means any dedicated street serving as the principal means of access to property,
which street is not shown on the General Street Plan of the City as a major street.
TELECOMMUNICATION: Means the technology which enables information to be exchanged through the transmission
of voice, video, or data signals by means of electrical or electromagnetic systems.
TOWNHOUSE: Means a single dwelling unit in a townhouse group of three (3) or more units, located or capable of
being located on a separate lot, and being separated from the adjoining dwelling unit by an approved common wall
extending from the foundation through the roof. A townhouse includes direct ground level access to the outdoors.
TRAILER HOUSE: Means a nonmotorized vehicle used or maintained for human habitation.
TRAILER SPACE: Means a lot or parcel of land used for the parking of mobile homes in a mobile home park or travel
trailer court for the accommodation of a mobile home or a trailer house camper.
TRAVEL TRAILER COURT: Means an area or tract of land used to accommodate two (2) or more travel trailers or
camper units for a short period of time (less than 30 days).
TWIN HOME: Means a two-dwelling structure in where each dwelling unit is located on a separate zoning lot.
VARIANCE: Means a waiver of specific regulations of this title granted by the City in accordance with the provisions
set forth in this title for the purpose of assuring that no property because of special circumstances applicable to it shall
be deprived of privileges commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same zone.
VEHICLE ASSEMBLY: Means a business where finished vehicle-related parts are put together to develop a final
product.
VEHICLE-RELATED USE: Means an establishment primarily engaged in the sale or rental of goods, merchandise,
and services related to vehicles, such as repair, body work, painting, detailing, vehicle and vehicle-related equipment
sales. These uses do not include auto dismantling, salvage, junkyards, and similar uses.
VEHICLE RENTAL: Means a business primarily engaged in the rental of vehicles.
VEHICLE REPAIR: Means a business engaged in the servicing of passenger vehicles, light and medium trucks and
other consumer motor vehicles such as motorcycles, boats and recreational vehicles. "Vehicle repair" includes
businesses where minor auto repair services performed may include lubrication and service of vehicles, tune-ups,
transmission or muffler repair, alignment services, auto upholstery shops, auto detailing, tire sales, repair and/or
mounting, and other similar repairs. "Vehicle repair" also includes major auto repair such as the removal of engines,
rebuilding of engines, repair of the internal components, repair or removal of differentials or axles, and body work.
"Vehicle repair" may also include uses that are often accessory to businesses engaged in the repair of vehicles such
as offices, part sales, storage of merchandise, and vehicle storage when such vehicle storage is fully and adequately
screened. "Vehicle repair" does not include repair and service of commercial or industrial vehicles and equipment or
other heavy vehicles in excess of ten thousand (10,000) GVW, "vehicle assembly", "manufacturing use", auto
dismantling or wrecking, salvage, "junkyards", or similar uses.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 327/571
VEHICLE SALES (MINOR): Means a business engaged in only the sale of operable vehicles and that displays no
more than three (3) vehicles outside and ten (10) vehicles inside.
VEHICLE SALES AND SERVICE (MAJOR): Means a business primarily engaged in the sale of operable vehicles with
more than three (3) vehicles displayed outside and more than ten (10) vehicles inside. Vehicle parts and accessories
may be sold, and minor repair and installation of parts and accessories may be performed on site as part of this use.
VENDING CART: Means a small wheeled, nonmotorized device from which to sell food and/or merchandise for
immediate consumption or use.
VETERINARY HOSPITAL: Means an establishment for the care and treatment of the diseases and injuries of animals
and where animals may be boarded during their convalescence.
WAREHOUSE/DISTRIBUTION: Means a use engaged in storage, wholesale, and distribution of manufactured
products, supplies, and equipment, excluding bulk storage of materials that are inflammable or explosive or that
present hazards or conditions commonly recognized as offensive. Does not include "self-service storage facility".
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA: Means the physical device through which electromagnetic,
wireless telecommunications signals authorized by the Federal Communications Commission are transmitted or
received. Antennas used by amateur radio operators are excluded from this definition.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT SHELTER: Means the structure in which the electronic receiving
and relay equipment for a wireless telecommunications facility is housed.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY: Means a facility consisting of the equipment and structures involved
in receiving telecommunications or radio signals from a mobile radio communications source and transmitting those
signals to a central switching computer which connects the mobile unit with the land based telephone lines.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER: Means a structure intended to support equipment used to transmit
and/or receive telecommunications signals including monopoles, guyed and lattice construction steel structures.
YARD: Means an open space on the same lot with a building unoccupied or unobstructed from the ground upward,
except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
YARD, FRONT: Means the minimum horizontal distance between the street line and the front line of the building or
any projection thereof, excluding steps. On a corner lot, "front yard" may be applied to either street.
YARD, REAR: Means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot as a building measured from the rear line of the
building (exclusive of steps) and the rear lot line, and extending for the entire width of the lot. In case of a corner lot
where the building facade faces on the side street, the rear yard may be established from the side of the house to the
side property line.
YARD, REQUIRED: Means the open space around buildings which is required by the terms of this title.
YARD, SIDE: Means a yard between the building and the side line of the lot and extending from the street line to the
rear of the lot.
ZONE OF DEFORMATION: Means any area where the stratification has been folded, faulted or tilted by tectonic
activity or downslope movement.
ZONING LOT: Means a lot or parcel of land which:
A. Meets all area, width, access, buildable area, utility, setback, and other requirements applicable within the zone
in which it is located; or is a nonconforming lot of record which met the requirements of the underlying zone upon
its creation1; and
B. Is served by the minimum level of improvements required for issuance of a building permit2; and
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 328/571
C. Is shown as a separate lot in a recorded subdivision or planned development, or was legally exempted from
compliance with the subdivision ordinance prior to July of 1992. A parcel which is part of an unrecorded or illegal
subdivision shall not qualify as a zoning lot. (Ord. 2018-08, 6-6-2018, eff. 6-28-2018)
Chapter 18.12
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
18.12.010: AMENDMENTS:
A. This planning and zoning title, including the map, may be amended by the Mapleton City council after said
amendments shall have first been submitted for recommendation to the planning commission. For the purpose of
establishing and maintaining sound, stable, and desirable development within the city, it is declared to be the public
policy that amendments shall not be made to the planning and zoning title and map except to promote more fully
the intent of this title and the Mapleton City general plan or to correct manifest errors. Any person seeking an
amendment to the planning and zoning title or map shall submit to the planning commission a written petition
containing all of the following information:
1. Designation of the specific zone change or title amendment desired.
2. The reason and justification for such zone change or title amendment, and a statement setting forth the manner
in which a proposed amendment or zone would further promote the intent of this title and the Mapleton City
general plan.
3. A complete and accurate legal description of the area proposed to be rezoned, or a draft of the proposed title
amendment.
4. The filing fee as established by city resolution.
5. If a map amendment is proposed, the following shall also be submitted:
a. An accurate plan, drawn to scale, showing all areas to be included within the proposed rezoning, designating
the present zoning of the property subject of the petition, and properties immediately adjacent thereto.
b. A concept plan that meets the requirements of section 17.04.020 of this code, unless provided otherwise in
this title.
c. The signature of the property owner or authorized agent or, in the case of a multiple property rezoning
request, the signature of a simple majority of the persons who own property within the area proposed for the
zoning map amendment. (Ord. 2006-37, 11-21-2006)
B. Upon receipt of a petition by the planning commission, the commission shall hold a public hearing in accordance
with the provisions of this title and may approve, conditionally approve, or deny the preliminary project plan. Before
recommending an amendment to this title, the planning commission shall determine whether such amendment is in
the interest of the public, and is consistent with the goals and policies of the Mapleton City general plan. The
following guidelines shall be used to determine consistency with the general plan:
1. Public purpose for the amendment in question.
2. Confirmation that the public purpose is best served by the amendment in question.
3. Compatibility of the proposed amendment with general plan policies, goals, and objectives.
4. Potential adverse effects to the city by creating "leapfrog" development or areas away from the existing "core" or
center of the city.
5. Potential of the proposed amendment to hinder or obstruct attainment of the general plan's articulated policies.
6. Adverse impacts on adjacent landowners.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 329/571
7. Verification of correctness in the original zoning or general plan for the area in question.
8. In cases where a conflict arises between the general plan map and general plan policies, precedence shall be
given to the plan policies.
C. The fee provided herein shall not be refundable and shall be applied to the general fund to offset the cost of legal
publications, notification of property owners, and the staff time involved in researching the appropriateness of said
request and its effect upon the general welfare of the community.
D. If a building permit is not issued within one year after rezoning and approval of a final project plan, the final project
plan shall expire and be of no further force or effect. Upon written notice from the zoning and planning director, in
such cases, the planning commission shall initiate proceedings to revert the subject property to the previous zone
designation unless an applicant requests and is granted an extension of time by the planning commission for good
cause shown. In the case that the rezone will result in a final subdivision application, if the final plat is not recorded
within one year of the approval of the preliminary subdivision plan, the preliminary approval for the subdivision shall
expire, and the planning commission shall initiate the same procedure to rezone the property as described above.
(Ord. 2002-22, 11-6-2002)
18.12.020: PUBLIC HEARING REQUIRED BEFORE AMENDING; NOTICE:
Amendments to this title may be adopted only after a public hearing held in accordance with Utah code. (Ord. 2006-
37, 11-21-2006)
18.12.030: ANNEXATIONS:
In every case where territory becomes a part of the city by annexation, the city council may assign a zoning
designation to the territory being annexed. If the city council does not assign a zone at the time the territory is annexed
to Mapleton City, the territory annexed to the city shall be zoned to the same zone with which the annexed territory has
the longest common boundary in accordance with section 20.04.030 of this code. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
18.12.040: PLANNING AND ZONING DIRECTOR TO ENFORCE TITLE:
The planning and zoning director shall be charged with the administration and enforcement of this title. The city
council may also appoint other officers and inspectors to assist in the administration and enforcement of this title. (Ord.
2002-05, 3-20-2002)
18.12.050: BUILDING PERMITS:
A. Permits Required: It shall be unlawful to do any construction or excavation work on any street, curb, gutter or
sidewalk within the city, or to cause any building or structure to be constructed, reconstructed, altered or moved
without a permit from the city to do so, unless exempted by the international residential and commercial code.
B. Permit Application: The application for a permit required by the above subsection shall be signed by the contractor
desiring to do the work or his duly authorized agent, and shall provide that the contractor agrees to complete the
work in accordance with city construction standards and specification without any cost to the city.
C. Permit Fees: A permit fee and an inspection fee shall be paid to the city prior to the issuance of a permit. All fees
shall be established by resolution of the city council.
D. Contractors To Be Approved: All contractors shall be approved by the city prior to the issuance of any permits upon
the submission of the following:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 330/571
1. A current Utah state contractor's license. All work be restricted to that covered by the license.
2. Proof of comprehensive general liability insurance. The amount of insurance required shall be the amount
required by the bid documents. If no bid documents are involved, the amount of insurance required shall be the
amount established by resolution of the city council.
3. Proof of workers' compensation insurance.
4. A statement that the contractor shall hold harmless, indemnify and defend the city and its officers and
employees from any and all liability claims, losses or damages arising or alleged to arise from the work covered
by any permit, but not including the sole negligence of the city or its officers or employees.
E. Grounds For Denying Permit: The city shall have complete discretion to grant or deny a permit. Consistent
problems with a contractor with compliance with this section or with work performance or quality may result in
denial of a permit by the city.
F. Compliance With The Permit: The contractor shall perform in accordance with the terms of the permit and the
specifications in effect at the date of the permit. Time limits may be a condition of the permit.
G. Bonding For Damage To Improvements: Prior to issuance of a building permit, the city may, depending on the
nature and extent of the construction to occur, and in every case in which is expected that heavy equipment may
be used, require a guarantee to be submitted in an amount to be established by the city council to guarantee the
repair of any damage caused by the contractor to streets, curb, gutter, sidewalks or other improvements. The
nature of the guarantee may be by escrow account, bond or letter of credit from a financial institution acceptable to
the city. The duration, and disposition and release of the guarantee, shall be treated in the same fashion as
prescribed for the performance bonds, in chapter 17.20 of this code. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
18.12.055: HOLD HARMLESS AGREEMENT FOR VARIOUS GEOLOGICAL HAZARDS AND HIGH
WATER TABLES:
A. Purposes: The main purpose of the hold harmless agreement for various geological hazards and high water tables
is to inform building permit applicants of potential geological hazards and flooding or ground water problems within
Mapleton City. The agreement also releases the city from liability for any damage to homes resulting from high
water tables, flooding, debris flow, mudslides, earth shifting, sinking, ground movement, or other similar problems
associated with high water tables or unforeseen geological hazards. The second purpose is for the builder,
developer or homeowner to take preventive measures rather than remedial measures in dealing with basement or
house/dwelling unit designs in known or unknown high water table areas or areas with known or unknown
geological hazards.
B. Definitions:
GEOLOGICAL HAZARDS: Anything relating to expansive or collapsible soils, proximity to potential landslide area,
proximity to a primary or secondary fault, proximity to an alluvial fan, proximity to an inactive or active landslide
area, or any steep slopes.
HIGH WATER TABLE: Any area that has a water table of a height sufficient to impair construction of a home with a
basement or a crawl space or that would place a home in a high probability that it would continually or occasionally
have water within it.
HOLD HARMLESS AGREEMENT: An agreement whereby the building permit applicant acknowledges potential
geological hazards and high water tables, mitigates the hazards insofar as is feasible, accepts any risk which
remains and releases and agrees to hold the city harmless from any risk associated with building in an area of a
high water table and other geological hazards.
C. Hold Harmless Agreement: The applicant shall complete a hold harmless agreement which is attached as exhibit A
to ordinance 2003-11.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 331/571
D. High Water Table Standards For Basements:
1. Prior to the issuance of the building permit with a basement, the applicant(s) shall execute the statement
referred to in subsection C of this section, and cause the same to be recorded properly in the office of the Utah
County recorder stating that the city will be released and held harmless from all damages or injury resulting from
flooding in a high water table area.
2. If it is known that a high water table exists prior to the issuance of any building permit with a basement, the
applicant shall submit to Mapleton City's building official a certificate from a registered professional engineer
indicating the method or design to floodproof the basement. Said design shall be considered acceptable by the
professional engineer hired to certify the method used to mitigate flooding of basements.
For the purpose of application a "basement" and/or lowest floor will be presumed to be any floor that has a
surface lower than twelve inches (12") above the lowest flow line in the adjacent curb or in the absence of a
curb, the crown of the street.
All plans submitted for a high water table area must state the elevation of the lowest floor in relation to the lowest
flow line of the curb or the crown of the street whichever is appropriate.
E. Geological Standards For New Home Construction: If it is known by Mapleton City, the home builder, the property
owner, or the applicant that there are geological hazards on the property, building permit applicant must provide
Mapleton City with a geotechnical report prepared in accordance with subsection 18.30.090A of this title. The
geotechnical report must be received prior to the issuance of any building permit on the property. (Ord. 2003-11, 3-
19-2003, eff. 4-2-2003)
18.12.060: PERMITS TO COMPLY WITH TITLE:
Permits shall not be granted for the construction or alteration of any building or structure or for the moving of a building
or structure onto a lot or for the change in use of any land, building, or structure, if such construction, alteration,
moving or change in use would be a violation of any of the provisions of this title. No utilities shall be installed to serve
such premises if such use would be in violation of this title. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
18.12.065: FINDINGS WHICH ARE A PREREQUISITE FOR PERMITS TO CONSTRUCT,
RECONSTRUCT, ALTER, OR MOVE IN A DWELLING:
Before a building permit can be issued to construct, reconstruct, alter, or move in a dwelling, the planning and zoning
director must have the following findings:
A. The lot or parcel of land is a zoning lot1; and
B. Dwellings are a permitted use within the zone in which the zoning lot is located; or a conditional use for a dwelling
has been granted for this zoning lot by the planning commission; and (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
C. All zoning requirements for the zone are being complied with; or variance to the zoning requirements have been
granted for this lot by the planning commission. (Ord. 2013-04, 2-19-2013, eff. 4-1-2013)
18.12.070: SPECIAL PERMITS AND BONDING:
It shall be unlawful to do any construction, excavation work on any street, curb, gutter, sidewalk, sewer line, water line
or other infrastructure addition or improvement in Mapleton City without an excavation permit from the city to do so. No
work shall be started until a permit is secured. In order to obtain an excavation permit, the contractor must comply with
the current city construction standards and specifications.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 332/571
All permits issued for construction, excavation work on any street, curb, gutter, sidewalk, sewer line, water line or other
infrastructure addition or improvement in Mapleton City, for which an excavation permit is required, shall be issued
only after approval by the city, and upon posting of a bond in an amount equivalent to an estimated cost of the
additions or improvements contemplated in the permit, which amount shall be approved by the city engineer. Said
bond may be posted in cash, letter of credit or escrow account. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
18.12.080: SITE PLAN REQUIRED FOR BUILDING PERMITS:
All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by a site plan drawn to scale not smaller than one inch
equals twenty feet (1" = 20') showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the size and location of existing
buildings, buildings to be erected and existing buildings on adjacent property and such other information as may be
deemed necessary to provide for the enforcement of this title. A careful record of such application and site plans shall
be kept in the office of the planning and zoning director. An electronic copy (such as a 3.5 inch floppy disk, a zip disk,
or a CD-ROM) of each site plan shall be included with the application. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
18.12.090: NO CONFLICTING LICENSES OR PERMITS SHALL BE ISSUED:
No license or permit for uses, buildings or purposes where the same would be in conflict with this title shall be issued.
All departments, officials, and public employees vested with the duty and authority to issue licenses or permits shall
not issue the licenses or permits which would not be in conformance with the provisions of this title. Any license or
permit so issued shall be null and void. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
18.12.100: CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
A. It shall be unlawful to use or occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or to change the
occupancy of any building or premises until a certificate of zoning compliance shall have been issued therefor by
the planning and zoning director, stating that the proposed use of the building or land conforms to the requirements
of this zoning title.
B. No nonconforming structure or use shall be changed or extended until a certificate of zoning compliance shall have
been issued by the planning and zoning director. The certificate of zoning compliance shall state specifically
wherein the nonconforming use differs with the provisions of this title.
C. The planning and zoning director shall maintain a record of all certificates of zoning compliance and a copy shall be
furnished upon request to any applicant.
D. Failure to obtain a certificate of zoning compliance shall be a violation of this title. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
18.12.110: CONSTRUCTION AND USES TO COMPLY WITH APPLICATION:
Building permits or certificates of zoning compliance issued on the basis of plans and specifications approved by the
planning and zoning director authorizes only the use, arrangement and construction set forth in such approved plans
and applications, and no other use, arrangement or construction. Use, arrangement or construction at variance with
that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this title. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
18.12.120: RESPONSIBILITY FOR VIOLATIONS:
It shall be the duty of all architects, contractors and subcontractors, builders and other persons having to do with the
establishment of any use of land or the erection, altering, changing or remodeling of any building or structure, to see
that a proper permit has been granted before such work is begun. Any such architect, builder, contractor or other
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 333/571
person doing or performing any such work without a permit having been issued is in conflict with the requirements of
this title and shall be deemed guilty of violation of this title in the same manner and to the same extent that the owner
of the premises or the persons for whom such buildings are erected, or altered, and shall be subject to the penalties
prescribed in this title for violation. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
Chapter 18.20
NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES, AND LOTS
18.20.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations governing legally established lots, structures, uses and other
nonconformities that do not conform to applicable requirements of this title. They may continue to exist and be put to
productive use, but their nonconforming aspects shall be regulated as provided in this chapter. The intent of this
chapter is to recognize the interests of property owners while controlling expansion of nonconforming conditions. (Ord.
2003-23, 11-5-2003, eff. 12-11-2003)
18.20.020: SCOPE:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all lots, structures, uses and other nonconformities within the City
regardless of when the nonconformity was established. Any lot, structure, use or other circumstance governed by this
title which does not conform to the provisions of this title may be continued to the extent that it was legally established
and complies with applicable provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2003-23, 11-5-2003, eff. 12-11-2003)
18.20.025: DEFINITIONS:
ILLEGAL LOT: Any lot that does not meet the definition of a "zoning lot" as defined in section 18.08.010 of this title.
ILLEGAL NONCONFORMING: Any use, or structure that was created or erected, either contrary to the requirements
of the underlying zone, and/or without the required permission from Mapleton City and in conformance with this Code.
NONCONFORMING LOT: A lot or a parcel of real property that:
A. Legally existed before its current zoning designation;
B. Has been shown continuously on the records of the Utah County Recorder as an independently existing piece of
property; and
C. As a result of subsequent zoning changes does not conform with the minimum size, width, frontage, depth or
other applicable dimensional requirement of the zone where the lot is located.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE: A structure, or portion thereof, that:
A. Legally existed before its current zoning designation; and
B. As a result of subsequent zoning changes does not conform with the setback, height restrictions, or other
applicable requirements of this title that govern the structure.
NONCONFORMING USE: A use of land that:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 334/571
A. Legally existed before its current zoning designation;
B. Has been maintained continuously since the time the zoning regulation governing the land changed; and
C. As a result of subsequent zoning changes does not conform with applicable requirements of this title that govern
use of the land.
OTHER NONCONFORMITY: A circumstance governed by this title other than a nonconforming lot, structure, or use
that:
A. Legally existed before the current zoning designation of the lot where the nonconformity is located; and
B. As a result of subsequent zoning changes does not conform with applicable requirements of this title. (Ord.
2003-23, 11-5-2003, eff. 12-11-2003)
18.20.030: COMPLIANCE AND ENFORCEMENT:
A. No building permit may be lawfully issued nor shall a certificate of occupancy be granted until the planning director
or his/her designee has given authorization indicating all requirements of this chapter, all conditions and
stipulations of approval, and any other specific project related requirements have been met.
B. A person, firm, or corporation violating any of the stipulations, conditions of approval, or any other provision of this
chapter shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor, punishable by a fine or imprisonment, or by both. Any such
person, firm, or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during which any
violation occurs.
C. In addition to, or independent of the criminal penalties provided above, the city may bring a civil proceeding in a
court of competent jurisdiction to enforce compliance with the terms of this chapter, or to prevent, restrain, or abate
any violation of the terms of this chapter.
D. Any violation of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance, and instead of, or in addition to, any criminal or civil
enforcement measure authorized by this chapter, may be enjoined or restrained by the city as other nuisances are
abated under authority of Mapleton City. (Ord. 2003-23, 11-5-2003, eff. 12-11-2003)
18.20.035: CHANGE IN NONCONFORMING STATUS:
A nonconforming lot, structure, use or other nonconformity may not be changed except in conformance with the
provisions of this title. Whenever any nonconforming use is changed to a less intensive nonconforming use, such use
shall not be changed back to a more intensive nonconforming use. Whenever any nonconforming use is changed to a
conforming use, such use shall not later be changed to a nonconforming use. (Ord. 2003-23, 11-5-2003, eff. 12-11-
2003)
18.20.040: NONCONFORMING USES:
A. Continuation: A nonconforming use which was legally existing when such use became prohibited may be continued
as provided in this section and by any other applicable provision of this chapter, so long as it remains otherwise
lawful, subject to applicable standards and limitations in this chapter.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 335/571
B. Expansion Within Conforming Building: A nonconforming use existing within a portion of a conforming building may
not be expanded to include the entire floor area of such building.
C. Nonconforming Use Of Open Land: A nonconforming use of open land may be continued provided such
nonconforming use shall not be expanded or extended into any building or open land, except as may be required
by law.
D. Expansion Of Outdoor Nonconforming Uses: A nonconforming use of a lot where the principal use is not enclosed
within a building, shall not be expanded unless the strict provisions of this chapter are met.
E. Restoration: A nonconforming use in a conforming structure damaged by fire, wind, earthquake, or other natural
disaster or calamity may be restored as it existed previously and its use may be continued so long as restoration is
complete within one year. A building permit necessary for the restoration shall be applied for no later than six (6)
months after the damage occurred. An extension may be granted by the planning and zoning director for up to an
additional six (6) months if the applicant has shown a diligent effort to complete the restoration. Said restoration
must be completed to the extent that no less than fifty percent (50%) of the necessary work has been completed
within the one year period as determined by the Mapleton City building official. (Ord. 2003-23, 11-5-2003, eff. 12-
11-2003)
18.20.050: NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES:
A. Continuation: A nonconforming structure in any zone may be continued as provided in this section and any other
applicable provision of this chapter so long as no additions or enlargements are made thereto and no structural
alterations are made therein, except as provided in this section or as may be required by law. If any nonconforming
structure is removed from the lot where it was located each future structure thereon shall conform to applicable
provisions of this title.
B. Maintenance And Repair: A nonconforming structure may be maintained. Repairs and structural alterations may be
made to a nonconforming structure within the existing footprint thereof provided that the degree of nonconformity is
not increased.
C. Expansion And Enlargement: No nonconforming structure may be enlarged, altered or expanded unless such
alterations make the structure conforming to the requirements in the underlying zone. Buildings or structures that
are nonconforming due to the fact that they do not meet the setback requirements in the zone, may be expanded
so long as the expansion does not further violate the setback requirements. Any additions to a building or structure
that will increase the height of a structure may be permitted only if the addition can meet the requirements in the
underlying zone, including setback. Therefore, if an existing home had a side yard less than what was required in
the zone, and the homeowner wished to add a second story to the building, the second story would be required to
meet the setback requirement.
D. Relocation: If a nonconforming structure is relocated within the City, it must be made to become conforming to the
zone wherein the structure is placed. A conditional use permit obtained from the Planning Commission shall also
be required.
E. Restoration: A nonconforming structure in a conforming structure damaged by fire, wind, earthquake, or other
natural disaster or calamity may be restored as it existed previously and its use may be continued so long as
restoration is complete within one year. A building permit necessary for the restoration shall be applied for no later
than six (6) months after the damage occurred. An extension may be granted by the Planning and Zoning Director
for up to an additional six (6) months if the applicant has shown a diligent effort to complete the restoration. Said
restoration must be completed to the extent that no less than fifty percent (50%) of the necessary work has been
completed within the one year period as determined by the Mapleton City building official. (Ord. 2003-23, 11-5-
2003, eff. 12-11-2003)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 336/571
18.20.060: NONCONFORMING LOTS:
A. Continuation: A nonconforming lot may continue to be occupied and used although it may not conform in every
respect with the dimensional requirements of this title, subject to the provisions of this section and any other
applicable provision of this chapter.
B. Residential Zones: A new dwelling may be constructed on a legally established lot which is nonconforming as to
area and frontage provided the dwelling conforms to all other requirements of this title and other applicable codes.
C. Nonresidential Zones: A new building may be constructed on a legally established lot which is nonconforming as to
area, frontage and/or width provided the building conforms to all other requirements of this title and other
applicable codes.
D. Lot With Existing Building Or Structure: If a nonconforming lot contains a legally established structure the owner
may continue the legal use of such structure and may expand the structure so long as the expansion conforms to
applicable requirements of this title. Residential structures located on a nonconforming lot may be enlarged or
rebuilt provided that it meets the requirements of the underlying zone.
E. Illegal Lots: Any lot that does not meet the strict definition of a "zoning lot" as described in section 18.08.010 of this
title, and has been created illegally, shall not be issued a building permit. Any home located on a lot that was
created illegally, shall not be issued a building permit to expand, enlarge, or rebuild the home, or a building permit
to construct an accessory building or structure. Any home or structure located on a lot that was illegally created
prior to July 1992, may be granted the status of "nonconforming" by the Planning Commission with the following
criteria and conditions of approval:
1. Ownership: The home must not be owned by the person(s) who created the illegal lot nor by anyone related to
said person(s) either by blood or adoption to the fourth degree of consanguinity.
2. Setbacks: The creation of the illegal lot did not cause nonconformance to the setbacks of any structure located
on the lot or adjacent lots.
3. Conditions: The planning commission may require that the property owner enter into a signed and recorded
agreement stating that if the property that was split away from the parcel containing the existing home is
developed, that the lot with the home must become a part of the development either by means of a subdivision
lot or as allowed in title 17 of this code. If the lot is adjacent to property that has been improved to meet Mapleton
City standards, including the installation of curb, gutter and sidewalk, the planning commission may also require
the installation of those improvements, which may have been required when the property was divided or altered.
Other conditions may include additional landscaping and/or any other items necessary to bring the property to
current standards as directed by this code.
F. Accessory Buildings: Accessory buildings customarily incidental to a main building or structure may be constructed
on a nonconforming lot provided the accessory building and its location on the lot meets all other applicable
building and zoning requirements. (Ord. 2003-23, 11-5-2003, eff. 12-11-2003)
G. Boundary Line Adjustments: A legal nonconforming lot of record may be altered in size and configuration without
losing its legal nonconforming status if the alteration is part of a boundary line adjustment to correct boundary
overlaps, gaps or fence line disputes. (Ord. 2014-02, 1-7-2014, eff. 2-2-2014)
18.20.070: OTHER NONCONFORMITIES:
A. Application And Intent: This section shall apply to any other circumstance which does not conform to the
requirements of this title including, but not limited to, fence height or location; lack of buffers or screening; lack of or
inadequate landscaping; lack of or inadequate off street parking; and any other nonconformity not covered by
sections 18.20.040, 18.20.050, and 18.20.060 of this chapter. Because the nonconformities regulated by this
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 337/571
section involve less investment and are more easily corrected than those regulated by sections 18.20.040,
18.20.050, and 18.20.060 of this chapter, the intent of the city is to eliminate such nonconformities as quickly as
practicable. The degree of such nonconformities shall not be increased.
B. Nonconforming Development With Approved Site Plan: Any nonconforming development which is governed by an
approved site plan shall be deemed to be in conformance with this title to the extent such development conforms to
the plan.
C. Compliance Required: A nonconformity other than one enumerated in sections 18.20.040, 18.20.050, and
18.20.060 of this chapter shall be brought into conformance upon the occurrence of any one of the following:
1. Any action which increases the floor area of the premises by more than twenty five percent (25%). (Ord. 2003-
23, 11-5-2003, eff. 12-11-2003)
18.20.080: NONCONFORMITIES RESULTING FROM PUBLIC ACTION:
When area or yard setbacks of a legally established lot are reduced as the result of conveying land to a federal, state
or local government for a public purpose, such as a city street for use by the general public, such lot and yards shall
be deemed to be in compliance with the minimum lot size and yard setback standards of this title without any need for
a variance. (Ord. 2003-23, 11-5-2003, eff. 12-11-2003)
18.20.090: ABANDONMENT OF NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE OR USE:
A. Presumption Of Abandonment By Passage Of Time: Any nonconforming structure or use which is not occupied or
used for a continuous period of six (6) months shall be presumed abandoned and shall not thereafter be
reoccupied or used except in a manner that conforms to the requirements of this title unless the presumption of
abandonment is overcome as provided in subsection C of this section.
B. Presumption Of Abandonment By Event: Independent of the six (6) month requirement set forth in subsection A of
this section, a nonconforming structure or use shall be presumed abandoned when any of the following events
occur:
1. The owner has in writing or by public statement indicated intent to abandon the structure, use or other
nonconformity;
2. A less intensive use has replaced the original nonconforming use;
3. The owner has physically changed the structure or its permanent equipment in a way that reduces or eliminates
the nonconformity; or
4. The structure has been removed through applicable procedures for the abatement or condemnation of unsafe
structures.
C. Overcoming Presumption Of Abandonment: A presumption of abandonment may be rebutted upon evidence
presented by the owner showing no intent to abandon the structure or use. Such evidence may include proof that
during the alleged period of abandonment the owner has done either of the following:
1. Maintained the structure or use, if any, in accordance with the applicable codes; or
2. Has actively and continuously attempted to sell or lease the property where the structure or use is located. (Ord.
2003-23, 11-5-2003, eff. 12-11-2003)
18.20.100: DETERMINATION OF NONCONFORMING STATUS; EFFECT OF DETERMINATION:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 338/571
A. Procedure: The planning director, or his/her designee, shall determine the existence, expansion, or modification of
a nonconforming lot, structure, use or other nonconformity as provided in the following procedure:
1. If a determination of the nonconforming status of a property is desired, the owner or his designee shall make
application for a zone verification with the department of planning. The planning director shall then investigate
the factual and legal history of the subject property and shall thereafter make a preliminary determination of
nonconforming status of the property.
2. Notice of the preliminary determination of nonconforming status shall be mailed to the owners of the subject
property and immediately abutting properties, and to the chairman of the neighborhood where the property is
located.
3. If within fourteen (14) days after notice is mailed, information is received by the planning director which may
affect the validity of the preliminary determination, the director shall make an amended preliminary
determination. Notice of the amended preliminary determination shall be given. (Ord. 2003-23, 11-5-2003, eff.
12-11-2003)
4. If no new information is received by the planning director within fourteen (14) days after notice of a preliminary
determination is mailed, the preliminary determination shall become final. The notice shall include a statement
that the final determination may be appealed to the planning commission as provided in section 18.84.460 of this
title, and shall state the date by which the appeal must be filed. (Ord. 2013-04, 2-19-2013, eff. 4-1-2013)
B. Burden Of Proof: In all cases, the property owner shall have the burden of proving by a preponderance of evidence
that a lot, structure, use or other circumstance which does not conform to the provisions of this title complied with
applicable ordinance requirements in effect when the nonconforming circumstance was established.
C. Abatement Or Compliance: If a property owner is unable to demonstrate that a lot, structure, use or other
nonconforming circumstance was legally established, it shall be deemed illegal and shall be abated or brought into
conformance with applicable provisions of this title. Abatement or compliance shall be achieved within thirty (30)
days, unless the work which must be undertaken to achieve compliance cannot be accomplished in that time
period. In such case the owner of the property shall enter into a legally binding agreement wherein the owner
agrees to a schedule to achieve conformity as soon as reasonably practicable, so long as compliance is achieved
within six (6) months. (Ord. 2003-23, 11-5-2003, eff. 12-11-2003)
18.20.110: APPEALS:
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the community development director, planning commission, city council or other
official enforcing the provisions of this chapter may appeal for relief therefrom as provided in section 18.84.460 of this
title. (Ord. 2013-04, 2-19-2013, eff. 4-1-2013)
Chapter 18.22
TEMPORARY USES
18.22.010: PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES:
The following regulations are provided to accommodate those uses of land or buildings which are temporary in nature
and are not, therefore, listed as regular permitted or conditional uses in any zone of the city. The character of these
uses is such that proper conditions are required to protect adjacent properties and the general health, safety, and
welfare of the citizens of Mapleton City. Any building or structure which does not meet the requirements of this chapter
shall be treated as a permanent land use and shall conform to all required standards of the building, health, fire,
zoning, and other similar codes. (Ord. 2013-09, 9-3-2013, eff. 10-3-2013)
18.22.020: USES ALLOWED:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 339/571
A. Uses allowed on a temporary basis in accordance with the provisions of this chapter may include, but are not
limited to, the following: seasonal sales as specified herein, retail/wholesale nursery supplies, shaved ice stands,
promotional displays, fruit and vegetable stands, tents for religious services, and political rallies.
B. A temporary use permit shall not be required for yard and garage sales, provided that the yard or garage sale shall
not operate for more than a total of five (5) days in any calendar year, and shall be conducted by bona fide
residents of the premises. Goods for sale shall consist of household items and personal belongings of the
residents. Goods offered for sale shall not be placed over a public sidewalk or in a public right of way.
C. A temporary use permit shall not be required for temporary uses and sales related to events sponsored by
Mapleton City so long as the uses are an approved accessory use to the event, confined to the official location of
the event, and confined in duration to the hours and time period of the official event.
D. Uses shall be allowed for not more than thirty (30) days' duration except as specifically provided herein:
1. Shaved ice stands may be permitted for one period of up to one hundred fifty (150) days per year, and shall be
restricted to the following zones: GC-1, CC-1, NC-1 and OS-P.
2. Fruit and vegetable sales shall be permitted for one period of up to one hundred fifty (150) days per year, and
shall be restricted to the following zones: GC-1, CC-1, and NC-1. Subject to the same restrictions contained in
this part, fruit and vegetable stands may be operated in the A-2 zone when the produce sold is grown on the
same two plus (2+) acre parcel or adjacent parcels in the same ownership as the stand is located.
3. Retail/wholesale nursery supplies which may be permitted up to one year by the same business owner or
owners in the same or any locations, and shall be restricted to the GC-1 zone.
4. Seasonal sales of pumpkins and fireworks shall be limited to the GC-1, CC-1, NC-1 zones and shall be limited to
one 30-day period per category, per year.
5. Christmas tree farms (live trees planted in the ground) and pumpkin patches shall be permitted a temporary use
permit for sales in the A-2, RA-1, and RA-2 zones during the months associated with those types of sales. (Ord.
2013-09, 9-3-2013, eff. 10-3-2013)
18.22.030: PRIOR APPROVAL REQUIRED:
Prior to the establishment of any of the above uses, or any qualifying temporary use, a temporary use permit must be
obtained from the planning department. Any application for such permit shall meet the requirements of section
18.22.040 of this chapter and shall be made by the property owner or his/her authorized agent. The granting of said
permit shall require the following findings:
A. The conduct of the requested use will not have any detrimental effects on adjacent properties and will be in general
harmony with surrounding uses.
B. The requested use will not create excessive traffic hazards on adjacent streets and that traffic control, if necessary,
shall be provided at the expense of the applicant.
C. The applicant shall have sufficient liability insurance for the requested use or event. (Ord. 2013-09, 9-3-2013, eff.
10-3-2013)
18.22.040: STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS:
A temporary use established under the provisions of this chapter shall conform to the following standards and
requirements:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 340/571
A. Any structure requiring sanitary facilities by building, fire, health, or other similar codes shall be located on the same
lot as a host structure unless independent water and sewer service is provided to the temporary structure. Where
such codes require sanitary facilities, they may be provided by a host structure provided that there is:
1. No preparation of any food on the premises;
2. No indoor seating of patrons;
3. Written evidence that a host structure will provide sanitary facilities for any employees and that such facilities are
conveniently located not more than three hundred feet (300') from the structure and will be accessible during all
periods of operation of the use;
4. Written evidence from the city/county health department that all food will be prepared and delivered from an
approved commissary and that all waste resulting from the operation of the use will be properly disposed.
B. The minimum required parking shall be two (2) spaces except that a reasonable number of additional parking
places may be required. Such parking, along with any structures, tents, canopies, seating areas, or display areas,
shall not have the effect of decreasing any existing parking that is required for any other use existing on the site. All
parking shall meet the standards for off street parking as specified in section 18.84.270 of this title.
C. A site plan shall be submitted with the application that addresses the access, parking, circulation, exterior seating,
and other significant elements of the temporary use and any other uses or structures existing on the site.
D. All structures shall be securely anchored to the ground at not less than four (4) points as directed by the chief
building official. Temporary uses that include the use of electricity, water, sewer or other utility services and
temporary uses that include the use of a structure or equipment deemed by the adopted building code to need a
building permit or other inspection shall meet those requirements before being allowed to conduct business.
E. The right to occupy the site shall be secured by a written agreement with the owner of the parcel and the owner of
any host structures. Said agreement shall address the question of use of restroom facilities by employees,
responsibility for maintenance, and restoration of the site upon termination of the use. A copy of the proposed
agreement shall be part of the application.
F. Approval for each temporary use permit shall bear an expiration date based upon the nature of the use. If any
temporary structure becomes vacant prior to the expiration of the permit, it shall be removed within ten (10) days.
G. The landowner of the parcel shall provide a cash bond for the restoration of the site of said use to its original
condition, including cleanup, replacement of facilities, and removal of any structures. Said bond shall be one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for temporary uses without a structure, or a structure less than forty (40) square feet in
size, or one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for all structures larger than forty (40) square feet in size, or two
thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for all structures larger than two hundred (200) square feet in size.
H. Temporary uses as allowed by this chapter may be identified by signage not to exceed two (2) freestanding vinyl
banners with a combined area of up to twenty four (24) square feet and up to twenty four (24) square feet of total
wall signage on the temporary structure itself. Signage must be located on the same property as the temporary
use. All other signage is prohibited. (Ord. 2013-09, 9-3-2013, eff. 10-3-2013)
18.22.050: ACTION ON APPLICATION:
The community development director or designee shall approve or deny permits for temporary uses. A use that meets
the requirements stated above shall be approved and a use not meeting the requirements stated above shall be
denied, or may be approved with appropriate conditions to assure that the use will be compatible with and will not
pose any detriment to persons or property. Said conditions may include a limitation upon hours of operation and/or a
time limitation which is less than the maximum established by this chapter. (Ord. 2013-09, 9-3-2013, eff. 10-3-2013)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 341/571
18.22.060: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
A permit may be revoked in the event of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or the conditions set forth in
the temporary use permit. (Ord. 2013-09, 9-3-2013, eff. 10-3-2013)
18.22.070: BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED:
A temporary use permit is not a business license and the granting of said permit shall not relieve the permittee of any
other license requirement of the city or any other public agency. Subject to the approval of a temporary use permit, a
seasonal business license shall be issued prior to the commencement of a business allowed by this part. (Ord. 2013-
09, 9-3-2013, eff. 10-3-2013)
18.22.080: FEES:
In order to offset a portion of the costs incurred by the city in processing temporary use permits, fees may be charged
as provided for in the fee schedule adopted by the Mapleton City council. (Ord. 2013-09, 9-3-2013, eff. 10-3-2013)
18.22.090: CHRISTMAS TREE SALES; PERMIT:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale in the city, any cut fir, evergreen, or Christmas tree, without
a permit, except as provided in subsection B of this section.
B. A permit to sell cut fir, evergreen, or Christmas trees shall be obtained as otherwise described in this chapter. The
permit required by this section shall allow tree sales for a period of thirty (30) days per year. (Ord. 2013-09, 9-3-
2013, eff. 10-3-2013)
18.22.100: TEMPORARY CONSTRUCTION AND SALES OFFICES:
A. Temporary Construction Trailers: A temporary construction trailers permit may be approved by the community
development director or designee for a structure or shelter used in connection with an approved development or
project. The construction trailer may be used for temporary administrative and supervisory functions, and for
sheltering employees and equipment during the construction phase of a project. Such a structure or shelter shall
be removed within fourteen (14) days of the approval of the final certificate of occupancy.
B. Temporary Sales Office: A temporary sales office may be approved by the community development director or
designee, subject to the following conditions:
1. The sales office is in connection with the sale of property within a project or subdivision under construction.
2. The sales office is located on the same parcel of land as the project or subdivision and is engaged in the sale of
only units or lots thereon.
3. The sales office shall be permitted for up to one year or until all the lots are sold, whichever comes first. An
extension may be granted on a yearly basis so long as units or lots within the project or subdivision remain
unsold. (Ord. 2013-09, 9-3-2013, eff. 10-3-2013)
18.22.110: CONCRETE BATCH PLANTS:
A. Concrete batch plants may be granted by the planning commission on a temporary basis up to two (2) years from
the date of planning commission approval and shall be restricted by the following conditions:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 342/571
1. The use shall only be allowed on property where preliminary approval has been granted for a project by both the
planning commission and city council; and
2. The overall project area must include a minimum of one hundred (100) acres; and
3. The use shall cover not more than three (3) acres of the project area; and
4. A site specific temporary use permit and a site plan shall be reviewed and approved by the planning
commission; and
5. The use shall not be located closer than one-fourth (1/4) mile to any existing or proposed residential dwelling in
which a certificate of occupancy has been issued; and
6. Permanent buildings are prohibited; and
7. Mining, including sand and gravel mining operations, shall be prohibited; and
8. Access to the proposed use shall be allowed off of Highway 6 and must be reviewed and approved by UDOT
(Utah department of transportation), Mapleton City engineer, and any other affected local governments; and
9. A lease agreement shall be required between the property owner and business owner; and
10. The use shall not generate noise above eighty five (85) decibels as measured from one-fourth (1/4) mile away
from the perimeter of the site; and
11. Access roads shall remain dust free; and
12. The property owner or business owner shall provide a cash bond for the restoration of the site of said use to its
original condition, including cleanup, replacement of facilities, and removal of any structures. Said bond shall be
determined by the city engineer; and
13. As a means of mitigating potential safety hazards or significant adverse visual impacts, the planning
commission may require additional conditions; and
14. Business owner shall obtain a Mapleton City business license. (Ord. 2013-09, 9-3-2013, eff. 10-3-2013)
Chapter 18.24
ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES; ZONE MAP
18.24.010: ZONES ESTABLISHED:
In order to carry out the purposes of this title the City is divided into the following zones:
A-2 Agricultural-Residential Zone, one dwelling unit per two (2) acres
CE-1 Critical Environment Zone
RA-1 Residential Agricultural Zone, one dwelling unit per acre
RA-2 Residential-Minor Agricultural Zone
R-1-B Residential Zone
R-2 Residential Zone
R-2-B Residential Zone
PO-1 Professional Office Zone
SDP Specific Development Plan Zone
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 343/571
SDP-1 Mapleton-West Specific Development Plan Zone
SDP-2 Sunrise Ranch Specific Development Plan Zone
NC-1 Neighborhood Commercial Zone
CC-1 Central Commercial Zone
GC-1 General Commercial Zone
I&M-1 Industrial and Manufacturing Zone
M&HM-1 Mining and Heavy Manufacturing Zone
TDR Transferable Development Rights Overlay Zone
PRD-1 Planned Residential Development-1 Whisper Rock Development
PD Planned Development Zones
PD-1 Planned Development-1 Mapleton Village District
PD-2 Planned Development-2 Zone
PD-3 Planned Development-3 Harmony Ridge District
PD-4 Planned Development-4 Mapleton Heights
OS-P Open Space and Parks Zone
PRC Planned Residential Community Zone
PRC-1 Hillcrest Subdivision, Planned Residential Community (PRC-1) Zone
PRC-3 Pheasant View Subdivision, Planned Residential Community (PRC-3) Zone
PRC-4 Preserve At Mapleton Subdivision, Planned Residential Community (PRC-4) Zone
PRC-5 Mapleton 340 Lakes, Planned Residential Community (PRC-5) Zone
PRC-6 Maple Vale Subdivision, Planned Residential Community (PRC-6) Zone
(Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002; amd. Ord. 2003-01, 1-15-2003, eff. 1-29-2003; Ord. 2003-16, 6-4-2003, eff. 6-11-2003; Ord.
2003-21, 10-15-2003, eff. 11-13-2003; Ord. 2003-32, 11-19-2003, eff. 12-11-2003; Ord. 2004-10, 6-16-2004, eff. 7-13-
2004; Ord. 2004-11, 6-16-2004, eff. 7-13-2004; Ord. 2004-12, 6-16-2004, eff. 7-13-2004; Ord. 2004-25, 8-11-2004, eff.
9-9-2004; Ord. 2006-29, 11-7-2006; Ord. 2006-31, 11-7-2006; Ord. 2007-13, 6-13-2007, eff. 7-5-2007; Ord. 2007-17,
8-21-2007, eff. 9-2-2007; Ord. 2007-18, 8-7-2007, eff. 12-11-2007; Ord. 2007-24, 11-7-2007; Ord. 2008-24, 12-17-
2008, eff. 2-4-2009; Ord. 2009-06, 6-17-2009, eff. 8-19-2009; Ord. 2011-07, 4-19-2011, eff. 6-5-2011; Ord. 2013-05, 6-
18-2013, eff. 7-12-2013; Ord. 2015-03, 8-5-2015, eff. 9-7-2015; Ord. 2017-03, 7-5-2017, eff. 8-8-2017; Ord. 2018-02,
3-21-2018, eff. 4-28-2018; Ord. 2018-03, 4-18-2018, eff. 5-15-2018; Ord. 2018-04, 5-2-2018, eff. 5-30-2018; Ord.
2019-03, 3-6-2019, eff. 4-2-2019)
18.24.020: OFFICIAL ZONE MAP ADOPTED:
A. The location and boundaries of each of the zones shall be as set forth on the official zone map, Mapleton City,
Utah. The official zone map and all notations, references and other information shown thereon shall be as much a
part of this title as if the boundary lines and other references and information set forth thereon were fully described
in this chapter.
Hereafter the boundaries of the several zones within the City shall be as set forth on said map as such boundaries
may be amended in accordance with sections 18.12.010 and 18.12.020 of this title.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 344/571
B. If in accordance with the provisions of this title, changes are made in zone boundaries or other matters portrayed on
the official zone map, such changes shall be made on the official zone map.
C. No changes of any nature shall be made in the official zone map or matter shown thereon except in conformity with
the procedure set forth in this title. Any unauthorized change of whatever kind by any person or persons shall be
considered a violation of this title and punishable as provided in this title.
D. Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the official zone map which may be made or published, the
official zone map which shall be located in the Office of the Planning and Zoning Director shall be the final
authority. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
18.24.030: BOUNDARIES OF ZONES:
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of various zones, the following rules shall apply:
A. Where the intended boundaries on the zone map are approximately street or alley lines, the streets or alleys shall
be construed to be the zone boundaries.
B. Where the individual boundaries are approximately lot lines, the lot lines shall be construed to be the zone
boundaries, unless otherwise indicated.
C. Where land has not been subdivided into lots, the zone boundary shall be determined by the use of the scale
shown on the map. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
D. Where other uncertainty exists, the Planning Commission shall interpret the map. (Ord. 2013-04, 2-19-2013, eff. 4-
1-2013)
Chapter 18.26
LOTS, YARDS, AND OPEN SPACES; BUILDING HEIGHT AND SIZE
18.26.010: REQUIREMENTS DESIGNATED:
Requirements and regulations pertaining to area on width of lots, size of yards, and open spaces, percentage of lot
that may be occupied, and the height and size of buildings shall be as set forth in the applicable chapter for that
particular zone. (Ord. 2013-03, 1-15-2013, eff. 2-7-2013)
18.26.020: EXCEPTION TO SIDE AND REAR SETBACK REQUIREMENTS FOR ACCESSORY
STRUCTURES IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES:
Accessory buildings on residential lots shall comply with the front yard and side yard; corner lot setback requirements,
and the building height requirements for the zone in which the building is located. Accessory buildings shall be set
back at least ten feet (10') from the side and rear property lines, unless the rear yard faces a public street, in which
case the setback shall be the same as the required front yard setback. An accessory building may be located no
closer than three feet (3') from the side and/or rear property lines if the following conditions are met:
A. The building shall be less than fifteen feet (15') tall;
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 345/571
B. All roof drainage shall be directed away from any adjacent property lines and shall be drained to the property
wherein the building is located;
C. The side and/or rear property line is not facing a public street; and
D. The building will not be placed over any land designated as a utility easement upon which any underground utility
line or system shall have been constructed. (Ord. 2014-02, 1-7-2014, eff. 2-2-2014)
18.26.030: CRITERIA FOR DETERMINING COMPLIANCE WITH MINIMUM LOT WIDTH
REQUIREMENTS; LOTS TO ABUT UPON CITY STREET:
A. For purposes of determining compliance with the lot width (frontage) requirements, measurement of the lot width
shall be measured at a distance of thirty feet (30') from the property line or street right of way line on a line
perpendicular to a line drawn from the center of a cul-de-sac, knuckle, or curvilinear street to the midpoint of the
arc, which length is determined by the lot lines.
B. In addition to compliance with the minimum lot width requirement as set forth in the above subsection, each lot shall
abut directly upon a designated city street. The distance of said abutting side shall be:
1. Not less than the minimum width requirement of the zone, except that the length of said abutting side may be
reduced to not less than fifty feet (50') where: a) the lot fronts upon a cul-de-sac, knuckle or curve in the street,
and b) the side lot lines radiate in such a manner that the minimum lot width requirements are met at the front
setback line1.
2. Such other length as is specifically required under the terms of this chapter, whichever is greater (i.e., CE-1
zone; see subsection 18.30.040C of this title). (Ord. 2004-13, 6-16-2004, eff. 7-13-2004)
18.26.040: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
Where specific requirements are made, or exemptions allowed under individual sections of the code, those
requirements or exemptions shall prevail over the requirements of this section. However, any stricter code requirement
(not exemption) shall also apply. (Ord. 2004-13, 6-16-2004, eff. 7-13-2004)
Chapter 18.28
A-2 AGRICULTURAL-RESIDENTIAL ZONE, ONE DWELLING UNIT
PER TWO ACRES
18.28.010: PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES:
The A-2 zone is established to provide areas in which agricultural pursuits can be encouraged and supported within
the municipality. The A-2 zone is designed and intended to protect agricultural uses from encroachment of typical
urban development. Uses permitted in the A-2 zone, in addition to agricultural and residential uses, must be incidental
thereto and should not change the basic agricultural character of the zone. Development within the A-2 zone should
be accomplished in an orderly and progressive manner, and to discourage "leapfrog" encroachments of such uses or
developments into the agricultural area. (Ord. 2004-10, 6-16-2004, eff. 7-13-2004)
18.28.020: GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS:
A. The A-2 agricultural-residential zone has been established as a zone in which the primary use of the land is for
agricultural and livestock raising purposes. Land within this zone is characterized by residential estates, open
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 346/571
fields, ranches, and farms devoted to the production of food, fiber, animals, and general agricultural uses.
B. Representative of the use within this zone are large residential estates, barns, corrals, row crops, and the raising of
livestock.
C. The objectives in establishing the A-2 agricultural-residential zone are:
1. To protect and encourage the continued use of agricultural land within the zone for agricultural purposes and to
discourage the preemption of agricultural land for nonagricultural purposes;
2. To discourage commercial and industrial uses, and any other use which tends to thwart or mitigate the use of the
land for agricultural purposes;
3. To prevent the soil from becoming polluted. (Ord. 2004-10, 6-16-2004, eff. 7-13-2004)
18.28.030: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses shall be permitted in the A-2 zone:
Agricultural buildings for the storage of farm equipment, animals, grains, hay and other agricultural products. Buildings
for the storage of other equipment, such as construction related materials, not related to the production of agriculture,
shall be prohibited except as allowed as an accessory use in section 18.28.035 of this chapter.
Agriculture (the science and art of farming; work of cultivating the soil, production of crops, and the raising of
livestock).
Animal rights.
A. Acreage 5.25 Acres And Over: The raising, care and keeping of livestock, fowl, feed and produce, barns,
corrals, pens, coops and other structures, including educational animal laboratories, for the care and keeping of
domestic livestock and fowl. Provided, however, that no structure or corral for the housing of the livestock and
fowl or no corral for the close confinement of livestock shall be located closer than one hundred feet (100') to an
existing dwelling on an adjacent lot or fifty feet (50') from an existing dwelling on the same lot.
B. Acreage Under 5.25 Acres: The raising, care and keeping of livestock and fowl will be limited to one animal
unit and their seasonal offspring for each twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
Beehives (must comply with the minimum distances specified for barns, corrals, etc., as stated in this section).
Customary residential household pets as defined in section 18.08.010 of this title.
Fences, walls subject to section 18.84.130 of this title, and subject to the approval by the Planning and Zoning
Director.
Home occupations, subject to the provisions of section 18.84.380 of this title.
Noncommercial plant nurseries and private greenhouses.
One single-family dwelling unit per legally created lot.
Public utility buildings and facilities and other public buildings.
Temporary and seasonal fruit and vegetable stands for the sale of produce raised on the premises, that do not exceed
two hundred (200) square feet, and are maintained in an orderly manner.
Temporary office building used as an office in connection with the sale of property within a subdivision under
construction, provided that the temporary office is located on the same tract of land as the subdivision. A permit
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 347/571
therefor shall be valid for not more than one year, at the expiration of which time the use shall be discontinued. This
use is subject to subsection 18.84.200B of this title (temporary building construction).
Water reservoirs and water facilities. (Ord. 2004-10, 6-16-2004, eff. 7-13-2004)
18.28.035: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses and structures are permitted in the A-2 Zone, provided they are incidental to the main residential
dwelling unit, and do not alter the character of the permitted principal use or structure. Such permitted accessory uses
and structures include, but are not limited to, the following:
Accessory buildings such as barns, garages, carports, greenhouses, gardening sheds, recreation rooms, and similar
structures which are customarily used in conjunction with and are incidental to a principal use or structure.
Swimming pools and incidental cabanas subject to any and all requirements of the International Residential Code
(IRC). (Ord. 2004-10, 6-16-2004, eff. 7-13-2004)
18.28.040: CONDITIONAL USES:
The uses listed below may be approved by issuance of a conditional use permit from the Planning Commission. Uses
not specified herein as "permitted" or "conditional" shall be considered prohibited.
If an applicant is proposing to combine more than one conditional use identified in this section, the Planning
Commission may adopt stricter standards than those identified below if it is determined that the combination of uses
has reasonably anticipated determinantal neighborhood effects.
The following is a list of possible conditional uses within the A-2 Zone:
Agribusiness including commercial fruit and vegetable packing plants located on parcels of land with ten (10) acres or
more, and agriculture/commercial structures that comply with City regulations and are in harmony with the objective
and characteristics of the zone only located on parcels of ten (10) acres or greater.
Commercial equestrian riding arenas and stables, subject to the following minimum standards:
A. A minimum lot size of two (2) acres, with two hundred feet (200') of frontage is required. The lot shall be a
legally created lot as determined by Mapleton City.
B. The use shall be allowed only if a single-family home is present on the lot. The activities of the business shall
be conducted by members of the residing family. The Planning Commission may limit the number of employees
and/or occupancy if necessary to limit neighborhood impacts.
C. The number of horses and other animals on the lot shall not exceed the number of animal units allowed for
the lot as permitted in the A-2 Zone.
D. The number of persons allowed within any building shall comply with the current edition of the International
Building Code.
E. The business shall not operate between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
F. In addition to any required parking spaces for the single-family home, gravel or hard surface off street parking
shall be provided for the commercial use. The parking requirement shall be determined by the Planning
Commission based on the scope of the proposed use. No parking shall be permitted along City streets. The
driveway for the commercial use shall be a minimum of sixteen feet (16') in width. The first thirty feet (30') of the
driveway from the street shall be constructed of a hard surface material to avoid the tracking of gravel or mud
onto City streets.
G. The property owner shall obtain a building permit for each structure associated with the commercial use,
which shall comply with all applicable zoning requirements for the A-2 Zone, and shall also conform to the
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 348/571
commercial building standards in the current version of the International Building Code. Existing buildings
proposed for the commercial use must also conform to the commercial building standards in the current version
of the International Building Code.
H. Permanent restroom facilities shall be provided for the commercial use, which shall conform to the
commercial requirements in the current version of the International Building Code. Restrooms in the home shall
not count toward this requirement.
I. To avoid nuisance conditions, manure shall not be allowed to accumulate. Dust shall be controlled by watering
or sprinkling. Outdoor lighting of any riding arena shall be designed with minimum light trespass off site by using
cut off luminaries that are fully shielded with no light distributed above the horizonal plane of the luminaire.
J. No arena, stable, barn, structure or corral for the housing of the livestock and fowl or no corral for the close
confinement of livestock shall be located closer than one hundred feet (100') to an existing dwelling on an
adjacent lot or fifty feet (50') from an existing dwelling on the same lot.
K. Signs shall be limited to one nonilluminated sign not larger in area than four (4) square feet. Electric or
electronic signs shall not be permitted. The sign must be attached to the home or building where the home
business is to take place.
L. All commercial equestrian activity shall be confined to the lot.
M. The business owner shall maintain a current business license with Mapleton City.
N. The Planning Commission may attach additional conditions related to health, safety, and welfare to mitigate
any possible disturbances to surrounding properties or any hazardous conditions.
Conditional use agriculture such as commercial greenhouses.
Exotic pets. Sufficient evidence shall be provided that such pets will be prevented from causing damage to property of
others; endangering the health, safety and welfare of other persons; or otherwise creating a public nuisance.
Places of worship, public schools, public parks and playgrounds, subject to section 18.84.320, "Site Plan Review
Process And Bonding", of this title.
Reception facilities that comply with the following:
A. The facility shall be located on a legal lot of record of five (5) acres in size or larger with at least two hundred
feet (200') of frontage on an approved public or private road.
B. The facility shall be accessory to a legally established single-family dwelling on the same parcel.
C. No more than eight (8) receptions shall be permitted per calendar month. The Planning Commission may limit
the number of receptions to fewer than eight (8) if necessary to limit neighborhood impacts.
D. Reception events shall conclude by no later than ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
E. Off street parking shall be provided at a rate of one space per two hundred (200) square feet of floor area for
the facility. If receptions are not held indoors, the Planning Commission shall determine the amount of parking to
be required. A site plan shall be submitted with a proposed parking and circulation plan.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 349/571
F. An enclosed reception facility shall be classified as an assembly group (A-2) occupancy type for the purposes
of the International Building Code. All requirements of an A-2 occupancy shall apply.
G. A business license shall be required.
H. A building and fire inspection shall be required prior to issuance of a business license.
I. Failure to comply with the standards of this use and/or conducting the reception facility in a manner
constituting a disturbance of the peace or creating a menace to the public health, safety, morals or welfare may
result in a revocation of the conditional use permit by the Planning Commission. For the purposes of this section,
the disturbing the peace ordinance in subsection 9.12.040A of this Code shall include any disturbances between
the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
J. The applicant shall agree, at its sole expense, to defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the City, its public
officials, officers, employees, and assigns, from any liability; and shall reimburse the City for any expense
incurred, resulting from, or in connection with any appeal, claim, suit or other legal proceeding related to the
operation of the conditional use.
Residential healthcare facilities (nursing homes, including skilled nursing and intermediate healthcare facilities, and
residential care housing facilities as defined in section 18.84.370 of this title), subject to compliance with the standards
for such uses as set forth in this Code and the approval of site plan.
Short term residential rental property that complies with the following:
A. The rental shall be located on a legal lot of record of five (5) acres in size or larger.
B. The property is developed or will be developed with a single-family residence that has received proper
building permit approvals.
C. Off street parking shall be provided to include two (2) parking spaces for the residence and one additional
space for each guestroom. A site plan shall be submitted with the proposed parking plan.
D. A business license shall be required.
E. A building and fire inspection shall be required prior to issuance of a business license. Additional safety
requirements may be imposed above those typically required for a single-family dwelling. A checklist of
inspection items shall be provided to the applicant prior to the inspection.
F. All short term residential rental properties shall be subject to the Municipality Transient Room Tax as allowed
under Utah Code.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 350/571
G. Failure to comply with the standards of this section and/or conducting the short term rental property in a
manner constituting or conducive to a breach of the public peace or a menace to the public health, safety, morals
or welfare may result in a revocation of the conditional use permit by the Planning Commission.
H. The property shall be rented as a single unit. Individual rooms may not be rented separately.
I. All rental contracts shall require a minimum stay of two (2) consecutive nights.
J. All short term residential rental properties shall designate a local property manager. The local property
manager shall be available twenty four (24) hours per day to respond to tenant and neighborhood questions or
concerns. Each short term residential rental property shall have a clearly visible sign within the unit containing
the name and phone number of the local property manager.
K. No on site camping shall be permitted (i.e., tents, RVs, campers, etc.). All tenants shall utilize the indoor
sleeping accommodations provided with the rental.
L. The owner and property manager shall be jointly and severally liable for any violations of this use. Any rental
dwelling unit which is found in violation of this use or any other provision of this Code may be subject to
revocation of the short term residential rental property's business license and the conditional use permit. For the
purpose of subsection G of this use and this subsection the disturbing the peace ordinance in subsection
9.12.040A of this Code shall include any disturbances between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. to seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M.
M. The applicant shall agree, at its sole expense, to defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the City, its public
officials, officers, employees, and assigns, from any liability; and shall reimburse the City for any expense
incurred, resulting from, or in connection with any appeal, claim, suit or other legal proceeding related to the
short term residential rental property approval. (Ord. 2011-04, 2-15-2011, eff. 3-25-2011; amd. Ord. 2014-11, 9-
16-2014, eff. 10-11-2014; Ord. 2014-13, 12-2-2014, eff. 12-26-2014; Ord. 2018-10, 11-7-2018, eff. 12-4-2018)
18.28.050: LOTS, BUILDINGS, YARDS, AND OPEN SPACES:
Each lot or parcel of property in the A-2 Zone shall meet all of the following requirements:
A. Lot Size And Area Per Dwelling: The minimum lot size in the A-2 Zone shall be not less than two (2) acres or eighty
seven thousand one hundred twenty (87,120) square feet. Not more than one single-family dwelling may be placed
upon a legally created lot or parcel of land in the A-2 Zone. When part of a TDR receiving site, the minimum lot
size shall not be less than one acre or forty three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet.
B. Lot Width: Each lot or parcel of land in the A-2 Zone shall have a minimum width of at least two hundred feet (200').
When part of a TDR receiving site, each lot or parcel shall have a minimum width of one hundred twenty five feet
(125'). (Ord. 2013-03, 1-15-2013, eff. 2-7-2013)
C. Front Yard/Garage Requirements: No home shall have a front yard setback of less than thirty feet (30') measured
from the front property line or the right-of-way edge to the foundation of the home. For homes that have garage
doors that face the street, the garage shall be set back a minimum of twenty five feet (25') from the back of
sidewalk.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 351/571
D. Side Yard/Rear Yard: Each lot or parcel of land in the A-2 Zone shall have a side yard of not less than ten feet (10').
No home shall have a rear yard setback of less than twenty five feet (25') from the rear property line.
E. Side Yard; Corner Lots: When a side yard on a corner lot faces a street, the same setbacks as described in
subsection C, "Front Yard/Garage Requirements", of this section shall apply. (Ord. 2016-08, 11-2-2016, eff. 11-27-
2016)
F. Accessory Buildings: See section 18.26.020 of this title. (Ord. 2014-02, 1-7-2014, eff. 2-2-2014)
G. Projections Into Yards: The following structures may be erected on or projected into any required yard:
1. Fences and walls in conformance with this Code and approval by the Planning and Zoning Director. Other City
codes or ordinances also apply.
2. Landscape elements including trees, shrubs, agricultural crops and other plants.
3. Necessary appurtenances for utility service.
4. The structures listed below may project into a minimum front or rear yard not more than four feet (4'), and into a
minimum side yard not more than two feet (2'):
a. Cornices, eaves, belt courses, sills, buttresses, or other similar architectural features.
b. Fireplace structures and bays, provided that they are not wider than eight feet (8') measured generally parallel
to the wall of which they are a part.
c. Stairways, balconies, door stoops, fire escapes, awnings, and planter boxes or masonry planters not
exceeding twenty four inches (24") in height.
d. Porte-cochere over a driveway in a side yard, providing such structure is not more than one story in height
and twenty four feet (24') in length, and is entirely open on at least three (3) sides except for necessary
supporting columns and customary architectural features. (Ord. 2004-10, 6-16-2004, eff. 7-13-2004)
H. Building Height: No lot or parcel of land in the A-2 Zone shall have a building or structure used for dwelling or public
assembly which exceeds a height of two (2) stories with a maximum of forty feet (40') as defined in section
18.08.010 of this title. (Ord. 2013-05, 6-18-2013, eff. 7-12-2013)
I. Permissible Lot Coverage: All buildings, including accessory buildings and structures, shall cover not more than
thirty percent (30%) of the area of the lot or parcel of land. (Ord. 2004-10, 6-16-2004, eff. 7-13-2004)
18.28.060: PARKING AND DRIVEWAY REQUIREMENTS:
A. Each home located on a lot or parcel in the A-2 Zone shall have on the same lot or parcel two (2) off street
enclosed parking spaces.
B. Each home shall also have a driveway that leads from a public street to the required enclosed parking spaces. Said
driveway shall have a width of at least twelve feet (12'), and constructed with a hard surface material. (Ord. 2004-
10, 6-16-2004, eff. 7-13-2004)
Chapter 18.30
CE-1 CRITICAL ENVIRONMENT ZONE
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 352/571
18.30.010: LEGISLATIVE INTENT:
The CE-1 zone includes those areas of the city which, as the result of the presence of steep slopes, soil
characteristics, flood hazards, erosion, mudflow or earthquake potential, wildfire hazards or similar natural conditions
or environmental hazards are considered environmentally sensitive and fragile.
The following is the intent and purpose of the city council in establishing the CE-1 zone:
A. To reflect the Utah County natural hazards overlay zone, to delineate environmentally sensitive and fragile areas
within the city and to establish standards and guidelines for the uses and development activities occurring thereon
which recognize and appropriately balance: 1) the need for the preservation of the natural environmental
conditions, 2) the need for mitigation of potentially adverse or unsafe conditions arising from development
activities, 3) the protection of the interests of subsequent purchasers and occupants, and 4) the rights of current
owners to the reasonable use of their property.
B. To avoid or mitigate the effects of natural hazards from earthquakes, rockfall, debris flow, landslides, floods, fires
and similar calamities and to reduce the potential for subsequent public involvement or expenditure in mitigation of
such adverse or unsafe conditions occurring as a result of disruption of natural conditions from development
activity.
C. To protect and conserve the watershed for the culinary water supply, sensitive vegetation, soil, wildlife habitat,
viewsheds and other natural resources within the area.
D. To facilitate and encourage the location, design, and construction of uses, development projects and building sites
in the zone area which provide maximum safety and human enjoyment consistent with the efficient and economical
use of public services and facilities, the natural limitations and the need for protection of the environment.
E. To preserve the aesthetic appearance of the landscape. Because of the fragile nature of the land in this zone,
special conditions and requirements are attached to developments occurring therein to promote the
implementation of the purposes stated above and to mitigate the potential adverse aspects of developments in the
area. The requirements set forth in this chapter are considered the minimum required in order to accomplish the
purpose and intent for which this zone was established.
F. To protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents of Mapleton City.
G. To place the liability and expense of evaluating the condition of potentially unstable land, and liability and expense
for determining restrictions which should be placed on its development, upon geologists or engineers employed by
the landowner.
H. To restrict the development of land to those uses which do not present unreasonable risks to persons or property
because of geologic hazards.
I. To prevent fraud in land sales relating to the geologic conditions of real property.
J. To restrict development in areas difficult to provide city services, such as water, fire protection, garbage collection
and snow removal.
With the enactment of this chapter, it is the intent of the city council to authorize a governmental function of
regulation within the meaning of sections 63-30-3 and 63-30-10(1), (3) and (4) of the Utah code, as amended.
(Ord. 2007-29, 12-4-2007, eff. 1-4-2008)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 353/571
18.30.020: USE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Permitted Uses: The following uses of land shall be permitted upon compliance with the applicable standards and
conditions set forth in this chapter:
Agricultural uses that are conducted in a manner that does not destroy or alter the natural habitat of the land,
including the removal of existing vegetation, or the grazing of animals in such a way that would cause erosion, or
the plowing or turning of soil other than digging holes for the purpose of planting trees or building a fence.
Municipal reservoir.
One-family dwellings - conventional construction and modular homes, subject to compliance with the subdivision
ordinance, the conditions of the zone and approval of a site plan in accordance with the provisions of section
18.84.320 of this title.
Public parks.
The keeping of customary household pets. (Ord. 2008-05, 3-19-2008, eff. 4-17-2008)
B. Conditionally Permitted Uses: The following buildings, structures and uses of land may be permitted upon
compliance with the standards and conditions set forth in this chapter and after approval has been given by the
designated review body:
Buildings and other structures for the storage and keeping of agricultural products and machinery.
Customary residential accessory structures which are an integral part of, and incidental to an approved dwelling
subject to the standards of section 18.26.020 of this title.
Earth shelter home projects subject to the provisions of chapter 18.84 of this title.
Golf courses or private parks.
Home occupations, subject to the provisions of section 18.84.380 of this title.
Keeping of livestock and associated structures in a manner that is not harmful to the environment due to
overgrazing or groundwater contamination. Animal units shall be based on the amount of building lots allowed
using the criteria set forth in this chapter. There shall be one animal unit allowed for every possible building lot.
Motor vehicle roads and rights of way subject to compliance with city standards for design and construction for
such uses and upon approval of a site plan in accordance with the provisions of section 18.84.320 of this title.
Residential subdivisions, subject to compliance with the applicable requirements for such developments. PUDs are
specifically excluded from the CE-1 zone.
Retention or detention basin.
Water, sewer and utility transmission lines and facilities required as an incidental part of development within the
zone, and subject to the approval of a site plan in accordance with the provisions of section 18.84.320 of this title.
(Ord. 2008-05, 3-19-2008, eff. 4-17-2008; amd. Ord. 2014-02, 1-7-2014, eff. 2-2-2014)
18.30.030: ACTIONS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to grade, plow, excavate, cut or fill with soil or other materials in any portion of property located in
the CE-1 zone without first obtaining a permit to do so. Notwithstanding any other provision of this code it shall also be
unlawful to grade, fill, or excavate any land in any manner which presents an unreasonable risk, as shown on the Utah
County natural hazards map such as erosion, flooding, landslide, or any other unsafe condition, and it shall be
unlawful to erect any structure which will not be reasonably safe for use as a human habitation because of:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 354/571
A. A high water table (water close to the surface);
B. Surface water;
C. Expansive soils;
D. Collapsible soils;
E. Proximity to a potential landslide area;
F. Proximity to a secondary fault;
G. Proximity to an alluvial fan;
H. Proximity to a landslide;
I. Proximity to a primary Wasatch fault zone;
J. Steep slopes; or
K. Any other unsafe conditions. (Ord. 2007-29, 12-4-2007, eff. 1-4-2008)
18.30.040: LOT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Density, Area, Width And Height Requirements: The maximum project density, and minimum lot area, width and
height requirements of a zoning lot shall be set forth as follows: (Ord. 2013-05, 6-18-2013, eff. 7-12-2013)
1. Contained In Approved Subdivision Project: When the lot is contained within an approved subdivision project:
a. Use: One-family dwellings.
b. Maximum project density: One lot for every three (3) acres of buildable area in project plus one lot for every
twenty (20) acres of nonbuildable area in the project.
c. Minimum lot area: Three (3) acres.
d. Minimum lot width: Two hundred fifty feet (250'), except as otherwise noted in this Code.
2. Not Included In Approved Subdivision Project: When the lot is not included as part of an approved subdivision
project and is legally exempt therefrom:
a. Use: One-family dwellings.
b. Minimum lot area: Three (3) acres.
c. Minimum lot frontage: Two hundred fifty feet (250'), all of which shall front a dedicated public right-of-way (City
street). (Ord. 2007-29, 12-4-2007, eff. 1-4-2008)
3. Building Height: No lot or parcel of land in the CE-1 Zone shall have a building or structure used for dwelling or
public assembly which exceeds a height of two (2) stories with a maximum of forty feet (40') as defined in
section 18.08.010 of this title. (Ord. 2013-05, 6-18-2013, eff. 7-12-2013)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 355/571
B. Access Requirements: Each lot shall abut upon and have direct access to a City maintained dedicated public street
that meets all of the requirements as outlined in title 17 of this Code. Each street shall be formally accepted by
action of the City Council. The distance of said abutting side shall not be less than the minimum lot width
requirement of the zone except that the length of said abutting side may be reduced to not less than eighty feet
(80') when the lot fronts upon a cul-de-sac or sharp curve in a designated City street and the side lot lines radiate
in such a manner that the width of the lot, measured between the side lot lines at points one hundred sixty feet
(160') from the front lot line, will meet or exceed the minimum width requirements of the zone.
C. Location Requirements:
1. Main Buildings: All dwellings and other main buildings and structures shall be set back in accordance with the
following:
a. Front Setback: All dwellings and other structures shall be set back not less than fifty feet (50') from the front lot
line, provided that on lots qualifying under the provisions of subsection B of this section, the front setback shall
be the distance from the front lot line at which the minimum width requirements are met, but not less than fifty
feet (50').
b. Side And Rear Setback: All dwellings and other structures shall be set back not less than fifty feet (50') from
the side or rear lot line.
c. Bonneville Bench: All new buildings that are situated along a Bonneville Bench ridgeline shall be set back two
hundred fifty feet (250') from the crest of the Bonneville Bench. The Bonneville Bench line is at the
approximate elevation of five thousand one hundred thirty five feet (5,135') above sea level as quoted by the
United States geologic survey (USGS). However, where a snow avalanche hazard analysis, performed by an
avalanche consultant, concludes that it would be in the interest of the health, safety, and welfare of the
inhabitants of proposed lots in the CE-1 zone, the city council may permit a waiver of the two hundred fifty foot
(250') setback to permit the proposed lots to be located outside the area of hazard as determined by the snow
avalanche hazard analysis. The city council may place additional height limitations upon the lots that receive
such a waiver in order to ensure that the visual integrity of the bench is preserved.
D. Utility Requirements:
1. Culinary Water: All structures to be used for human occupancy shall be served by the city's water system and
shall be capable of providing water to the structure in volumes and under pressure sufficient for both culinary
and firefighting purposes as determined by the city engineer.
2. City Sewage Disposal: All structures intended for human occupancy shall be served by the city sewer system.
Septic systems or other means of sewage disposal shall not be permitted.
E. Buildable Area Required; All Buildings To Be Located On A Buildable Area: Each lot shall contain at least one area
of not less than fourteen thousand five hundred (14,500) square feet which qualifies as a "buildable area" as
defined in this title and which is accessible over a driveway having a width of not less than twelve feet (12') and
which conforms to the minimum standards of subdivision streets with respect to slope, grading, drainage and
design features1. The site plan required pursuant to subsection 18.84.320B of this title shall delineate the location
of the territory qualifying as buildable area and also the alignment of the proposed driveway access. All dwellings
and other habitable structures and accessory buildings shall be located within the designated buildable area. All
other areas within the designated buildable area shall be protected and preserved as open space. For purposes of
determining compliance herewith, the toe of any slope greater than thirty percent (30%) shall not be cut to provide
a building site.
F. Structural Requirements:
1. Location On Fault Traces Prohibited; Minimum Setbacks To Be Determined: No portion of any structure intended
for human occupancy shall be located over any fault trace or zone of deformation identified in the geotechnical
and geology report submitted as provided in this chapter. The minimum setback distance from any fault trace or
zone of deformation, or from the base or crest or any potentially unstable slope shall be as established by the
city engineer following the receipt of a recommendation on the subject from the geotechnical engineer as part of
the technical reports.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 356/571
2. Site Specific Geotechnical Study And Structural Calculations Required Before Building Permit Issuance: Prior to
the issuance of a building permit, the city must receive a site specific geotechnical study conducted by an
engineer licensed by the state of Utah, along with blueprints, which blueprints must be prepared by a registered
structural engineer. The blueprints must take into consideration concerns stated in the geotechnical study.
3. Construction Standards: All structures intended for human occupancy shall be designed and constructed to the
recommendation of the structural engineer, after his review of the site specific geotechnical study.
4. Architectural Design Standards:
a. Exterior Building Colors: The exterior of any building or structure shall blend with the natural materials and
predominant colors and hues of the surrounding foothills. Colors permitted include grays, browns, greens, tans
and other earth tones. White or bright colors shall be limited to window casings, doors, eaves and other trim
areas.
b. Exterior Building Glass: Windows and other glass surfaces shall have an outdoor visible light reflective value
no more than eighteen percent (18%) as defined and measured by ASTM E308-90 or its successor. (Ord.
2007-29, 12-4-2007, eff. 1-4-2008)
c. Roof Materials And Colors: Roof colors shall be earth tones consisting of grays, browns, greens, and tans
which blend with the natural materials and predominant colors and hues of the surrounding foothills. White,
bright and reflective materials are prohibited from roofs. Tile, slate, architectural asphalt shingles, metal, and
fire retardant wood are permitted as roofing materials. (Ord. 2011-15, 9-20-2011, eff. 10-20-2011)
d. Mechanical Equipment: Mechanical equipment including, without limitation, swamp coolers, air conditioning
equipment, heat pumps, vents, blowers and fans shall be screened from view or painted to match the building
color adjacent to the equipment. Roof mounted mechanical equipment shall not extend above the highest roof
ridgeline. Roof mounted solar collection panels need not be screened or painted so long as they are mounted
parallel to and flush with the roof slope and do not project above the ridgeline of the roof segment upon which
they are mounted. Except as provided in the foregoing sentence, solar collection panels shall not be mounted
upon any roof. Satellite antennas shall be painted nonreflective black or other dark earth tone colors.
e. Building Height: No lot or parcel of land in the CE-1 zone shall have a building or structure used for dwelling or
public assembly which exceeds a height of two (2) stories with a maximum of thirty feet (30') measured from
the finished grade of the lot to the midpoint of the roof pitch. Measurement shall be taken on three (3) sides of
the home. Finished grade shall be established thirty feet (30') away from the front of the home, top of the curb
(if present), or the middle point of the street directly in front of the home. If the home is located more than thirty
feet (30') from a city street, then the measurement shall be taken off of the established grade ten feet (10')
from the home.
5. Exterior Lighting: Floodlighting of buildings and structures is prohibited. Exterior lighting shall be architecturally
integrated decorative lighting. Yard areas may be lit only with "directional" lighting and no direct light beam may
impact any other property, except for security lights intended to be activated only at limited times as necessary
for immediate security.
6. Fence Restrictions: Fences and walls shall only be constructed after first obtaining a building permit subject to
the standards of this section.
a. Site Plan Submittal: As part of the site plan review process, a fencing plan shall be submitted which shall
show:
(1) Any specific subdivision approval conditions regarding fencing.
(2) Material specifications and illustrations necessary to determine compliance with specific approval
limitations and the standards of this section.
b. Field Fencing Of Designated Undevelopable Areas: Fencing on areas identified as undevelopable areas or
transitional areas on any subdivision granted preliminary approval by the planning commission after December
6, 1994, or any lot previously platted which identifies undevelopable areas or transitional areas shall be limited
to the following standards:
(1) Low visibility see through fencing shall consist of flat black colored steel "T" posts and not more than four
(4) strands of nonbarbed steel wire, strung at even vertical spacing between such "T" post, and erected to a
height of not more than forty two inches (42") above the natural ground surface.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 357/571
(2) When fencing lot boundary lines, vegetation or native brush shall not be cleared so as to create a visible
demarcation from off site.
(3) The existing surface of the ground shall not be changed by grading activities when erecting boundary
fences.
(4) Fence materials and designs must not create a hazard for big game wildlife species.
(5) No field fencing shall be erected in conflict with pedestrian easements dedicated to Mapleton City.
c. Buildable Area Fencing: Fencing on any portion of a lot identified as buildable area or required side yard on
any subdivision granted preliminary approval by the planning commission after December 6, 1994, or any lot
previously platted which identifies undevelopable area or transitional areas shall be limited to the following
standards:
(1) Open, see through fencing constructed of tubular steel, wrought iron or similar materials, finished with a flat
black, nonreflective finish constructed to a height of six feet (6') or less; or
(2) Sight obscuring or privacy type fencing shall be of earth tone colors, or similar materials to the primary
dwelling, and located in a way which screens private outdoor living spaces from off site view. (Ord. 2007-29,
12-4-2007, eff. 1-4-2008)
G. Permissible Lot Coverage: All buildings, including accessory buildings and structures, shall cover not more than
thirty percent (30%) of the lot. (Ord. 2013-03, 1-15-2013, eff. 2-7-2013)
18.30.050: PRELIMINARY DETERMINATION BY CITY ENGINEER:
All proposals to grade, fill, or excavate land or to erect a structure for human habitation shall be referred to the city
engineer who shall make a preliminary determination by reference to the maps and materials maintained in his office,
in order to coordinate data with the geotechnical engineering, if any of the unsafe physical conditions described in
section 18.30.030 of this chapter appear to exist in relation to the real property which is included in the proposal. (Ord.
2007-29, 12-4-2007, eff. 1-4-2008)
18.30.060: PRESUMPTION:
Conditions described on Utah County geologic hazard maps and aerial topographical maps maintained by the city
engineer, together with explanatory material appurtenant thereto, shall be presumed to exist. (Ord. 2007-29, 12-4-
2007, eff. 1-4-2008)
18.30.070: APPROVAL PROCEDURE AND REQUIREMENTS:
A. Site Plan: Wherever the terms of this zone require submission and approval of a site plan, said plan shall conform
with and be approved in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and section 18.84.320 of this title.
B. Technical Reports: In addition to other materials required for submission, the site plan shall be accompanied by
copies of the following technical reports and plans. The following technical reports and plans shall be completed by
an engineer licensed by the state of Utah:
1. Geotechnical And Geology Report: The report shall include, but is not necessarily limited to, identification and
mapping of the location of major geographic and geologic features such as fault traces, surface ruptures, zones
of deformation, potential slide and other high hazard areas such as mine shafts and avalanche paths,
conclusions and recommendations regarding the effect of geologic conditions on the proposed development,
recommendations covering the adequacy of sites proposed for development, and any potential adverse impact
on the natural environment.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 358/571
2. Soils Report: The report shall include, but is not necessarily limited to, information with respect to slope analysis,
general soils classification, suitability for development, erosion potential, any recommendations for proposed
methods of mitigating any constraints determined to be present as part of the development plan, and any
adverse impact on the natural environment.
3. Grading And Drainage Plan: The plan shall include, but is not necessarily limited to, information on ground water
levels, identification and mapping of drainage channels and systems, floodplains, existing details and contours
where modification of terrain is proposed, the direction of proposed drainage flow, proposed plans and the
location of all surface and subsurface drainage devices to be constructed as part of the proposed development,
erosion control measures during the course of construction, identification of any grading and drainage problems
such as the alteration of natural drainage patterns and any other problems of the proposed development, and a
plan to mitigate or eliminate such problems, and any adverse impact to the natural environment.
4. Natural Conditions And Vegetation Analysis And Preservation Plan: This report and plan shall include a survey
of existing trees, large shrubs and ground covers, a plan for the proposed revegetation of the site, detailing
existing vegetation to be preserved, new vegetation to be planted and any modifications to existing vegetation,
and the identification of any vegetation problems and recommendations as how to mitigate or eliminate such
problems and avoid potential adverse impact on the natural environment.
5. Fire Protection Report: The report shall include, but not be limited to, identification of potential fire hazards,
mitigation measures, access for fire protection equipment and proposed fire flow capability.
The scope and content of these required technical reports and plans shall be in accordance with city standards.
The planning commission, subject to the prior recommendation of the city engineer, may waive the necessity for
submitting one or more of the technical reports or any elements of a report where, in its opinion, conditions
associated with the proposed development do not require consideration of the subject matter covered. Also,
where the lot is contained within an approved subdivision and the technical reports previously submitted as part
of the subdivision approval process are sufficient in scope and detail to adequately address the issues required
under this chapter, this requirement may be waived.
C. City Engineer To Review Technical Reports: The plans and technical reports required herein shall be reviewed by
the city engineer for the purpose of making a determination as to the adequacy of the reports and
recommendations relating to the proposed project. Prior to the time of action by the planning commission, the city
engineer shall provide to the planning commission a written or oral report of the results and conclusions of the
review together with any recommendation or amendment of the technical reports.
D. City Engineer Or Planning Director Requires Further Review By Qualified Professionals: If the city engineer
concludes that the determinations required by this chapter require further review by professionals having
qualifications not possessed by the city staff, he may designate a qualified person to make the required
determination. The city engineer or planning director, at his/her discretion, may ask the state geologist office of
Utah to review all plans and technical reports required herein.
E. Project Evaluation Guidelines: The planning commission shall review the site plan, technical reports and
recommendations of the city engineer and shall approve the application upon a finding that:
1. All the plan submissions and technical reports required for review and consideration have been submitted and in
a form suitable for evaluation by the city, and the evaluation of conditions and the recommendations for
mitigation provided by the technical reports are reasonably adequate to accomplish the purpose and intent of the
CE-1 zone.
2. The plan conforms, in all respects, to applicable city requirements, standards and criteria.
3. The location and arrangement of the buildings, roadways, open areas and other elements of the development
duly recognize and accommodate the natural conditions present, and construction of such elements will not
result in the creation of an adverse or unsafe condition or visual impact.
4. The applicant provides sufficient information to establish that adequate public services and facilities in the area
affected by the proposed development will have sufficient capacity available at the adopted level of service
standards to accommodate the proposed development within a reasonable period of time following the issuance
of final approval of a site plan and/or subdivision plat for the proposed development.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 359/571
5. The development will accomplish and preserve the intent of the zone.
F. City May Require Changes To Plans: The city may require changes in the plan in order to more fully accomplish the
intent of the zone. Such changes may include, but are not limited to, adjustments in the boundaries of the buildable
area and changes in the location of roadways, structures, drainfield and similar elements.
G. Full Disclosure Required: No subdivision in the CE-1 zone shall be approved without a note on the final plat, which
shall read: "This subdivision lies within a critical environment zone with some potential hazards. Any building lot in
this zone, must comply with chapter 18.30 of the Mapleton City Code." disclosing that the subdivision is in a
geologically sensitive area with potential hazards present. (Ord. 2007-29, 12-4-2007, eff. 1-4-2008)
18.30.080: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
A. Grading: No grading, filling, plowing, or excavation of any kind including the activities described in subsection B of
this section shall be commenced on land within the zone without first having obtained a grading permit from the city
planning director, signed by the superintendent of public works, who shall not issue such permit until a grading
plan, endorsed by a licensed civil engineer, following review and approval by the city engineer, shall have been
approved in accordance with the provisions of section 18.30.070 of this chapter. Such a permit shall only be issued
in relation with an approved development proposal for the property. Cutting roads, clearing vegetation, or otherwise
disturbing the earth shall not be approved unless the applicant can show good cause to do so, as determined by
the planning commission.
B. Slope Protection: All land surface having a slope of thirty percent (30%) or greater shall remain in its natural state
and shall not be graded or otherwise disturbed except for the planting of additional vegetation, the addition of
sprinkler irrigation systems, the establishment of required firebreaks or required access easements, or when such
disturbance is specifically provided for under an approved site plan. No disturbance shall be permitted on any slide
area as depicted in the Utah County natural hazards overlay landslide zones map until recommended by the city
engineer based on adequate documentation to show that sliding is not a potential hazard and then only after
approval is gained through the city council. (Ord. 2014-02, 1-7-2014, eff. 2-2-2014)
C. Roads, Streets And Driveways: All roads, streets and driveways in this zone shall be set back at least fifty feet (50')
from the edge of the Bonneville bench, except where the road must cross the Bonneville bench to access the top
of the bench, and shall be approved by the city council, which approval shall be based on the recommendations of
the city engineer, consistent with the purpose of this zone that such streets, roads and driveways will not have
significant adverse visual, environmental or safety impacts. However, where a snow avalanche hazard analysis,
performed by an avalanche consultant, concludes that it would be in the interest of the health, safety, and welfare
of the inhabitants of proposed development in the CE-1 zone, the city council may permit a waiver of the fifty foot
(50') setback to permit the proposed roads to be located outside the area of hazard as determined by the snow
avalanche hazard analysis.
D. Cuts And Fills: Cutting and filling shall be held to a minimum and retaining walls employed to help provide planting
areas conducive to revegetation. Revegetation plans will be required for all areas disturbed during road, street or
driveway construction. All cuts and fills shall be approved by the city council, which approval shall be based on the
recommendations of the city engineer, consistent with the purpose of this zone that such cuts and fills not have
significant adverse visual, environmental or safety impacts.
E. Driveways: The design, construction and alignment of driveways shall not exceed twelve percent (12%) grade.
Driveways shall include all private single-family dwelling accesses from a public right of way.
F. Vegetation, Preservation And Landscaping: Site plans and reports shall preserve existing vegetation to the extent
possible and shall provide for prompt revegetation and erosion control measures where appropriate. Natural
vegetative material shall not be removed except for those portions of the site to be committed to the dwelling and
attendant yard area, required roadways, driveways and for firebreaks. All areas proposed for removal of vegetative
materials shall be shown on the site plan. Every effort shall be made to conserve topsoil which is removed during
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 360/571
construction for later use on areas requiring revegetation or landscaping (i.e., cut and fill slopes). Vegetation
sufficient to stabilize the soil shall be established on all disturbed areas and shall be equivalent to or exceed the
amount and erosion control characteristics of the original vegetation cover. The types and sizes of vegetation
suitable for revegetation and soil stabilization shall be approved by the planning commission at the time of final
plan approval.
G. Fire Protection: In order to minimize the potential for destruction due to fire, the following fire prevention and
protection measures are required for all dwellings in this zone:
1. The installation of NFPA 13-D residential fire sprinkler systems in all new single-family structures;
2. The addition of exterior fire sprinklers in all new structures where eaves, siding and projections are constructed
of combustible materials. This requirement may be waived should noncombustible building materials be used;
3. All new structures shall be constructed with nonreflective, noncombustible roofing materials as approved by the
Mapleton City fire marshal;
4. There shall be at least a thirty foot (30') clear area around all structures located in the CE-1 zone. This area shall
be sprinkled and planted with fire resistant vegetation. This clear area shall be measured from each exterior wall.
However, this requirement may be modified, subject to the current edition of the international wildland-urban
interface code. Building permits for the CE-1 zone shall include a site plan showing existing and proposed
vegetation, and shall be reviewed by the Mapleton City fire chief prior to approval.
H. Ridgeline Protection: All ridgeline areas, as seen along the entire length of Main Street from 2000 North to the
southern city limits, in this zone shall be retained in a natural state, and development shall be sited in such a
manner so that all structures are located away from areas that are visible against the sky or mountains along a
ridgeline. No building, roof or other appurtenant device shall encroach or visually intrude upon a ridgeline area.
However, this requirement may be waived by the city council for clustered CE-1 developments if it is determined
that it would be in the best interest of the city to do so, based on other site considerations, such as slope and/or
natural hazards.
I. Open Space Preservation: All developments in this zone shall be sited so as to maximize the protection and
preservation of open space. Such open space, including, but not limited to, nonbuildable areas as defined in this
title, shall be identified in the site plan and maintained as open space and may not be separately sold, subdivided
or developed and shall not include roads, streets, rights of way, lots or buildings for dwelling purposes. Such open
space areas shall be maintained so that their use and enjoyment as open space are not diminished or destroyed.
Open space areas may be owned, preserved and maintained as approved as part of the site plan.
J. Wildlife Habitat Preservation: Any development shall take all reasonable efforts to maintain and preserve critical
wildlife areas and floodplain corridor and shall take all reasonable steps to minimize impact upon these areas.
K. Clustering Of Single-Family Detached Dwellings: Based upon receipt of a recommendation from the planning
commission and approval by the city council, a developer may be allowed to reduce the dimension requirements
as set forth in subsection 18.30.040A1 of this chapter in accordance with the provisions of this title, provided the
following conditions are met:
1. The maximum project density shall be one lot for every three (3) acres of area with less than thirty percent (30%)
slope, regardless of geologic hazards.
2. The minimum lot size shall be one-half (1/2) acre with the remaining acreage of the required three (3) acres used
as follows:
a. Dedicated as open space and being owned, preserved and maintained as outlined in subsection K7 of this
section;
b. The generation of transferable development rights (TDRs) is not permitted; and
c. Public streets may run through the dedicated open space to access the clustered lots.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 361/571
3. Dedicated open space areas do not have to be contiguous with the clustered lots.
4. A clustered lot may not contain any geologic hazards within the designated building envelopes, in accordance
with engineering studies and designs.
5. Areas including the clustered lots and the dedicated open spaces shall be noted on the zoning map.
6. The city council, based on the recommendation of the planning commission, makes the following findings:
a. That clustering enables structures to be placed on the land in such a manner that ridgeline protection is
enhanced.
b. That the city's costs for operation and maintenance of the subdivision infrastructure improvements will not
increase or will be reduced because of the clustering of the dwellings.
c. That the potential exposure of any proposed dwellings to hazards as identified in reports required in
subsection 18.30.070B of this chapter will not be increased or will be reduced.
7. In accordance with subsection I of this section, the city council may require that all areas designated as open
space on an approved site plan be owned, preserved and maintained by the city, another appropriate public or
nonprofit entity approved by the city or a homeowners' association which assumes full responsibility for its
maintenance.
8. The minimum frontage requirements may be reduced to a width of not less than one hundred feet (100') at the
front setback line.
9. The front, rear, and side yard setbacks shall be no less than fifteen feet (15') from the lot lines. Notwithstanding
a lesser setback for the main building, garages, whether attached or not, shall be set back at least twenty feet
(20'), measured from the back of sidewalk.
10. Each clustered lot shall contain at least one area of not less than four thousand five hundred (4,500) square
feet which qualifies as a "buildable area" as defined in this title and which is accessible over a driveway having a
width of not less than twelve feet (12') and which conforms to the minimum standards of subdivision streets with
respect to slope, grading, drainage and design features2. The site plan required pursuant to subsection
18.84.320B of this title shall delineate the location of the territory qualifying as buildable area and also the
alignment of the proposed driveway access. All dwellings and other habitable structures and accessory building
shall be located within the designated buildable area. All other areas within the designated buildable area shall
be protected and preserved as open space.
L. Grading, Filling, Or Excavation Compliance With Entire Code: In addition to the provisions of this chapter, all
grading, filling, or excavation of land or erection of any structure shall comply with all other applicable provisions of
this code.
M. Improvements Intended For Public Ownership Subject To City Council Approval: Those parts of any proposal to
construct improvements such as roads, sewer lines, or water lines, or other improvements which are intended to
be placed in public ownership shall be subject to the approval of the city council after recommendation by the city
engineer. (Ord. 2007-29, 12-4-2007, eff. 1-4-2008)
18.30.090: ENGINEER GEOLOGIST QUALIFICATIONS AND CERTIFICATE:
A. A geologic report shall be approved and signed by one of the following:
1. A geotechnical engineer who shall be a registered professional engineer in the state of Utah, qualified by
training and experience in the application of the principles of soil mechanics to foundation investigation, slope
stability, and site development; or
2. An engineering geologist who shall be a graduate in geology or engineering geology from an accredited
university with at least five (5) years of professional geologic experience of which at least three (3) full years
shall be in the field of engineering geology.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 362/571
B. A geologic report shall contain the following certificate:
CERTIFICATE
I hereby certify that I am a geotechnical engineer or an engineering geologist. I have examined the geologic
report to which this certificate is attached and the information and conclusions contained therein are, without any
reasonable reservation not stated therein, accurate and complete. All procedures and tests used in said geologic
report meet minimum applicable professional standards.
Signature
C. In addition to any applicable private civil remedies, it shall be unlawful to knowingly make a false, untrue, or
incomplete statement in a geologic report or to sign the certificate described above knowing the same to be
materially false or not true. (Ord. 2007-29, 12-4-2007, eff. 1-4-2008)
18.30.100: POSTCONSTRUCTION INSPECTION AND CERTIFICATION:
For any real property with respect to which development has proceeded on the basis of a geologic report which has
been acknowledged by the city engineer, no final inspection shall be completed or certificate of occupancy issued or
performance bond released until the engineer or geologist who signed and approved that geologic report shall further
certify that the completed improvements and structures conform to the descriptions and requirements contained in
said report. Provided, however, that improvements and structures may, with the consent of the city engineer, deviate
from the descriptions and requirements contained in the geologic report because of conditions which are discovered
after acknowledgment by the city engineer of the geologic report. (Ord. 2007-29, 12-4-2007, eff. 1-4-2008)
18.30.110: APPEAL FROM DECISION OF CITY ENGINEER:
Any person dissatisfied with a decision of the city engineer may appeal the same within thirty (30) days thereof to the
planning commission, which shall affirm or reverse, either in whole or in part. Any person dissatisfied with a decision of
the planning commission may appeal that decision within thirty (30) days thereof to the city council. Appeals to the city
council decision can be appealed within thirty (30) days to any court of competent jurisdiction for administrative and
not a de novo review. (Ord. 2007-29, 12-4-2007, eff. 1-4-2008)
18.30.120: SCOPE OF APPLICATION:
No subdivision or other development plat or plan shall be approved without compliance with the provisions of this
chapter. Every proposal to grade, fill, or excavate land, and every proposal to erect a structure for human habitation
shall be subject to this chapter, including proposals related to land in subdivisions or any other development plans
which may have been approved prior to the adoption of this chapter. (Ord. 2007-29, 12-4-2007, eff. 1-4-2008)
18.30.130: RESTRICTIVE COVENANT REQUIRED:
Once a geologic report has been submitted to the city engineer, no subdivision or other development plat or plan shall
be approved and no building permit shall be issued for construction of a structure until the owner(s) of the subject real
property has signed and delivered to Mapleton City a restrictive covenant in a form suitable for recording containing
not less than the following:
A. A complete description of the geologic condition of the subject real property, including references to relevant reports
and studies;
B. A description of the grading, filling, or excavating or erection of a structure for human habitation approved in the
geologic report which has been acknowledged by the city engineer, together with the requirements and restrictions
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 363/571
imposed thereon. (Ord. 2007-29, 12-4-2007, eff. 1-4-2008)
18.30.140: ECONOMIC HARDSHIP RELIEF PROVISIONS:
A. Hardship Relief Petition: Any applicant for development in this zone, after a final decision on its development
application is made, may file a hardship relief petition with the city recorder seeking relief from all or part of the
regulations of this chapter on the basis that the denial of the application has created a substantial economic
hardship to the extent of depriving the applicant of all reasonable use of their property.
B. Affected Property Interest: The hardship relief petition must provide information sufficient for the planning
commission and the city council to determine that the petitioner possesses a protectable interest in property under
article I, section 22 of the constitution of Utah and/or the fifth amendment to the United States constitution.
C. Economic Hardship Standard: For purposes of this section, a "substantial economic hardship" shall be defined as a
denial of all reasonable use of the property. Upon a finding that the denial of the application has resulted in a denial
of all reasonable use of the property, the Mapleton City council may provide the petitioner with relief from part of
the CE-1 critical environment zone regulations.
D. Time For Filing Notice Of Petition: No later than fifteen (15) calendar days from final action by the city council on
any development application, the applicant shall file a notice of petition in writing with the city recorder. Within thirty
(30) calendar days of filing of a notice of petition, the applicant shall file a hardship relief petition with the city
recorder. Upon planning commission approval, the time in which the hardship relief petition must be submitted may
be extended up to an additional thirty (30) days.
E. Information To Be Submitted With Hardship Relief Petition:
1. The hardship relief petition must be submitted on a form acceptable to the city, shall be signed by the applicant
and verified, and must be accompanied at a minimum by the following information:
a. Name of the petitioner;
b. Name and business address of the current owner of the property, form of ownership, whether sole
proprietorship, for profit or not for profit corporation, partnership, joint venture, limited liability company, or
other, and if owned by a corporation, partnership, joint venture, or limited liability company the name and
address of all principal shareholders, members, or partners;
c. Price paid and other terms of purchase of the property, the date of purchase, and the name of the party from
whom purchased, including the relationship, if any, between the petitioner and the party from whom the
property was acquired;
d. Nature of the protectable interest claimed to be affected, such as, but not limited to, fee simple ownership,
leasehold interest;
e. Terms (including sale price) of any previous purchase or sale of a full or partial interest in the property in the
five (5) years prior to the date of application;
f. All appraisals of the property prepared for any purpose, including financing, offering for sale, or ad valorem
taxation, within the five (5) years prior to the date of application;
g. The assessed value of and ad valorem taxes on the property for the previous five (5) years;
h. All information concerning current mortgages or other loans secured by the property, including name of the
mortgagee or lender, current interest rate, remaining loan balance and term of the loan and other significant
provisions, including, but not limited to, right of purchaser to assume the loan;
i. All listings of the property for sale or rent, price asked and offers received, if any, within the previous five (5)
years;
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 364/571
j. All studies commissioned by the petitioner or agents of the petitioner within the previous five (5) years
concerning feasibility of development or utilization of the property;
k. For income producing property, itemized income and expense statements from the property for the previous
five (5) years;
l. Information from a title report or other source showing all recorded liens or encumbrances affecting the
property as of the date of the petition;
m. A specific description of the exact CE-1 critical environment zone regulations the application of which
petitioner asserts to create a substantial economic hardship to the extent of depriving the petitioner of all
reasonable uses of its property, together with the factual basis for said assertion; and
n. A specific description of the modifications from the CE-1 critical environment zone regulations which petitioner
asserts are necessary, to the minimal extent necessary, to prevent the petitioner from sustaining a substantial
economic hardship to the extent of depriving the petitioner of all reasonable use of its property, together with
the factual basis for said assertion.
2. The planning commission or the city council may request additional information reasonably necessary, in their
opinion, to arrive at a conclusion concerning whether there has been a denial of all reasonable use constituting a
substantial economic hardship.
F. Failure To Submit Information: In the event that any of the information required to be submitted by the petitioner is
not reasonably available, the petitioner shall file with the petition a statement of the information that cannot be
obtained and shall describe the reasons why such information is unavailable.
G. Hearing By The Planning Commission: Within thirty (30) calendar days of the filing of a completed hardship relief
petition, together with all required and requested supporting information and documentation required by the city
council or the planning commission, the planning commission shall schedule a public hearing with adequate notice
consistent with the provisions of this code. The public hearing shall be held on or before thirty (30) days from the
date of notice, unless a reasonable extension of time is agreed to by both the planning commission and the
petitioner. At the public hearing, the petitioner shall be entitled to testify and to call witnesses and present facts and
evidence.
H. Application Of The Economic Hardship Standard: In applying the economic hardship standard, the planning
commission shall consider among other items the following information:
1. Any estimates from contractors, architects, real estate analysts, qualified developers, or other competent and
qualified real estate professionals concerning the feasibility, or lack of feasibility, of construction or development
on the property as of the date of the petition, and in the reasonably near future;
2. Any evidence or testimony of the market value of the property both considering and disregarding all or portions
of the CE-1 critical environment zone requirements; and
3. Any evidence or testimony deemed relevant by the planning commission.
I. Burden Of Proof: The petitioner shall have the burden of proving that the denial of the application creates a
"substantial economic hardship" as defined herein.
J. Findings Of The Planning Commission: The planning commission shall, on the basis of the evidence and testimony
presented, make specific findings as part of its report and recommendations to the city council, which may include
the following:
1. Whether the petitioner has complied with the requirements for presenting the information to be submitted with a
hardship relief petition;
2. Whether the petitioner has a protectable interest in the property;
3. The market value of the property considering the CE-1 critical environment zone requirements;
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 365/571
4. The market value of the property disregarding all or specific provisions of the CE-1 critical environment zone
requirements;
5. Whether it is feasible to undertake construction on or development of the property as of the date of the
application, or in the reasonably near future thereafter;
6. Whether, in the opinion of the planning commission, the denial of the application would create a "substantial
economic hardship" as defined herein.
K. Report And Recommendation Of The Planning Commission:
1. The planning commission, based upon the evidence and findings, shall make a report and recommendation to
the city council concerning the hardship relief petition.
2. If the planning commission recommends that the city council approve the hardship relief petition, then the report
of the planning commission shall discuss the type and extent of incentives necessary, in the opinion of the
planning commission, to provide an appropriate increase in market value or other benefit or return to the
petitioner sufficient to offset the substantial economic hardship. The types of incentives that the planning
commission may consider include, but are not limited to, the following:
a. Modification or waiver of specific requirements of the CE-1 critical environment zone requirements to the
minimal extent necessary to offset the substantial economic hardship;
b. A waiver of permit fees;
c. Approval of development on some portion of the property within the CE-1 critical environment zone; and
d. Acquisition of all or a portion of the property at market value.
3. The report and recommendation shall be submitted to the city council and mailed to the petitioner within thirty
(30) calendar days following conclusion of the public hearing.
L. City Council Review And Consideration: Within sixty (60) calendar days following receipt of the planning
commission's report, the city council shall hold a public hearing and provide adequate notice as provided by this
code to review the report and recommendation of the planning commission. At the public hearing, the petitioner
shall be entitled to testify and to call witnesses and present facts and evidence. At the public hearing, the city
council may limit the testimony and evidence to new testimony and evidence not presented to the planning
commission. The city council shall approve, in whole or in part, or disapprove, the hardship relief petition. The city
council may modify or waive the requirements of the CE-1 critical environment zone, or may adopt any incentive, to
the extent reasonably necessary to offset any "substantial economic hardship" as defined herein, and may
condition such incentives upon approval of specific development plans. The city council may take such action
without the necessity of resubmission of the petition to the planning commission.
M. Findings Of The City Council: The city council shall, on the basis of the report and recommendation of the planning
commission and the evidence and testimony presented, make specific findings as part of its decision. The findings
may adopt, change, or modify the findings of the planning commission.
N. Decision Of The City Council: The decision of the city council shall be mailed to the petitioner within thirty (30)
calendar days following conclusion of the public hearing.
O. Time Limits/Transfer Of Incentives: Any modifications, waivers, or incentives adopted by the city council pursuant to
this section may be transferred and utilized by successive owners of the property or parties in interest, but in no
case shall the incentives be valid after one calendar year of the development approval.
P. Decision Final: The decision of the city council shall be final. (Ord. 2007-29, 12-4-2007, eff. 1-4-2008)
18.30.145: TRANSFERABLE DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 366/571
Property owners or developers who wish to forgo the development of property in the CE-1 zone, or find that the
development process in the CE-1 zone is cost prohibitive, shall have the right to transfer the development rights as per
chapter 18.76 of this title. (Ord. 2007-29, 12-4-2007, eff. 1-4-2008)
18.30.150: COSTS AND CHARGES:
All costs for processing the application and for conducting all regular and special reviews including, but not limited to,
review of all plans and technical reports by the city engineer as required herein, shall be borne by the applicant. The
city council may, by resolution, establish fees for the administration of this chapter and provide for the assessment and
collection thereof. (Ord. 2007-29, 12-4-2007, eff. 1-4-2008)
18.30.160: CIVIL AND CRIMINAL FRAUD:
It shall be unlawful for any person, including the seller or his representative, directly or indirectly in connection with the
sale or offering for sale of real property located in Mapleton City, to make any untrue statement or withhold a material
fact related to the geologic condition of the subject property. This section shall be construed to create private and
public civil causes of action in addition to creating criminal liability. (Ord. 2007-29, 12-4-2007, eff. 1-4-2008)
18.30.170: VIOLATION OF CHAPTER:
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the terms and requirements of this chapter. Any violation of the
requirements of this chapter shall constitute a class B misdemeanor. In the event a person changes the natural state
of any land surface having a slope of thirty percent (30%) or greater or, on any portion of land situated in the CE-1
zone grades, cuts slopes, begins development, or constructs in violation of the terms of this chapter, the person
violating the terms, and the person at whose direction the actions were taken are required to immediately restore and
revegetate the area disturbed consistent with a plan approved by the city engineer and shall bear all costs of
restoration, including the costs of the city engineer's review of the plan, and the restoration process. No subdivision
application shall be processed or approved, and no building or grading permits shall be issued to the person violating
these terms, the person at whose direction the actions were taken, nor the owner, or subsequent owners of the
property, until the disturbed land is restored and revegetated. A grading permit shall issue after proper application, for
work to be performed to restore and revegetate the area disturbed. (Ord. 2007-29, 12-4-2007, eff. 1-4-2008)
Chapter 18.32
RA-1 RESIDENTIAL AGRICULTURAL ZONE, ONE DWELLING
UNIT PER ACRE
18.32.010: PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES:
The RA-1 Zone is established to provide areas in which minor agricultural pursuits can be encouraged and supported
within the Municipality. The RA-1 Zone is designed and intended to protect agricultural uses from encroachment of
typical smaller lot development. Uses permitted in the RA-1 Zone, in addition to residential and agricultural uses, must
be incidental thereto and should not change the basic residential and agricultural character of the zone. Development
within the RA-1 Zone should be accomplished in an orderly and progressive manner, with no "leapfrog"
encroachments of such uses or developments into the residential agricultural area. (Ord. 2011-01, 1-18-2011, eff. 2-
13-2011)
18.32.020: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses shall be permitted in the RA-1 Zone:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 367/571
Agriculture (the science and art of farming; work of cultivating the soil, producing crops, and raising livestock).
Customary residential household pets as defined in section 18.08.010 of this title.
Home occupations, subject to the provisions of section 18.84.380 of this title.
Public utilities, drainage facilities, water wells and facilities; fences, walls, ornamental ponds; fences subject to section
18.84.130 of this title.
Single-family dwellings.
Temporary fruit and vegetable stands, for the sale of produce raised on the premises, that shall not exceed one
hundred (100) square feet; and are maintained in an orderly manner.
Temporary office building used as an office in connection with the sale of property within a subdivision under
construction, provided that the temporary office is located on the same tract of land as the subdivision. A permit
therefor shall be valid for not more than one year, at the expiration of which time the use shall be discontinued. This
use subject to subsection 18.84.200B of this title (temporary building construction).
The raising, care and keeping of limited numbers of livestock and fowl, excluding swine, for family food production or
recreation. Also barns, corrals, pens and coops and other structures for the care and keeping of domestic livestock
and fowl, subject to the following:
A. The number of animals kept shall not exceed one animal unit for each twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of
lot area.
B. No structure for the housing of livestock or fowl or corrals for the close confinement of livestock shall be located
closer than one hundred feet (100') to an existing dwelling on an adjacent lot or fifty feet (50') to such a dwelling
on the same lot. (Ord. 2011-01, 1-18-2011, eff. 2-13-2011)
18.32.030: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses and structures are permitted in the RA-1 Zone, provided they are incidental to the main residential
dwelling unit, and do not substantially alter the character of the permitted principal use or structure. Such permitted
accessory uses and structures include, but are not limited to, the following:
Accessory buildings such as barns, garages, carports, greenhouses, gardening sheds, recreation rooms, and similar
structures which are customarily used in conjunction with and are incidental to a principal use or structure.
Swimming pools and incidental cabanas subject to any and all requirements of the international building code (IBC).
(Ord. 2011-01, 1-18-2011, eff. 2-13-2011)
18.32.040: CONDITIONAL USES:
The uses listed below may be approved by issuance of a conditional use permit from the planning commission. Uses
not specified herein as "permitted" or "conditional" shall be considered prohibited. The following is a list of possible
conditional uses within the RA-1 zone:
Exotic pets. Sufficient evidence shall be provided that such pets will be prevented from causing damage to property of
others; endangering the health, safety and welfare of other persons; or otherwise creating a public nuisance.
Places of worship, public schools, private parks and playgrounds, subject to section 18.84.320 of this title.
Residential healthcare facilities (nursing homes, including skilled nursing and intermediate healthcare facilities),
subject to compliance with the standards for such uses as set forth in section 18.84.370 of this title and the approval of
site plan in accordance with the provisions of section 18.84.320 of this title. (Ord. 2011-01, 1-18-2011, eff. 2-13-2011)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 368/571
18.32.050: LOTS, BUILDINGS, YARDS, AND OPEN SPACES:
Each lot or parcel of property in the RA-1 zone shall meet all of the following requirements:
A. Lot Size And Area Per Dwelling: The minimum lot size in the RA-1 zone shall be not less than one acre or forty
three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet. Not more than one single-family dwelling may be placed
upon a legally created lot or parcel of land in the RA-1 zone. When part of a TDR receiving site, the minimum lot
size shall not be less than one-half (1/2) acre or twenty one thousand seven hundred eighty (21,780) square feet.
B. Lot Width: Each lot or parcel of land in the RA-1 zone shall have a width of at least one hundred twenty five feet
(125'). When part of a TDR receiving site, each lot or parcel shall have a width of at least one hundred feet (100').
(Ord. 2013-03, 1-15-2013, eff. 2-7-2013)
C. Front Yard/Garage Requirements: No home shall have a front yard setback of less than thirty feet (30') measured
from the front property line or the right of way edge to the foundation of the home. For homes that have garage
doors that face the street, the garage shall be set back a minimum of twenty five feet (25') from the back of
sidewalk.
D. Rear Yard Requirements: No home shall have a rear yard of less than twenty five feet (25') measured from the rear
property line to the foundation of the home.
E. Side Yard: Each lot or parcel of land in the RA-1 zone shall have a side yard of not less than ten feet (10').
F. Side Yard; Corner Lots: When a side yard on a corner lot faces a street, the same setbacks as described in
subsection C, "Front Yard/Garage Requirements", of this section shall apply. (Ord. 2016-08, 11-2-2016, eff. 11-27-
2016)
G. Accessory Buildings: See section 18.26.020 of this title. (Ord. 2014-02, 1-7-2014, eff. 2-2-2014)
H. Standard Setbacks Based On Geotechnical Information:
1. Notwithstanding the setback requirements set forth in this section, the city council, upon the recommendation of
the city engineer or the planning commission, may require a greater setback on a lot or group of lots or proposed
lot or group of lots based on geotechnical information and engineering plans. (Ord. 2011-01, 1-18-2011, eff. 2-
13-2011)
2. Any person adversely affected by the city council's decision administering or establishing the setbacks based on
geotechnical information, may within thirty (30) days of the city council's decision, appeal that decision to the
appeal authority as outlined in Utah code section 10-9a-703. (Ord. 2013-04, 2-19-2013, eff. 4-1-2013)
I. Projections Into Yards: The following structures may be erected on or projected into any required yard:
1. Fences and walls in conformance with this code and approval by the planning and zoning director. Other city
codes or ordinances also apply.
2. Landscape elements including trees, shrubs, agricultural crops, and other plants.
3. Necessary appurtenances for utility service.
4. The structures listed below may project into a minimum front or rear yard not more than four feet (4'), and into a
minimum side yard not more than two feet (2'):
a. Cornices, eaves, belt courses, sills, buttresses, or other similar architectural features.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 369/571
b. Fireplace structures and bays, provided that they are not wider than eight feet (8') measured generally parallel
to the wall of which they are a part.
c. Stairways, balconies, door stoops, fire escapes, awnings, and planter boxes or masonry planters not
exceeding twenty four inches (24") in height.
d. Porte-cochere over a driveway in a side yard, providing such structure is not more than one story in height
and twenty four feet (24') in length, and is entirely open on at least three (3) sides except for necessary
supporting columns and customary architectural features. (Ord. 2011-01, 1-18-2011, eff. 2-13-2011)
J. Building Height: No lot or parcel of land in the RA-1 Zone shall have a building or structure used for dwelling or
public assembly which exceeds a height of two (2) stories with a maximum of forty feet (40') as defined in section
18.08.010 of this title. (Ord. 2013-05, 6-18-2013, eff. 7-12-2013)
K. Permissible Lot Coverage: All buildings, including accessory buildings and structures, shall cover not more than
thirty five percent (35%) of the area of the lot or parcel of land. (Ord. 2011-01, 1-18-2011, eff. 2-13-2011)
18.32.055: CLUSTERING OF SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLINGS:
A. Purpose: The purpose of clustering within the RA-1 Zone is to protect and preserve open space, encourage
imaginative and efficient utilization of land, develop a sense of community, and to ensure compatibility with the
surrounding neighborhoods and environment. Clustering also offers the developer some flexibility in addressing
land development issues. These provisions are intended to create more attractive and desirable environments
within the residential areas of Mapleton City.
B. Overall Size Requirement: The minimum overall size requirement for any development utilizing clustering within the
RA-1 Zone is no less than fifty (50) acres. If the development utilizing clustering contains more than one zone a
minimum of fifty (50) acres shall be located in the RA-1 Zone portion of the development.
C. Project Density: The maximum project density allowed for any development utilizing clustering is one single-family
dwelling unit per acre within the RA-1 Zone, excluding street rights-of-way.
D. Lot Size Requirement: The minimum lot size requirement for any development utilizing clustering shall be no less
than twenty one thousand (21,000) square feet. If the lot contains more than one zone a minimum of twenty one
thousand (21,000) square feet shall be located in the RA-1 Zone portion of the lot. Not more than one single-family
dwelling may be placed on a lot or parcel of land in the RA-1 Zone.
E. Setbacks: Any development utilizing clustering shall meet any setbacks, as provided under section 18.32.050 of
this chapter.
F. Open Space: Within a development utilizing clustering any open space lots may be owned and maintained either
privately or by a homeowners' association.
G. TDR: A development in the RA-1 Zone utilizing clustering under this section is not a TDR receiving site. (Ord. 2011-
01, 1-18-2011, eff. 2-13-2011)
18.32.060: PARKING AND DRIVEWAY REQUIREMENTS:
A. Each home located on a lot or parcel in the RA-1 Zone shall have on the same lot or parcel two (2) off street
enclosed parking spaces.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 370/571
B. Each home shall also have a driveway that leads from a public street to the required enclosed parking spaces. Said
driveway shall have a width of at least twelve feet (12') and be constructed with a hard surface material. (Ord.
2011-01, 1-18-2011, eff. 2-13-2011)
Chapter 18.36
RA-2 RESIDENTIAL-MINOR AGRICULTURAL ZONE
18.36.010: PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES:
The Residential-Minor Agricultural (RA-2) Zone is established for the primary purpose of allowing single-family
residential homes on medium sized lots. Incidental and minor agricultural uses are allowed on larger lots with twenty
thousand (20,000) square feet or greater of land. New developments within the RA-2 Zone with a mixture of lots both
greater and less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet would not allow for animal rights within the subdivision.
(Ord. 2004-12, 6-16-2004, eff. 7-13-2004)
18.36.020: APPLICABLE REGULATIONS:
Within the RA-2 Zone, the height and number of stories, the size of buildings and other structures, the percentage of a
lot that may be occupied, the size of yards, courts and other open spaces, the density of population, the location and
use of buildings, structures and land are regulated and restricted as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 2004-12, 6-16-2004,
eff. 7-13-2004)
18.36.030: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses shall be permitted in the RA-2 Residential-Minor Agricultural Zone:
Customary residential household pets as defined in section 18.08.010 of this title.
Home occupations, subject to the provisions of section 18.84.380 of this title.
Public facilities.
Single-family residential dwelling unit.
Temporary fruit and vegetable stands, for the sale of produce raised on the premises, that shall not exceed one
hundred (100) square feet; are maintained in an orderly manner.
The following standards only apply to lots greater than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet: The raising, care and
keeping of limited numbers of livestock and fowl excluding swine for family food production or recreation. Also barns,
corrals, pens and coops and other structures for the care and keeping of domestic livestock and fowl, subject to the
following:
A. The number of animals kept shall not exceed one animal unit for each twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of a
lot. No livestock or fowl shall be kept on any lot containing less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
B. No structure for the housing of livestock or fowl or corrals for the close confinement of livestock shall be located
closer than one hundred feet (100') to an existing dwelling on an adjacent lot or fifty feet (50') to such a dwelling
on the same lot. (Ord. 2006-40, 11-21-2006)
18.36.040: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses and structures are permitted in the RA-2 Zone, provided they are incidental to the main residential
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 371/571
dwelling unit, and do not substantially alter the character of the permitted principal use or structure. Such permitted
accessory uses and structures include, but are not limited to, the following:
Accessory buildings such as barns, garages, carports, greenhouses, gardening sheds, recreation rooms, and similar
structures which are customarily used in conjunction with and are incidental to a principal use or structure.
A. Accessory structures on lots with less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet shall be limited to a footprint
size that is no greater than the main structure, with a height no taller than the main structure.
B. For lots greater than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, the maximum size on any accessory building, barn,
garage or otherwise, shall be limited to no more than one hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the footprint of
the main dwelling.
Swimming pools and incidental cabanas subject to any and all requirements of the international building code (IBC).
(Ord. 2004-12, 6-16-2004, eff. 7-13-2004)
18.36.050: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following is a list of conditional uses. Such uses may be approved by issuance of a conditional use permit from
the planning commission. Uses not specified herein as "permitted" or "conditional" shall be considered prohibited.
Places of worship, public schools, private parks and playgrounds, subject to section 18.84.320 of this title. (Ord. 2004-
12, 6-16-2004, eff. 7-13-2004)
18.36.060: LOTS, BUILDINGS, YARDS, AND OPEN SPACES:
Each lot or parcel of property in the RA-2 zone shall meet all of the following requirements:
A. Lot Size And Area Per Dwelling: The minimum lot size in the RA-2 zone shall be not less than fourteen thousand
five hundred (14,500) square feet. Not more than one single-family dwelling may be placed upon a legally created
lot or parcel of land in the RA-2 zone.
B. Lot Width: Each lot or parcel of land in the RA-2 zone shall have an average width of at least one hundred feet
(100'). (Ord. 2013-03, 1-15-2013, eff. 2-7-2013)
C. Front Yard/Garage Requirements: No home shall have a front yard setback of less than thirty feet (30') measured
from the front property line or the right of way edge to the foundation of the home. For homes that have garage
doors that face the street, the garage shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet (20') from the back of sidewalk.
D. Side Yard/Rear Yard: Each lot or parcel of land in the RA-2 zone shall have a side yard of not less than ten feet
(10'). No home shall have a rear yard setback of less than twenty five feet (25') from the rear property line.
E. Side Yard; Corner Lots: When a side yard on a corner lot faces a street, the same setbacks as described in
subsection C, "Front Yard/Garage Requirements", of this section shall apply. (Ord. 2016-08, 11-2-2016, eff. 11-27-
2016)
F. Accessory Buildings: See section 18.26.020 of this title. (Ord. 2014-02, 1-7-2014, eff. 2-2-2014)
G. Projections Into Yards: The following structures may be erected on or projected into any required yard:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 372/571
1. Fences and walls in conformance with this code and approval by the planning and zoning director. Other city
codes or ordinances also apply.
2. Landscape elements including trees, shrubs, agricultural crops, and other plants.
3. Necessary appurtenances for utility service.
4. The structures listed below may project into a minimum front or rear yard not more than four feet (4'), and into a
minimum side yard not more than two feet (2'):
a. Cornices, eaves, belt courses, sills, buttresses, or other similar architectural features.
b. Fireplace structures and bays, provided that they are not wider than eight feet (8') measured generally parallel
to the wall of which they are a part.
c. Stairways, balconies, door stoops, fire escapes, awnings, and planter boxes or masonry planters not
exceeding twenty four inches (24") in height.
d. Porte-cochere over a driveway in a side yard, providing such structure is not more than one story in height
and twenty four feet (24') in length, and is entirely open on at least three (3) sides except for necessary
supporting columns and customary architectural features. (Ord. 2004-12, 6-16-2004, eff. 7-13-2004)
H. Building Height: No lot or parcel of land in the RA-2 zone shall have a building or structure used for dwelling or
public assembly which exceeds a height of two (2) stories with a maximum of forty feet (40') as defined in section
18.08.010 of this title. (Ord. 2013-05, 6-18-2013, eff. 7-12-2013)
I. Permissible Lot Coverage: All buildings, including accessory buildings and structures, shall cover not more than
thirty five percent (35%) of the area of the lot or parcel of land, however the single-family home, attached garage,
and covered patio shall cover not more than thirty percent (30%) of the area of the lot or parcel of land. (Ord. 2010-
04, 5-18-2010, eff. 6-26-2010)
18.36.070: PARKING AND DRIVEWAY REQUIREMENTS:
A. Each home located on a lot or parcel in the RA-2 Zone shall have on the same lot or parcel two (2) off street
enclosed parking spaces.
B. Each home shall also have a driveway that leads from a public street to the required enclosed parking spaces. Said
driveway shall have a width of at least twelve feet (12'), and be constructed of a hard surface material. (Ord. 2004-
12, 6-16-2004, eff. 7-13-2004)
18.36.080: SEPARATION OF AGRICULTURAL/NONAGRICULTURAL USES REQUIREMENT:
A. For the purpose of separating agricultural and nonagricultural uses, new subdivision developments within the RA-2
Zone shall not plat lots that would exceed twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or greater if a simple majority of
the remaining lots within the subdivision would not qualify for animal rights (be less than 20,000 square feet in
size). However, the following exceptions shall apply:
1. With approval by the Planning Commission, lots that are twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in size or greater,
may be permitted contrary to the above requirements so long as the subdivision applicant agrees to provide and
have recorded with the subdivision, "codes, covenants and restrictions" (CC&Rs) that specify lots, regardless of
their size, have no animals rights.
B. This section shall not apply to homes or existing development adjacent to established and existing agricultural
uses. (Ord. 2004-12, 6-16-2004, eff. 7-13-2004)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 373/571
Chapter 18.44
R-1-B RESIDENTIAL ZONE
18.44.010: APPLICABLE REGULATIONS:
Within the R-1-B zone, the height and number of stories, the size of buildings and other structures, the percentage of a
lot that may be occupied, the size of yards, courts and other open spaces, the density of population, the location and
use of buildings, structures and land are regulated and restricted as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 2013-03, 1-15-2013,
eff. 2-7-2013)
18.44.020: GENERAL OBJECTIVE AND CHARACTERISTICS:
A. The objective in establishing the R-1-B residential zone is to encourage the creation and maintenance of a
residential environment within the city which is characterized by large lots surrounded by well kept lawns, trees,
and other plantings. A minimum of vehicular and pedestrian traffic and quiet residential conditions favorable to
family living and the rearing of children shall also be characteristic of this zone. While much of the land is currently
devoted to agricultural and other open land uses, it is intended in the future that the land shall be developed into
residential uses, having characteristics as hereinabove set forth.
B. Representative of the uses within the R-1-B zone are one-family dwellings, parks, agriculture, playgrounds,
churches and other community facilities designed in harmony with the characteristics of the zone. (Ord. 2002-05,
3-20-2002)
18.44.030: REGULATIONS GENERALLY:
In order to promote the objectives of this zone, the following regulations shall apply in the R-1-B residential zone. (Ord.
2002-05, 3-20-2002)
18.44.040: PERMITTED USES:
A temporary office building used as an office in connection with the sale of property within a subdivision under
construction, provided that the temporary office is located on the same tract of land as the subdivision. A permit
therefor shall be valid for not more than one year, at the expiration of which time the use shall be discontinued; subject
to section 18.84.200 of this title (construction of temporary buildings).
Customary residential pets, except kennels.
Fences, walls and hedges; subject to section 18.84.100 of this title.
Gardening.
Home occupations, subject to the provisions of section 18.84.380 of this title.
Public schools, public libraries, public recreation buildings and similar public buildings and grounds; places of worship
but not including temporary revival tents or buildings; public utility buildings and structures, providing that no storage
yard shall be maintained on the premises. All uses under this heading subject to section 18.84.320, "Site Plan Review
Process And Bonding", of this title.
Single-family dwellings - conventional construction and modular homes and manufactured homes. Also residential
accessory structures appurtenant thereto.
Temporary building or yard storage of construction materials and equipment incidental and necessary to construction
of a housing development, utilities, or other community facilities, provided such temporary building or yard is located
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 374/571
on the same tract of land on which the houses, utilities or other community facilities are constructed. A permit therefor
shall be issued only to the contractor or builder and shall be valid for not more than one year, at the expiration of which
time the same building or storage yard shall be removed from the premises and the use discontinued; subject to
section 18.84.200 of this title (construction of temporary buildings). (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
18.44.041: CONDITIONAL USES:
Residential healthcare facilities (nursing homes, including skilled nursing and intermediate healthcare facilities),
subject to compliance with the standards for such uses as set forth in section 18.84.370 of this title and the approval of
site plan in accordance with the provisions of section 18.84.320 of this title. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
18.44.050: LOTS, BUILDINGS, YARDS, AND OPEN SPACES:
Each lot or parcel of property in the R-1-B Zone shall meet all of the following requirements:
A. Lot Size And Area Per Dwelling: The minimum lot size in the R-1-B Zone shall be not less than fourteen thousand
five hundred (14,500) square feet. Not more than one single-family dwelling may be placed upon a legally created
lot or parcel of land in the R-1-B Zone.
B. Lot Width: Each lot or parcel of land in the R-1-B Zone shall have an average width of at least eighty feet (80').
(Ord. 2013-03, 1-15-2013, eff. 2-7-2013)
C. Front Yard/Garage Requirements: No home shall have a front yard setback of less than thirty feet (30') measured
from the front property line or the right-of-way edge to the foundation of the home. For homes that have garage
doors that face the street, the garage shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet (20') from the back of sidewalk.
D. Side Yard/Rear Yard: Each lot or parcel of land in the R-1-B Zone shall have a side yard of not less than ten feet
(10'). No home shall have a rear yard setback of less than twenty five feet (25') from the rear property line.
E. Side Yard; Corner Lots: When a side yard on a corner lot faces a street, the same setbacks as described in
subsection C, "Front Yard/Garage Requirements", of this section shall apply. (Ord. 2016-08, 11-2-2016, eff. 11-27-
2016)
F. Building Height: No lot or parcel of land in the R-1-B Zone shall have a building or structure used for dwelling or
public assembly which exceeds a height of two (2) stories with a maximum of forty feet (40') as defined in section
18.08.010 of this title. (Ord. 2013-05, 6-18-2013, eff. 7-12-2013)
G. Permissible Lot Coverage: All buildings, including accessory buildings and structures, shall cover not more than
thirty percent (30%) of the lot. (Ord. 2013-03, 1-15-2013, eff. 2-7-2013)
H. Accessory Buildings: See section 18.26.020 of this title. (Ord. 2014-02, 1-7-2014, eff. 2-2-2014)
Chapter 18.48
R-2 RESIDENTIAL ZONE
18.48.010: APPLICABLE REGULATIONS:
Within the R-2 zone, the height and number of stories, the size of buildings and other structures, the percentage of a
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 375/571
lot that may be occupied, the size of yards, courts and other open spaces, the density of population, the location and
use of buildings, structures and land are regulated and restricted as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 2013-03, 1-15-2013,
eff. 2-7-2013)
18.48.020: GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS:
A. The objective in establishing the R-2 residential zone is to provide a residential environment within the city which is
characterized by a more compact and somewhat denser residential development and somewhat higher volume of
vehicular and pedestrian traffic than is characteristic of one-family zones. Nevertheless, attractive lawns, shrubs
and trees, and other landscape plantings about the houses and on the parking strip within the streets is also
characteristic of this zone.
B. Representative of the uses in this zone are single-family dwellings, duplexes, nursing homes, public parks,
playgrounds, schools, places of worship and other compatible uses. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
18.48.030: REGULATIONS GENERALLY:
In order to accomplish the objectives of this zone, the following regulations shall apply in the R-2 residential zone.
(Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
18.48.040: PERMITTED USES:
A temporary office building used as an office in connection with the sale of property within a subdivision under
construction, provided that the temporary office is located on the same tract of land as the subdivision. A permit
therefor shall be valid for not more than one year, at the expiration of which time the use shall be discontinued; subject
to section 18.84.200 of this title (construction of temporary buildings).
Customary residential pets, except kennels.
Fences, walls and hedges; subject to section 18.84.100 of this title.
Gardening.
Home occupations, subject to the provisions of section 18.84.380 of this title.
Public schools, public libraries, public recreation buildings and similar public buildings and grounds; places of worship,
but not including temporary revival tents or buildings; public utility buildings and structures, providing that no storage
yard shall be maintained on the premises. All uses under this heading are subject to section 18.84.320, "Site Plan
Review Process And Bonding", of this title.
Single-family dwellings, twin homes (if subdivided into 2 lots in accordance with title 17 of this code) and duplexes -
conventional construction and modular homes. Also residential accessory structures appurtenant thereto.
Temporary building or yard storage of construction materials and equipment incidental and necessary to construction
of a housing development, utilities or other community facilities, provided such temporary building or yard is located on
the same tract of land on which the houses, utilities or other community facilities are constructed. A permit therefor
shall be issued only to the contractor or builder and shall be valid for not more than one year, at the expiration of which
time the same building or storage yard shall be removed from the premises and the use discontinued; subject to
section 18.84.200 of this title (construction of temporary buildings). (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002; amd. Ord. 2007-11, 5-
15-2007)
18.48.041: CONDITIONAL USES:
Residential healthcare facilities (nursing homes, including skilled nursing and intermediate healthcare facilities),
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 376/571
subject to compliance with the standards for such uses as set forth in section 18.84.370 of this title and the approval of
site plan in accordance with the provisions of section 18.84.320 of this title. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
18.48.050: LOTS, BUILDINGS, YARDS, AND OPEN SPACES:
Each lot or parcel of property in the R-2 Zone shall meet all of the following requirements:
A. Lot Size And Area Per Dwelling: The minimum lot size in the R-2 Zone shall be not less than ten thousand (10,000)
square feet. Not more than one single-family dwelling may be placed upon a legally created lot or parcel of land in
the R-2 Zone.
B. Lot Width: Each lot or parcel of land in the R-2 Zone shall have an average width of at least eighty feet (80'). (Ord.
2013-03, 1-15-2013, eff. 2-7-2013)
C. Front Yard/Garage Requirements: No home shall have a front yard setback of less than thirty feet (30') measured
from the front property line or the right-of-way edge to the foundation of the home. For homes that have garage
doors that face the street, the garage shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet (20') from the back of sidewalk.
D. Side Yard/Rear Yard: Each lot or parcel of land in the R-2 Zone shall have a side yard of not less than ten feet (10').
No home shall have a rear yard setback of less than twenty feet (20') from the rear property line.
E. Side Yard; Corner Lots: When a side yard on a corner lot faces a street, the same setbacks as described in
subsection C, "Front Yard/Garage Requirements", of this section shall apply. (Ord. 2016-08, 11-2-2016, eff. 11-27-
2016)
F. Permissible Lot Coverage: All buildings, including accessory buildings and structures, shall cover not more than
thirty percent (30%) of the lot. (Ord. 2013-03, 1-15-2013, eff. 2-7-2013)
G. Building Height: No lot or parcel of land in the R-2 Zone shall have a building or structure used for dwelling or public
assembly which exceeds a height of two (2) stories with a maximum of forty feet (40') as defined in section
18.08.010 of this title. (Ord. 2013-05, 6-18-2013, eff. 7-12-2013)
H. Accessory Buildings: See section 18.26.020 of this title. (Ord. 2014-02, 1-7-2014, eff. 2-2-2014)
Chapter 18.50
R-2-B RESIDENTIAL ZONE
18.50.010: APPLICABLE REGULATIONS:
Within the R-2-B Zone, the height and number of stories, the size of buildings and other structures, the percentage of
a lot that may be occupied, the size of yards, courts and other open spaces, the density of population, the location and
use of buildings, structures and land are regulated and restricted as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 2018-03, 4-18-2018,
eff. 5-15-2018)
18.50.020: GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS:
A. The objective in establishing the R-2-B Residential Zone is to provide a residential environment within the City
which is characterized by a more compact and somewhat denser residential development and somewhat higher
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 377/571
volume of vehicular and pedestrian traffic than is characteristic of lower density zones and to utilize transferable
development rights (TDRs) to achieve higher densities. This zone is only available for areas west of Highway 89
that have a General Plan land use designation of high density residential (HDR).
B. Representative of the uses in this zone are single-family dwellings, duplexes, twin homes, town homes, senior
housing, nursing homes, public parks, playgrounds, schools, places of worship and other compatible uses. (Ord.
2018-03, 4-18-2018, eff. 5-15-2018)
18.50.030: PERMITTED USES:
A temporary office building used as an office in connection with the sale of property within a subdivision under
construction, provided that the temporary office is located on the same tract of land as the subdivision. A permit
therefor shall be valid for not more than one year, at the expiration of which time the use shall be discontinued; subject
to section 18.84.200 of this title (construction of temporary buildings).
Customary residential pets, except kennels.
Fences, walls and hedges; subject to section 18.84.100 of this title.
Gardening.
Home occupations, subject to the provisions of section 18.84.380 of this title.
Public schools, public libraries, public recreation buildings and similar public buildings and grounds; places of worship,
but not including temporary revival tents or buildings; public utility buildings and structures, providing that no storage
yard shall be maintained on the premises. All uses under this heading are subject to section 18.84.320, "Site Plan
Review Process And Bonding", of this title.
Senior housing.
Single-family dwellings - conventional construction and modular homes, twin homes, duplexes, town homes. Also
residential accessory structures appurtenant thereto.
Temporary building or yard storage of construction materials and equipment incidental and necessary to construction
of a housing development, utilities or other community facilities, provided such temporary building or yard is located on
the same tract of land on which the houses, utilities or other community facilities are constructed. A permit therefor
shall be issued only to the contractor or builder and shall be valid for not more than one year, at the expiration of which
time the same building or storage yard shall be removed from the premises and the use discontinued; subject to
section 18.84.200 of this title (construction of temporary buildings). (Ord. 2018-03, 4-18-2018, eff. 5-15-2018)
18.50.040: CONDITIONAL USES:
Places of worship.
Residential healthcare facilities (nursing homes, including skilled nursing and intermediate healthcare facilities),
subject to compliance with the standards for such uses as set forth in section 18.84.370 of this title and the approval of
site plan in accordance with the provisions of section 18.84.320 of this title. (Ord. 2018-03, 4-18-2018, eff. 5-15-2018)
18.50.050: DENSITY:
A. Base Density: The maximum allowed density for projects not utilizing TDRs is four (4) units per acre exclusive of
right-of-way dedications.
B. TDR Density Bonus: A density bonus of up to eight (8) units per acre may be achieved with the use of TDRs. The
number of TDRs required shall be determined by the following steps:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 378/571
1. Determine the base density as described in subsection A of this section;
2. Determine the difference between the proposed density and the base density; and
3. Divide the difference between the proposed density and the base density by four (4) (density bonus). The result
of this calculation equals the number of TDRs required. When the calculation results in a fraction of a whole
number, the TDR requirement shall be rounded up to the next whole number.
By way of example, if a property is two (2) acres in size after subtracting the rights-of-way, its base density would
be eight (8) units (lot area x 4 units per acre). If the applicant was proposing a total of sixteen (16) units, two (2)
TDR certificates would be required. This is determined by calculating the difference between the proposed
density and the base density (16 - 8 = 8) and then dividing the result by four (8 / 4 = 2). (Ord. 2018-03, 4-18-
2018, eff. 5-15-2018)
18.50.060: LOTS, BUILDINGS, YARDS, DESIGN STANDARDS, AND OPEN SPACES:
A. Lot Size: The minimum lot size and width requirements in the R-2-B Zone are described in table A of this
subsection.
TABLE A
Lot Type Minimum Lot Size Minimum Width
Single family detached 8,000 square feet 70 feet
Duplex 8,000 square feet 80 feet
Twin home 5,000 square feet per unit 50 feet per unit
Town home 2,000 square feet per unit 22 feet per unit
Senior attached (maximum of 4 units per building) 1,200 square feet per unit 80 feet per building
B. Setback Standards: The minimum building setbacks in the R-2-B Zone for primary structures are described in table
B of this subsection.
TABLE B
Lot Type Front
Interior
Side
Corner Side
(Facing Street) Rear
Garage
Facing The
Street
Single family detached, duplex and twin home 25 feet 10 feet 20 feet 20 feet 20 feet
Rear loaded townhome 15 feet 8 feet 20 feet 10 feet n/a
Front loaded townhome 20 feet 8 feet 20 feet 20 feet 20 feet
Note: Setbacks are measured from the property line to the foundation of the building except for the "garage
facing the street" setback which is measured from the back of sidewalk.
C. Projections Into Yards: The following structures may be erected on or projected into any required yard:
1. Fences and walls in conformance with this Code and approval by the Planning and Zoning Director. Other City
codes or ordinances also apply.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 379/571
2. Landscape elements including trees, shrubs, agricultural crops, and other plants.
3. Necessary appurtenances for utility service.
4. The structures listed below may project into a minimum front or rear yard up to four feet (4'), and into a minimum
side yard up to two feet (2'):
a. Cornices, eaves, belt courses, sills, buttresses, or other similar architectural features.
b. Fireplace structures and bays, provided that they are not wider than eight feet (8') measured generally parallel
to the wall of which they are a part.
c. Stairways, balconies, door stoops, fire escapes, awnings, and planter boxes or masonry planters not
exceeding twenty four inches (24") in height.
d. Porte-cochere over a driveway in a side yard, providing such structure is not more than one story in height
and twenty four feet (24') in length, and is entirely open on at least three (3) sides except for necessary
supporting columns and customary architectural features.
e. Covered porch.
5. Cantilevered elements such as bay windows or other pop-outs that are eight feet (8') or less in length may
encroach into a minimum side and/or rear yard no more than two feet (2').
6. An uncovered deck may encroach no more than eight feet (8') into a rear yard.
D. Permissible Lot Coverage For Detached Units: All buildings, including accessory buildings and structures, shall
cover not more than forty percent (40%) of the lot.
E. Building Height: No lot or parcel of land in the R-2-B Zone shall have a building or structure used for dwelling or
public assembly which exceeds a height of two (2) stories with a maximum of forty feet (40') as defined in section
18.08.010 of this title.
F. Accessory Buildings: See section 18.26.020 of this title.
G. Design Standards: Single family detached, duplexes and twin homes shall have the following design standards:
1. No two (2) detached homes of the same exterior architectural design shall be situated next to, or across the
street from, another.
2. For projects of ten (10) lots or more, the developer/builder shall provide Mapleton City with no less than five (5)
different home designs with differing exterior elevations, rooflines, colors and materials. Exceptions shall be
granted if the lots or pads are sold to individuals who will build custom homes. If the lots are purchased by one
builder or multiple builders who have purchased a "block" of lots or pads, then these design standards shall
apply.
3. Twin homes and duplexes shall be designed so that both units are architecturally compatible in forms and
materials.
4. Garages that face the street shall be recessed a minimum of five feet (5') from the front wall and/or covered
entry element of the structure.
H. Project Plans: Project plans for town homes shall be approved by the City Council in conjunction with subdivision
plat approval. Plans shall include the following minimum standards:
1. No more than five (5) individual units may be attached without the creation of a new separated building.
2. Each unit must have a well-defined entrance celebrated by a front porch or covered entryway.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 380/571
3. The massing of the front facade of each unit shall be broken up into smaller components to avoid unrelieved
vertical walls. (Ord. 2018-03, 4-18-2018, eff. 5-15-2018)
Chapter 18.52
R-3 RESIDENTIAL ZONE
(Rep. by Ord. 2019-03, 3-6-2019, eff. 4-2-2019)
Chapter 18.54
PO-1 PROFESSIONAL OFFICE ZONE
18.54.010: LEGISLATIVE INTENT:
The PO-1 Professional Office Zone is established to provide areas within the City which will accommodate a mixture
of low and moderate density residential structures and limited scale office facilities under conditions which will not be
inimical to the preservation of a residential environment favorable to family living and the rearing of children.
Characteristic of the uses within the PO-1 Zone are one-family and two-family dwellings on moderate sized lots,
together with agricultural areas, public schools, churches, playgrounds, and similar nonresidential uses customarily
found in residential neighborhoods. The zone would also permit small scale office structures to accommodate doctors,
dentists, accountants, real estate and similar activities which are located in landscaped settings consistent with the
surrounding residential areas and which are of such a limited size that they will not generate a volume of traffic
sufficient to significantly impact the capacity of the adjacent road system or would otherwise depreciate the residential
environment. It is anticipated that each area placed within the PO-1 Zone would be relatively small and that the areas
so zoned would be distributed throughout the community and adjacent to collector or arterial class streets. (Ord. 2002-
05, 3-20-2002)
18.54.020: PERMITTED NONCONDITIONAL USES:
The following uses of land shall be permitted upon compliance with the applicable standards and conditions of this
Code and other ordinances and codes of the City:
Agriculture, not including the raising of livestock.
Customary household pets.
Fences, walls and hedges.
One-family and two-family dwellings - conventional construction and modular homes. Also residential accessory
structures appurtenant thereto, subject to compliance with all terms and conditions for such uses as set forth in the R-
2 Residential Zone and to the requirements of section 18.26.020 of this title.
Public schools, libraries, parks and similar public buildings and grounds, churches, public utility structures.
Real estate sale signs not exceeding eight (8) square feet in area advertising the sale of the premises. (Ord. 2002-05,
3-20-2002; amd. Ord. 2014-02, 1-7-2014, eff. 2-2-2014)
18.54.030: PERMITTED CONDITIONAL USES:
The following buildings, structures and uses of land may be permitted upon compliance with the applicable standards
and conditions of this Code and other ordinances and codes of the City and after approval has been given by the
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 381/571
designated review body:
Healthcare housing projects (small scale), subject to the provisions of section 18.84.370 of this title.
Home occupations, subject to the provisions of section 18.84.380 of this title.
Professional office projects (small scale) subject to compliance with all the following conditions and upon approval by
the City Council following receipt of a recommendation by the Planning Commission:
A. The parcel to be used for the project shall be not less than one-half (1/2) acre nor more than 2.5 acres in area.
B. The office structure shall contain not more than ten thousand (10,000) square feet or ten percent (10%) of the
total lot area, whichever is less.
C. The exterior facade of the structure shall be compatible and consistent with the design of residences in the
vicinity.
D. The lot and structure shall front upon a designated collector or arterial class street as shown on the major street
plan and all points of vehicular ingress and egress shall be to the designated major street.
E. Adequate off street parking shall be required. The number of parking spaces shall be sufficient to accommodate
the workers and clients of the proposed use, but shall be not less than one parking space for each four hundred
(400) square feet of office space. The location and layout of the accessways and parking area shall act to
encourage the use of off street parking; all parking spaces shall be located to be at least as accessible to the
main building entrance as the adjacent street. All travelways and off street parking area shall be hard surfaced.
F. All buildings shall conform to the setback requirements for the R-2 Residential Zone.
G. The project shall be connected to a public sewer or shall provide written evidence from the City-County Health
Department of the adequacy of the septic tank system for the proposed use.
H. Signs shall be limited to one fascia or low level (less than 4 feet in height) freestanding identification sign having
a total area of less than thirty two (32) square feet. If lighted, low intensity indirect lighting shall be used. No
advertising signs shall be permitted.
I. All portions of the project area not occupied by structures, off street parking, or accessways shall be landscaped.
(Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
J. No building within the project shall exceed two (2) stories or thirty feet (30') in height as defined in section
18.08.010 of this title. (Ord. 2013-05, 6-18-2013, eff. 7-12-2013)
K. The plan shall provide for the location of solid waste disposal containers. Where bulk containers are to be used,
permanent container enclosures shall be provided.
L. A detailed site plan prepared in accordance with the provisions of section 18.84.320 of this title shall be
submitted as part of the application.
M. The procedure to be followed in securing approval of the project shall be the same as required for an
amendment to the zoning ordinance1. Upon approval of the project and site plan by the City Council and posting
of the ordinance approving the project said site plan shall be deemed to constitute the specific zone
requirements for the project area. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 382/571
18.54.040: DESIGN STANDARDS:
Commercial and mixed use projects shall comply with the provisions of chapter 18.92, "Commercial Design
Standards", of this title which is on file in the City. (Ord. 2017-01, 4-19-2017, eff. 5-12-2017)
Chapter 18.56
SDP SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT PLAN ZONE
18.56.010: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of the SDP specific development plan zone is:
A. To create unique zone regulations for each allowed geographic area where a specific development plan can be
adopted.
B. To encourage and promote the use of transferable development rights (TDRs) so that the specified areas can be
developed to their full potential.
C. To reduce urban sprawl, encouraging development in areas with adequate infrastructure, provide for moderate
income housing opportunities, discourage strip commercial development, reduce infrastructure costs and energy
consumption.
D. To encourage imaginative and efficient utilization of land, to develop a sense of community, and to ensure
compatibility with the surrounding or proposed commercial environments. The SDP zone is to allow residential
uses adjacent to Mapleton City's commercial areas that traverse Highway 89 (1600 West). The SDP zone shall
only apply to the following areas: all areas west of 1600 West from 1600 South, northward along Highway 89 (1600
West) to approximately Maple Street, and all areas from Highway 89 (1600 West) eastward to 1400 West, and
from 1000 North, southwards to 1600 South. Both the regulations of this chapter, as well as the regulations
contained in each plan district shall apply to a given specific development plan zone area. (Ord. 2003-21, 10-15-
2003, eff. 11-13-2003)
18.56.020: CREATION OF ZONE:
A. The SDP zone shall be applied to a land area as an independent zone. Property to which an SDP zone has been
applied shall be developed only in conformance with an approved specific development plan. The first such zone
shall be designated SDP-1, the second SDP-2, the third SDP-3 and so on.
B. The SDP zone may be applied to any of the existing zones within the specified geographic area as defined above.
(Ord. 2003-21, 10-15-2003, eff. 11-13-2003)
18.56.030: SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT PLAN ZONE MAPS:
A specific development plan zone shall include the following plan maps:
A. A boundary map shall be prepared for every specific development plan zone. The boundary map, based on parcel
boundaries or other surveyed boundaries, shall be used to delineate areas of the zoning district that lie within the
city's boundaries on the official zone map. The zone map shall identify such areas as "SDP", and shall include the
name of the specific development area plan area.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 383/571
B. A conceptual development plan based on an adopted or proposed specific development plan shall accompany
each application for rezoning to an SDP zone. (Ord. 2003-21, 10-15-2003, eff. 11-13-2003)
18.56.040: SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT PLAN ZONE TEXT:
Each specific development plan zone ordinance shall include the following provisions and standards:
A. Name And Purpose Of Zone: This section shall describe the zone in sufficient detail as to clarify the purpose and
intent of the SDP zone regulations.
B. Review And Approval Process: A review and approval process consisting of three (3) elements as follows:
1. Approval of a specific development plan, including maps, text, and conceptual development plan for the site in
question;
2. Approval of an SDP zone text and map amendment to implement the plan and the rezone of the property;
3. Approval of a detailed development plan, subdivision, performance development, or condominium plat, if
applicable.
C. Applications:
1. Applications for an SDP zone text and map amendments shall be processed following the procedures set forth
in title 17 of this code, and this title.
2. An application for a project development plan, subdivision, or condominium shall be processed following the
procedures set forth in title 17 of this code, and this title.
D. Land Uses: This section shall identify permitted, conditional, and accessory land uses.
E. Land Use Standards: This section shall specify any required land use conditions (i.e., land use mix, density, open
space, buffering, etc.), and the review procedure required to review and approve each land use (design review,
project plan review, conditional use, etc.). The criteria set forth in section 17.12.090 of this code, shall be used in
creating land use standards.
F. Lot Standards: This section shall specify requirements for new lots such as lot area, dimensions, and density, as
applicable.
G. Building Setbacks: This section shall provide setback standards for front, side and rear yards, as applicable.
H. Design Standards: The design standards set forth in section 17.12.090 of this code, shall apply to all specific
development plan zones. In addition, each such zone shall include design standards to address building heights,
building orientation, common and private open space, natural resource protection, architectural design, and any
other provisions unique to the district.
I. Building Height: This section shall establish building height standards as per section 18.56.100 of this chapter. (Ord.
2003-21, 10-15-2003, eff. 11-13-2003)
18.56.050: EXCEPTIONS TO DEVELOPMENT AND DESIGN STANDARDS:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 384/571
When a specific development plan is adopted and the subject property has been placed in an SDP zone, the
development plan and development standards associated with the zone shall be strictly construed. No variations shall
be made from the development plan and standards adopted in the zone unless expressly approved by the city council
with recommendation from the planning commission for the purpose of achieving better design. In taking such action
the planning commission and city council shall:
A. Make a finding that the amendment will result in better design; and
B. Be bound by the standards set forth in the text of the applicable SDP zone which governs the development plan.
(Ord. 2003-21, 10-15-2003, eff. 11-13-2003)
18.56.060: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory buildings that comply with section 18.26.020 of this title, in conjunction with and incidental to the main use
of the property, such as a shed or detached garage no larger than forty percent (40%) of the main building size, and
no taller than the main structure.
Attached side by side dwelling unit or town home. (No over/under units except duplexes will be allowed.)
Clubhouse and other recreational amenities for the development.
Condominiums subject to subsection 18.56.170C of this chapter.
Cultural or civic activities.
Duplex.
Educational institutions.
Park and recreation areas.
Single-family residential dwelling unit.
Swimming pools and related equipment.
Utility facilities. (Ord. 2003-21, 10-15-2003, eff. 11-13-2003; amd. Ord. 2014-02, 1-7-2014, eff. 2-2-2014)
18.56.070: CONDITIONAL USES:
Multiple-family dwelling unit for attached (2 or more) dwelling units, not to exceed four (4) unrelated persons per
dwelling unit.
Nursing home or assisted living center.
Places of worship. (Ord. 2003-21, 10-15-2003, eff. 11-13-2003)
18.56.080: DENSITY AND THE USE OF TRANSFERABLE DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS (TDRs):
The allowed residential density shall be the same density as allowed in the original zone designation. Unless TDRs
are used in accordance with subsection A of this section, a concept plan that meets all of the requirements set forth in
the zone for a subdivision shall be presented to the planning staff to determine any densities. All lot and road
standards shall apply. Transferable development rights (TDRs), as defined in chapter 18.76 of this title, can be used
for the purpose of obtaining a higher density for residential dwelling units. The following shall apply to the use of
TDRs:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 385/571
A. A density bonus shall be awarded for the use of TDRs. Regardless of the original zone designation, a total of six (6)
dwelling units per acre shall be granted for the use of one TDR. If TDRs are not used, the density of the original
zone shall apply, and
1. The use of TDRs for the purpose of obtaining the density bonus shall not be used in conjunction with the density
established using the original zone designation. Only the six (6) dwelling units obtained by the use of the TDR
shall apply. In no case shall the density of a site in the SDP Zone exceed six (6) dwelling units per acre. (Ord.
2003-21, 10-15-2003, eff. 11-13-2003)
18.56.090: MINIMUM FLOOR AREA:
All detached dwelling units located on a lot or parcel shall have a minimum main floor area of not less than one
thousand (1,000) square feet. Pad site homes, which are not located on a lot shall have a minimum main floor area of
eight hundred (800) square feet. Attached units shall have a minimum floor area of no less than nine hundred (900)
square feet. The minimum floor area requirements shall not include garages, porches, sunrooms, or similar. (Ord.
2003-21, 10-15-2003, eff. 11-13-2003)
18.56.100: BUILDING HEIGHT:
No lot or parcel of land in the SDP Zone shall have a building or structure used for dwelling or public assembly which
exceeds a height of two (2) stories with a maximum of forty feet (40') as defined in section 18.08.010 of this title. (Ord.
2013-05, 6-18-2013, eff. 7-12-2013)
18.56.110: ACREAGE REQUIREMENT:
The minimum size requirement for any project applying for the SDP Zone shall be no less than fifteen (15) acres.
Parcels with less than fifteen (15) acres may be combined with other parcels to meet the minimum acreage
requirements. (Ord. 2003-21, 10-15-2003, eff. 11-13-2003)
18.56.120: LOT REQUIREMENTS FOR DWELLING UNITS:
There shall be no lot requirements for dwelling units. Detached dwelling units may be placed on a recorded building
pad as part of the development, as long as all surrounding areas are recorded on the plat as "common open space"
that is landscaped and maintained by a recorded homeowners' association. (Ord. 2003-21, 10-15-2003, eff. 11-13-
2003)
18.56.130: SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
For the purpose of promoting "walkable" communities, setback requirements shall be limited. Each SDP Zone text
shall outline the setback requirements for the development, however, the SDP text shall not be less restrictive than the
following setback standards for the SDP Zone:
A. Subdivision Lots:
1. Front yard: Setbacks shall be no less than twenty feet (20') measured from the edge of the street right of way to
the foundation of the home.
2. Corner lot side yards: Shall be measured the same as the front yard.
3. Rear yard setbacks: Shall be no less than twenty feet (20') measured from the rear property line to the
foundation of the home.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 386/571
4. Side yard setbacks: Shall be no less than eight feet (8') measured from the property line to the foundation of the
home.
B. Pad Sites: Pad sites surrounded by open space areas provided for the purpose of a dwelling unit, shall have the
following setback requirements:
1. Front yard - public street: Twenty feet (20') measured from the edge of the street right of way to the foundation of
the home.
2. Corner lots - public street: Twenty feet (20') measured from the edge of the street right of way to the foundation
of the home.
3. Side yard to property line: Five feet (5').
4. Rear yard to property line or zone boundary: Twenty feet (20') measured from the edge of the foundation to the
property line or zone boundary line.
5. Distance between dwellings: There shall be a minimum setback between dwellings of twenty feet (20') in the
rear yard, and sixteen feet (16') for the side yard. In no case shall any dwelling unit be closer than ten feet (10')
to another dwelling. (Ord. 2003-21, 10-15-2003, eff. 11-13-2003)
18.56.140: PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
All detached single-family residential dwelling units, whether or not on a lot or pad site, shall have an attached or
detached two (2) car garage. All residential dwelling units outside the commercial zone other than single-family
residential units shall be required to have one covered parking space, either by carport or garage. Each detached
dwelling unit shall be required to have a total of four (4) parking spaces. The two (2) car garage shall be considered
two (2) parking spaces, and the area directly in front of the garage, which shall be a paved area twenty feet (20') wide
by twenty feet (20') long, shall be considered the remaining two (2) parking stalls. All other parking requirements shall
be governed by section 18.84.270 of this title. (Ord. 2003-21, 10-15-2003, eff. 11-13-2003)
18.56.150: OPEN SPACE, STREET TREE AND LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS:
All landscaping shall conform to the requirements found in chapter 18.90 of this title. Not less than thirty five percent
(35%) of any project in the SDP zone shall be kept and maintained as permanent open space. Said open space areas
shall be maintained by a homeowners' association, and fees shall be collected from all related parties, property
owners, or residents therein, to assure the maintenance of the open space areas. Open space areas may include the
land around the residential areas, landscaped areas within the commercial centers or a separate park area. However,
open space areas shall not be included as part of a residential lot. Open space areas shall not include streets (public
or private), driveways or parking areas.
A. Street Trees: Street trees shall be required in the park strip area between a sidewalk and the curb and gutter of
every street. Said trees shall be of a minimum size of no less than two inch (2") caliper, and one tree shall be
placed every thirty feet (30'). Tree species shall be the same as required in the adopted Mapleton City tree list
attached as exhibit A to resolution 2002-43.
B. Landscaping Requirements: In addition to the street tree requirements, one 2-inch caliper tree shall be required for
every dwelling unit within the SDP project. Said tree shall be placed in front of, or in back of each of the proposed
dwelling units, unless the dwelling unit is within a mixed use building, in which case the tree(s) shall be placed in
the designated landscape area required for the commercial development. All other landscape requirements shall
be governed by section 18.84.290 of this title. (Ord. 2003-21, 10-15-2003, eff. 11-13-2003)
18.56.160: MINIMUM DESIGN STANDARDS:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 387/571
A. Architectural Design: Architectural design standards shall be subject to the requirements found in section
17.12.090, "Design Standards For Multi-Family And Specific Development Plan (SDP) Zones", of this code.
B. Attached Dwelling Units: Dwellings may be attached side by side, but in no case shall any separate dwelling be
located above another.
C. Pedestrian Linkage: Safe pedestrian linkages between residential and nonresidential uses shall be included on
every development site. Sites shall also be designed to accommodate pedestrian linkages to adjoining areas if
possible. (Ord. 2003-21, 10-15-2003, eff. 11-13-2003)
18.56.170: GUARANTEES AND COVENANTS:
A. Adequate guarantees shall be provided for permanent retention and maintenance of all open space areas created
within an SDP. No plats will be recorded and no bonds will be released until all required guarantees have been
submitted to and approved by the planning commission and city council. Said open space guarantees may include
the following:
1. The city may require the developer to furnish and record protective covenants which will guarantee the retention
of the open land area, or the city may require the creation of a corporation granting beneficial rights to the open
space to all owners or occupants of land within the development.
2. The developer shall be required to develop and provide for the maintenance of all open space, unless part of or
all of it is contiguous to and is made a part of an existing park, and the city accepts dedication and approves the
annexation of the property to said park.
3. In the case of private reservation, the open space to be reserved shall be protected against building
development by conveying to the city as part of the condition of project approval, an open space easement over
such open areas, restricting the area against any future building or use.
4. The care and maintenance of the area within such open space reservation shall be ensured by the developer by
establishing a private association or corporation responsible for such maintenance which shall levy the cost
thereof as an assessment on the property owners within the SDP development. Ownership and tax liability of
private open space reservations shall be established in a manner acceptable to the city and made a part of the
conditions of the final plan approval.
5. Maintenance of open space reservations shall be managed by person, partnership, or corporate entity in which
there is adequate expertise and experience in property management to assure that said maintenance is
accomplished efficiently and at a high standard of quality.
6. Minor changes in the location, siting, and height of buildings and structures may be authorized by the planning
commission and city council without additional public hearings if required by engineering or other circumstances
not foreseen at the time the final plan was approved. No change authorized by this subsection may cause any of
the following:
a. A change in the use or character of the development;
b. An increase in overall coverage of structures;
c. An increase in the intensity of use;
d. An increase in the problems of traffic circulation and public utilities;
e. A reduction in approved open space;
f. A reduction of off street parking and loading space;
g. A reduction in required pavement widths.
7. All other changes in use, or rearrangement of lots, blocks, and building tracts, or any changes in the provision of
common open spaces and changes other than listed above, must be made by the city council after report of the
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 388/571
planning director and recommendation by the planning commission.
B. In order to ensure that the SDP development will be constructed to completion in an acceptable manner, the
applicant shall post a performance bond in compliance with city bonding policy.
C. The applicant of any SDP development which is being developed as a condominium project under the provisions of
the condominium ownership act of Utah, or subsequent amendments thereto, shall, prior to the conveyance of any
unit, submit to the planning commission and city council, a declaration of covenants, conditions, and restrictions
relating to the project, which shall become part of the final development plan and shall be recorded to run with the
land. Said covenants, conditions, and restrictions shall include management policies which shall set forth the
quality of maintenance that will be performed and who is to be responsible for said maintenance within said
condominium development. Said document shall, as a minimum, contain the following:
1. The establishment of a private association or corporation responsible for all maintenance, which shall levy the
cost thereof as an assessment to each unit owner within the condominium development.
2. The establishment of a management committee, with provisions setting forth the number of persons constituting
the committee, the method of selection, and the powers and duties of said committee; and including the person,
partnership, or corporation with property management expertise and experience who shall be designated to
manage the maintenance of the common areas and facilities in an efficient and quality manner.
3. The method of calling a meeting of the members of the corporation or association with the members thereof that
will constitute a quorum authorized to transact business.
4. The method for maintenance, repair, and replacement of common areas and facilities, and distribution of costs
thereof.
5. The method for maintenance of all private driveways, alleys, and private utilities and acknowledgment that such
maintenance is the responsibility of the homeowners' corporation or association.
6. The manner of collection from unit owners for their share of common expenses, and the method of assessment.
7. Provisions as to percentage of votes by unit owners which shall be necessary to determine whether to rebuild,
repair, restore, or sell property in the event of damage or destruction of all or part of the project.
8. The method and procedure by which the declaration may be amended: The declaration required herein, any
amendment, and any instrument affecting the property or any unit therein shall be approved by the planning
commission and city council, and recorded with the county recorder. Neither the declaration nor any amendment
thereto shall be valid until approved and recorded. Said declaration and amendments thereto shall be
maintained as part of the project plan for the performance development.
D. In case of failure or neglect to comply with any and all of the conditions and regulations herein established, and as
specifically made applicable to a performance development, the planning director shall not issue a certificate of
zoning compliance therefor. Such failure or neglect shall be cause for termination of the approval of the project.
Such failure or neglect to comply with the requirements and to maintain the buildings and premises in accordance
with the conditions or approval thereafter shall also be deemed to be a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2003-21, 10-
15-2003, eff. 11-13-2003)
18.56.180: DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT REQUIRED:
Prior to the rezone hearing before the city council for the SDP zone, the applicant shall provide a detailed
development agreement that details the entire project, the total amount of units or lots, the amounts of open spaces
and landscaped areas, and any other amenities that the applicant is willing to proffer as part of the development. Said
development agreement will also incorporate any changes made by the planning commission. Accompanying the final
development agreement shall be the correct legal description of the property, a planning commission approved copy of
the preliminary plan or plat, as well as any proposed architectural elevations of homes or buildings. At the request of
the city council, other language may be required in the development agreement to assure the city that the plans will
match the final product built. Said agreement shall be recorded with the Utah County recorder's office, and will be
attached to the title of the property to inform future or prospective property buyers of the requirements of developing
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 389/571
the property under the SDP zone designation. Any renegotiation of the development agreement may only occur when
the applicant or owner of the property petitions the city to amend the SDP plan for the property as per the
requirements of this title. (Ord. 2003-21, 10-15-2003, eff. 11-13-2003)
18.56.190: FINAL APPROVALS, PHASING AND BONDING:
Once a proposed project has received the zone change and concept plan approval, each phase of the project shall be
required to obtain final plat approval. No parcel of property within an approved SDP project shall be developed, and no
building permits shall be issued until the final plat is approved for each phase. Plats without recorded lots, but
containing pad sites, shall be required to submit a condominium plat as required by this code. Each submittal for final
plat shall also include the following submittals for approval by the city council upon recommendation from the planning
commission:
A. Submittals: Submittal of a final plat for each phase in accordance with chapter 17.04 of this code, as well as
associated application fees.
B. Architectural Review: Architectural elevations for all dwellings, homes or buildings associated with each phase to
include the following minimum information:
1. Proposed building materials for all exteriors, including roofing materials.
2. Proposed colors and a proposed overall color scheme for the phases.
3. Phases containing ten (10) or less lots or pad site homes shall be required to submit no less than three (3)
uniquely different exterior home designs. Phases containing more than ten (10) lots or pad site homes shall be
required to submit no less than five (5) uniquely different exterior home designs. In no case shall an alike home
be located next to or across the street from another like exterior home. Attached units with three (3) or more
dwelling units shall be exempt from this requirement upon approval by the city council.
C. Phasing: If the project is done in phases, no remnant parcels shall be created. Any land not proposed for
development shall be designated and platted as open space. Furthermore, each phase adjacent to any dedicated
open space areas, including parks, walking paths or otherwise, as shown on the approved concept plan shall be
included with the proposed phase. Upon approval by the city council, a portion of the required open space may be
dedicated with each phase. The city council, at their discretion, may require the dedication of open space equal to
thirty five percent (35%) of the total land area in each phase to ensure the proper dedication of the required open
space in case of default.
1. Each phase of the project shall only proceed by application after the minimum of forty percent (40%) of building
permits are issued within the prior phase.
D. Bonding: A performance guarantee bond pursuant to the requirements in chapter 17.20 of this code shall also be
submitted with each phase. Bonding shall include all required development improvements, street trees, and all
landscaping for any required parks and open spaces as shown or required in each phase. (Ord. 2003-21, 10-15-
2003, eff. 11-13-2003)
Chapter 18.56A
SDP-1 MAPLETON-WEST SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT PLAN ZONE
18.56A.010: PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES:
The SDP-1 Mapleton-west specific plan zone describes a proposed residential mixed use development set in the
central-western area of Mapleton City, west of Highway 89. This zone consists of a maximum of four hundred ninety
six (496) residential dwelling units on 100.3 acres identified as exhibit A of the development agreement. (Ord. 2003-
32, 11-19-2003, eff. 12-11-2003)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 390/571
18.56A.020: COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER 18.56 AND ADEQUATE PUBLIC FACILITIES:
In addition to the specific development standards contained in this chapter, areas zoned to the SDP-1 zone shall
comply with the general criteria and enabling provisions contained in chapter 18.56 of this title and section 17.04.130,
"Availability Of Adequate Public Facilities", of this code. (Ord. 2003-32, 11-19-2003, eff. 12-11-2003)
18.56A.030: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory buildings, in conjunction with and incidental to the main use of the property, such as a shed or detached
garage no larger than forty percent (40%) of the main building size, and no taller than the main structure.
Cultural or civic activities.
Home occupations (subject to section 18.84.380 of this title) with the following additional restrictions:
A. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection 18.84.380D7 of this title, parking shall be further limited to the
number of available off street parking spaces at the home. Off street parking spaces shall be in the driveway,
garage, or other designated parking spaces for the home. Clients and employees must park in the off street
parking spaces designated for the home. However, one client at a time may also use a guest parking space for a
period not to exceed sixty (60) minutes.
B. Clients of the home occupation shall not park or store vehicles at the premises overnight.
Park and recreation areas.
Single-family residential dwelling unit:
Attached side by side dwelling unit or townhome (no over/under units except duplexes will be allowed).
Duplex.
Swimming pools and related equipment.
Utility facilities. (Ord. 2003-32, 11-19-2003, eff. 12-11-2003; amd. Ord. 2009-09, 8-5-2009, eff. 9-18-2009)
18.56A.040: CONDITIONAL USES:
Clubhouse and other recreational amenities for the development.
Cultural and civic activities.
Educational institutions (public schools).
Places of worship. (Ord. 2003-32, 11-19-2003, eff. 12-11-2003)
18.56A.050: LOT AREA:
There shall be no minimum lot size requirement, however, the total number of residential dwelling units shall not
exceed four hundred ninety six (496). (Ord. 2003-32, 11-19-2003, eff. 12-11-2003)
18.56A.060: LOT REQUIREMENTS:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 391/571
There are no lot requirements other than the general layout of the lots as presented in the Mapleton-west final plan for
the entire project. (Ord. 2003-32, 11-19-2003, eff. 12-11-2003)
18.56A.070: RESIDENTIAL DENSITY:
The overall residential density in the SDP-1 Mapleton-west zone shall not exceed the number of dwelling units as
agreed upon for the Mapleton-west development and rezone, or the number which is allowed in chapter 18.56 of this
title with the application of TDRs. In no case shall the density of the project be increased once the finalized plans have
been recorded with the Utah County recorder's office. The number of dwelling units shall not exceed that which is
permitted with the original approval of the SDP-1 Mapleton-west zone. (Ord. 2003-32, 11-19-2003, eff. 12-11-2003)
18.56A.080: YARD REQUIREMENTS:
All yard requirements shall comply with the project design criteria attached as exhibit D of the Mapleton-west
development agreement. (Ord. 2003-32, 11-19-2003, eff. 12-11-2003)
18.56A.090: BUILDING HEIGHT:
All building height requirements shall comply with the project design criteria attached as exhibit D of the Mapletonwest
development agreement. (Ord. 2003-32, 11-19-2003, eff. 12-11-2003)
18.56A.100: ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW:
(Rep. by Ord. 2007-11, 5-15-2007)
18.56A.110: PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
All detached single-family residential dwelling units, whether or not on a lot or pad site, shall have an attached or
detached two (2) car garage. Each detached dwelling unit shall be required to have a total of four (4) parking spaces.
The two (2) car garage shall be considered two (2) parking spaces, and the area directly in front of the garage, which
shall be a paved area twenty feet (20') wide by twenty feet (20') long, shall be considered the remaining two (2)
parking stalls. All other parking requirements shall be governed by section 18.84.270 of this title, including the design
criteria relating to recreation vehicles contained in exhibit D in the Mapleton-west development agreement. (Ord. 2003-
32, 11-19-2003, eff. 12-11-2003)
18.56A.120: OPEN SPACE, STREET TREE AND LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS:
All landscaping shall conform to the requirements found in chapter 18.90 of this title. No less than thirty five percent
(35%) of any project in the SDP-1 zone shall be kept and maintained as permanent open space. All street tree and
landscaping requirements shall comply with the project design criteria attached as exhibit D of the Mapleton-west
development agreement. (Ord. 2003-32, 11-19-2003, eff. 12-11-2003)
18.56A.130: ENFORCEMENT:
If the city deems that open space and parks are not being kept to Mapleton City standards, the city shall have said
improvements and maintenance done and any such expenses by the city shall be assessed to any of the
homeowners' associations of the SDP-1 zone. (Ord. 2003-32, 11-19-2003, eff. 12-11-2003)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 392/571
18.56A.140: EXCEPTIONS TO DEVELOPMENT AND DESIGN STANDARDS:
The Mapleton-west development agreement and development standards associated with this zone shall be strictly
construed. No variations shall be made from the development plan and standards adopted in the zone unless
expressly approved by the city council with recommendation from the planning commission for the purpose of
achieving better design. In taking such action, the planning commission and city council shall:
A. Make a finding that the amendment will result in better design; and
B. Be bound by the standards set forth in the Mapleton-west development agreement. (Ord. 2003-32, 11-19-2003, eff.
12-11-2003)
Chapter 18.56B
SDP-2 SUNRISE RANCH SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT PLAN ZONE
18.56B.010: PURPOSE:
The purposes of the SDP-2 Zone include the implementation of the Sunrise Ranch Annexation and Development
Agreement and to facilitate a unique residential development with a wide range of residential building types and
planned open spaces. (Ord. 2018-02, 3-21-2018, eff. 4-28-2018)
18.56B.020: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory buildings, in conjunction with and incidental to the main use of the property, such as a shed or detached
garage no larger than forty percent (40%) of the main building size, and no taller than the main structure.
Attached residential dwellings restricted to persons fifty five (55) years of age and older (not to exceed 4 units per
building). Ten percent (10%) of these units are not required to be age restricted.
Attached townhomes (not to exceed 4 units per building).
Community clubhouse.
Cultural or civic activities.
Home occupations (subject to section 18.84.380 of this title) with the following additional restrictions:
A. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection 18.84.380D7 of this title, parking shall be further limited to the
number of available off street parking spaces at the home. Off street parking spaces shall be in the driveway,
garage, or other designated parking spaces for the home. Clients and employees must park in the off street
parking spaces designated for the home.
B. Clients of the home occupation shall not park or store vehicles at the premises overnight.
Park and recreation areas.
Single-family detached dwellings.
Swimming pools and related equipment.
Utility facilities. (Ord. 2018-02, 3-21-2018, eff. 4-28-2018)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 393/571
18.56B.030: CONDITIONAL USES:
Places of worship.
Public schools. (Ord. 2018-02, 3-21-2018, eff. 4-28-2018)
18.56B.040: LOT AREA:
There shall be no minimum lot size within the SDP-2 Zone. (Ord. 2018-02, 3-21-2018, eff. 4-28-2018)
18.56B.050: RESIDENTIAL DENSITY:
The maximum number of residential units shall not exceed five hundred forty (540), with an average density of
approximately four (4) units per acre. (Ord. 2018-02, 3-21-2018, eff. 4-28-2018)
18.56B.060: LOT TYPES AND BUILDING RESTRICTIONS:
The Sunrise Ranch project includes the following building types, which are defined by geographical area as shown in
the Sunrise Ranch Annexation and Development Agreement:
A. Single family detached estate lots;
B. Single family detached cottage lots;
C. Townhomes; and
D. Attached age-restricted residential lots. (Ord. 2018-02, 3-21-2018, eff. 4-28-2018)
18.56B.070: SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
A. Single Family Detached Estate Lots: The following setback standards apply to single family detached estate lots:
1. Front Yard/Garage Requirements: No dwelling shall have a front yard setback of less than twenty five feet (25')
measured from the front property line to the foundation of the dwelling. For dwellings that have garage doors that
face the street, the garage shall be set back a minimum of five feet (5') from the front of the dwelling or covered
entry way.
2. Side Yard/Rear Yard: No dwelling shall have a side yard setback of less than ten feet (10') as measured from the
side property line to the foundation of the dwelling. No dwelling shall have a rear yard setback of less than
twenty feet (20') measured from the rear property line to the foundation of the dwelling.
3. Side Yard; Corner Lots: When a side yard on a corner lot faces a street, the same setbacks as described in
subsection A1, "Front Yard/Garage Requirements", of this section shall apply.
B. Single Family Detached Cottage Lots: The following setback standards apply to single family detached cottage lots:
1. Front Yard/Garage Requirements: No dwelling shall have a front yard setback of less than twenty feet (20')
measured from the front property line to the foundation of the dwelling. For dwellings that have garage doors that
face the street, the garage shall be set back a minimum of five feet (5') from the front of the dwelling or covered
entry way.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 394/571
2. Side Yard/Rear Yard: No dwelling shall have a side yard setback of less than five feet (5') measured from the
side property line to the foundation of the dwelling. No dwelling shall have a rear yard setback of less than
twenty feet (20') measured from the rear property line to the foundation of the dwelling.
3. Side Yard; Corner Lots: When a side yard on a corner lot faces a street, the same setbacks as described in
subsection B1, "Front Yard/Garage Requirements", of this section shall apply.
C. Townhomes And Attached Age-Restricted Residential Units: The following setback standards apply to townhomes
and the attached age-restricted residential units:
1. Front Yard/Garage Requirements: No dwelling shall have a front yard setback of less than fifteen feet (15')
measured from the front property line to the foundation of the dwelling.
2. Side Yard: There shall be minimum setback of ten feet (10') between buildings. No side yard setback is required
for attached units.
3. Side Yard; Corner Lots: When a side yard on a corner lot faces a street, the same setbacks as described in
subsection C1, "Front Yard/Garage Requirements", of this section shall apply.
D. Garages And Sidewalks: For dwellings that have garage doors that face the street, the garage shall be set back a
minimum of twenty feet (20') from the back of sidewalk.
E. Projections Into Yards: The following structures may be erected on or projected into any required yard:
1. Fences and walls in conformance with this Code and approval by the Planning and Zoning Director. Other City
codes or ordinances also apply.
2. Landscape elements including trees, shrubs, agricultural crops, and other plants.
3. Necessary appurtenances for utility service.
4. The structures listed below may project into a minimum front or rear yard not more than four feet (4'), and into a
minimum side yard not more than two feet (2'):
a. Cornices, eaves, belt courses, sills, buttresses, or other similar architectural features.
b. Fireplace structures and bays, provided that they are not wider than eight feet (8') measured generally parallel
to the wall of which they are a part.
c. Stairways, balconies, door stoops, fire escapes, awnings, and planter boxes or masonry planters not
exceeding twenty four inches (24") in height.
5. A detached garage for rear loaded town homes may encroach within ten feet (10') of the rear property line. (Ord.
2018-02, 3-21-2018, eff. 4-28-2018)
18.56B.080: BUILDING HEIGHT:
No building or structure shall exceed a height of two (2) stories with a maximum of forty feet (40') as defined in section
18.08.010 of this title. (Ord. 2018-02, 3-21-2018, eff. 4-28-2018)
18.56B.090: DESIGN STANDARDS:
There shall be a variety of architectural styles and building plans within the project to encourage an aesthetically
pleasing and visually interesting residential community.
A. Detached Units (Estate And Cottage Lots): A dwelling shall not have the same architectural design as an adjacent
dwelling or a dwelling directly across the street.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 395/571
B. Town Homes: At least fifty percent (50%) of the town home units shall be rear loaded units. Each unit must have a
well-defined entrance celebrated by a front porch or covered entryway. The massing of the front facade of each
unit shall be broken up into smaller components to avoid unrelieved vertical walls.
C. Attached Age-Restricted Units: There shall be a minimum of five (5) different exterior building plans for the attached
units. The building plans shall be differentiated in at least three (3) of the following ways:
1. Color.
2. Materials.
3. Fenestration.
4. Roof line.
5. Architectural style. (Ord. 2018-02, 3-21-2018, eff. 4-28-2018)
18.56B.100: STREETS:
Private streets in some areas of the project may be proposed in accordance with subsection 17.12.055B of this Code,
however, in no case shall any street be gated. The final street cross sections shall be approved during the subdivision
plat process. (Ord. 2018-02, 3-21-2018, eff. 4-28-2018)
18.56B.110: PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
A. Each dwelling unit shall have a two-car garage with minimum dimensions of twenty feet (20') by twenty feet (20').
B. One off-street parking space shall be required for every four (4) town home units for guest and overflow parking.
(Ord. 2018-02, 3-21-2018, eff. 4-28-2018)
18.56B.120: HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION:
A homeowners' association or associations and covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC&Rs) shall be established
to maintain all private streets, sidewalks, landscaping and other common areas in accordance with the concept plan,
preliminary plat and final plat. Prior to receiving a building permit for any structure in the development, the
owner/developer shall provide proof to Mapleton City that a unit owners' association has been established for the
property on which the building permit is requested and that the CC&Rs establish an age restriction on ownership and
occupancy of the senior residential units. (Ord. 2018-02, 3-21-2018, eff. 4-28-2018)
Chapter 18.58
NC-1 NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL ZONE
18.58.010: APPLICABLE REGULATIONS:
Within the NC-1 zone the location and use of buildings, structures and land are regulated and restricted as set forth in
this chapter. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
18.58.020: GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 396/571
The purpose of the NC-1 zone is to create a mixture of light commercial activities and residential uses. All project
approvals shall be compatible with adjacent residential uses. The zone is characterized by clean, well lighted streets
and pedestrianways, with ample off street parking for the convenience and safety of the public. Generally, all
commercial activities should be confined within approved on site structures. Representative uses in this zone include,
but are not limited to, bakeries, beauty and barber shops, small professional offices, single-family dwellings, electrical
appliance repair, and the like. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
18.58.030: PERMITTED USES:
There are no permitted uses for the NC-1 neighborhood commercial zone. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
18.58.040: CONDITIONAL USES:
All uses shall be conditional uses and must be compatible with the general characteristics of the NC-1 zone. Examples
are as noted, but not limited to, the following:
Bakeries.
Beauty and barber shops.
Bed and breakfast.
Book, stationery, and office supply stores.
Camera and photographic supply stores.
Computer goods and services.
Electrical appliance repair (light).
Florist shops.
Gift stores, craft stores, or antique stores.
Photocopy centers.
Professional offices.
Restaurants (no drive-through).
Shoe repair.
Uses will be strictly prohibited next to a residential zone that involve open storage of merchandise or equipment, trade
or industry that is offensive by reason of the emission of odor, smoke, gas, vibration or noise, obstructive lighting or
uses which generate significantly more traffic than adjacent residential uses. The business shall not be open to the
public before six o'clock (6:00) A.M or after ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
The planning commission may impose conditions that may mitigate concerns of adjacent residents. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-
20-2002)
18.58.050: RESIDENTIAL USES:
A. The business owner/manager may be allowed to reside in the structure if the structure meets the definition of a
dwelling unit and is located on a lot at least one acre in size. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 397/571
B. Single-family dwellings (lot size and density shall conform to the nearest residential zone), and accessory buildings
subject to the requirements of section 18.26.020 of this title. (Ord. 2014-02, 1-7-2014, eff. 2-2-2014)
18.58.060: LOTS, BUILDINGS, YARDS, AND OPEN SPACE:
A. The structures in the NC-1 Zone must be placed on approved building lots. Each lot must contain a minimum of one
hundred twenty feet (120') of frontage, upon a publicly maintained street, and a minimum of eighteen thousand
(18,000) square feet.
B. All projects shall comply with the provisions of chapter 18.92, "Commercial Design Standards", of this title which is
on file in the City. (Ord. 2017-01, 4-19-2017, eff. 5-12-2017)
C. In order to accomplish the intention of the NC-1 Zone, structures in the NC-1 Zone may not have a footprint which
exceeds thirty percent (30%) of the lot size.
D. All approved projects shall meet any other requirements and restrictions relevant to the NC-1 Zone found in chapter
18.26 of this title. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
18.58.070: OTHER REQUIREMENTS:
A. Signs: All signs erected in the NC-1 Zone shall be in conformance with the sign provisions of chapter 18.86 of this
title.
B. Uses Within Buildings: All uses established in the NC-1 Zone, including storage, shall be conducted entirely within a
fully enclosed building. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
C. Walls, Fences And Screening:
1. No wall, fence or opaque hedge or screening material higher than thirty six inches (36") shall be maintained
within a required front yard in an NC-1 Zone.
2. A decorative masonry wall at least six feet (6') in height shall be erected along all property lines which lie
immediately adjacent to any residential zone, except that alternative screening may be used, if jointly agreed to
in writing by surrounding property owners which may include a landscape hedge of six feet (6') at a two (2) year
maturity, wood fence or a combination of landscaping with chainlink with or without slats. In the case where there
is mutual agreement by adjoining property owners and approved by the Planning Commission or its designee,
this requirement may be waived.
3. All mechanical equipment (i.e., air conditioners, fans, pumps, etc.) shall be located within, or on the side of the
building, or on the roof with parapet walls. Any mechanical equipment located on the outside of the building
within twenty five feet (25') of the nearest residential use/dwelling must have a visual/noise barrier (masonry wall
or landscaping) that completely surrounds the equipment and extends at least one foot (1') above the
equipment, with the exception that any equipment located outside of the building must have the aforementioned
visual noise barrier regardless of its distance from a residential use. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002; amd. Ord. 2017-
01, 4-19-2017, eff. 5-12-2017)
18.58.080: TEMPORARY STRUCTURES:
Temporary structures are not permitted, except if they are bonded for removal and removed within one (1) year's time,
as currently allowed by this Code. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 398/571
Chapter 18.60
CC-1 CENTRAL COMMERCIAL ZONE
18.60.010: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
18.60.020: GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS:
A. Intent: The CC-1 Central Commercial Zone has been established as a district in which the primary use of the land is
for neighborhood retail and business purposes. It is intended that this zone shall be the dominant shopping center
of the City. The uses characteristic of this zone include neighborhood and community oriented retail and offices.
The CC-1 Zone is characterized by a pedestrian oriented streetscape with ample landscaping. Parking will be
convenient and will not detract from the streetscape. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
18.60.030: REGULATIONS GENERALLY:
In order to accomplish the objectives and purposes of this title and to promote the characteristics of this zone, the
following regulations shall apply in the CC-1 Central Commercial Zone. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
18.60.040: PERMITTED USES:
Auditorium.
Cafes and delis, with or without outdoor dining.
Child care, commercial.
Clinic, animal.
Club.
Commercial convenience store.
Commercial mixed use.
Convalescent home, rest home, nursing home.
Disabled care facility.
Existing single family dwellings that have been legally established on a legal lot of record may be maintained, added
onto and/or rebuilt. Single-family dwellings shall conform to the standards (height, setbacks, etc.) of the nearest
residential zone, and accessory buildings subject to the requirements of section 18.26.020 of this title.
Financial institutions.
Funeral home.
Office, general.
Office, intensive.
Office, medical.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 399/571
Recreation facility, public.
Restaurant.
Retail and service commercial. (Ord. 2018-08, 6-6-2018, eff. 6-28-2018)
18.60.045: CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES:
A. Conditionally Permitted Uses: Uses must be compatible with the intent of the zone as described above. The
conditions imposed upon these uses must fall under one or more of the following categories:
1. Safety for persons and property;
2. Health and sanitation;
3. Environmental concerns;
4. Compliance with the General Plan or special characteristics of the zoning district;
5. Performance, specifically the developer's ability to complete the project;
6. Traffic circulation and parking.
7. Aesthetics, based on adopted design standards.
8. Compatibility with existing uses.
Prior to the Planning Commission's review of a conditional use permit, the applicant must have the plan
reviewed by the Development Review Committee.
B. Conditional Uses: The following uses and structures are permitted in the CC-1 Zone only after a conditional use
permit has been issued, and subject to the terms and conditions thereof. Prior to the Planning Commission's
review of a conditional use permit, the applicant must have the plan reviewed by the Development Review
Committee.
Athletic clubs, bodybuilding studios, spas, aerobic centers.
Drive-through restaurant.
Entertainment center.
Gas station.
Hotel/motel. (Ord. 2018-08, 6-6-2018, eff. 6-28-2018)
18.60.050: LOTS, BUILDINGS, YARDS, AND OPEN SPACES:
There is no minimum lot area requirement in the CC-1 Zone except as may be dictated by off street parking
requirements, adequate circulation, and property site utilization. There will be a minimum of a seventy five foot (75')
frontage on a public street. All projects shall comply with the provisions of chapter 18.92, "Commercial Design
Standards", of this title which is on file in the City. (Ord. 2017-01, 4-19-2017, eff. 5-12-2017)
Chapter 18.64
GC-1 GENERAL COMMERCIAL ZONE
18.64.010: GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 400/571
A. The GC-1 General Commercial Zone has been established as a district in which the primary use of the land is for
retail and commercial establishments. The objectives in establishing this zone are to:
1. Designate the most appropriate land within the City for light commercial and general retail, and to prevent the
scattering of commercial uses into surrounding zones;
2. Encourage the construction of and continued use of the land for commercial buildings;
3. Discourage the use of the land for dwellings and for nuisance industries or any other uses which would thwart or
substantially interfere with the use of the land for its primary purpose;
4. Discourage "strip" or "linear" commercial along Highway 89 and adjacent arterial and collector roadways.
B. This zone is characterized by a mixture of businesses, retail services, commercial services and craft shops.
C. The GC-1 Zone shall be limited to those areas as shown on the Mapleton City General Plan, or more specifically,
those areas along Highway 89 and the intersections of the City's arterial and collector roads. Said intersections
along Highway 89 shall include 800 North, 400 North, Maple Street, 800 South, 1600 South and 4600 South.
Mapleton City anticipates that the most valued land, which has direct frontage onto Highway 89, and corner lots
onto collector and arterial streets, should be the main retail area of the GC-1 Zone. Areas behind retail commercial
are best suited for light commercial and nonretail uses. (Ord. 2006-05, 4-12-2006)
18.64.020: INTENT:
The intent of the GC-1 Zone is to provide a zone primarily for the accommodation of commercial and retail uses, as
well as professional offices. The GC-1 Zone is not intended for heavy commercial, manufacturing or warehousing.
This zone shall be used to promote or establish commercial areas in which Mapleton City's rural atmosphere will be
enhanced. The location of the GC-1 Zone shall be close to major arterial streets to provide convenient access for
higher traffic volumes without hazard and without traversing through a residential area. The GC-1 Zone shall not be
applied to the internal areas of residential neighborhoods. Uses characteristic of this zone are retail businesses,
offices, public buildings, and minor automobile services. (Ord. 2006-05, 4-12-2006)
18.64.030: PERMITTED USES:
The following principal uses are permitted in the GC-1 Zone. Uses not specified as a permitted use or a conditional
use as defined in section 18.64.035 of this chapter, or any use of land contrary to those uses specifically allowed
herein, shall be considered "prohibited" in the GC-1 Zone.
Assembly use.
Athletic clubs, bodybuilding studios, spas, aerobic centers.
Auditorium.
Cafes and delis, with or without outdoor dining.
Car wash.
Child care, commercial.
Clinic, animal.
Club.
Commercial convenience store.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 401/571
Commercial kennel.
Commercial mixed use.
Commercial nursery.
Commercial parking lot.
Commercial repair services.
Comprehensive mental care treatment.
Convalescent home, rest home, nursing home.
Disabled care facility.
Drive-through restaurant.
Entertainment center.
Financial institutions.
Hospital/medical center.
Office, general.
Office, intensive.
Office, medical.
Outdoor storage.
Recreation facility, commercial.
Recreation facility, private.
Recreation facility, public.
Restaurants.
Retail and service commercial.
Shopping center.
Vehicle rental.
Veterinary hospital. (Ord. 2018-08, 6-6-2018, eff. 6-28-2018)
18.64.035: CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES:
A. Conditional Use Categories: Uses must be compatible with the intent of this zone as described above. The
conditions imposed upon these uses must fall under one or more of the following categories:
1. Safety for persons and property;
2. Health and sanitation;
3. Environmental concerns;
4. Compliance with the General Plan or special characteristics of the zoning district;
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 402/571
5. Performance, specifically the developer's ability to complete the project;
6. Traffic circulation and parking;
7. Aesthetics, based on adopted design standards.
8. Compatibility with existing uses.
B. Conditional Uses: The following uses and structures are permitted in the GC-1 Zone only after a conditional use
permit has been issued, and subject to the terms and conditions thereof. Prior to the Planning Commission's
review of a conditional use permit, the applicant must have the plan reviewed by the Development Review
Committee.
Gas station.
Gas station, cardlock fueling station.
Gas station with vehicle repair.
Hotel/motel.
Liquor store.
Vehicle repair.
Vehicle sales (minor).
Vehicle sales and service (major). (Ord. 2018-08, 6-6-2018, eff. 6-28-2018)
18.64.040: MIXED COMMERCIAL AND RESIDENTIAL USES:
A. Conditionally Permitted: A mixed use commercial and single-family residential structure shall be conditionally
permitted subject to the following required conditions:
1. Single-family residential dwelling units shall be located directly above the commercial use on the second or third
story of the building. No basement units shall be permitted. No residential units shall be permitted above or
below another residential dwelling unit.
2. All residential dwelling units must meet all applicable requirements of the International Residential Building Code
as adopted by Mapleton City. Each dwelling unit will be of sufficient size to provide for a salubrious environment
for the enjoyment of the residents who will occupy it. Each dwelling unit shall have a kitchen suitable for cooking
and preparing meals, a bathroom with shower and bathing facilities, a living room and a bedroom. Studio
apartments are permitted so long as they provide space for the amenities as described in this section. (Ord.
2006-05, 4-12-2006)
3. There shall be no density restrictions for single-family residential dwelling units. Rather, the site and parking
requirements will be the limiting factor to the overall number of residential dwelling units. However, the Planning
Commission, based on concern for health, safety and welfare, may limit the total number of proposed residential
dwelling units in excess of ten (10). (Ord. 2017-01, 4-19-2017, eff. 5-12-2017)
18.64.050: LOTS, BUILDINGS, YARDS, AND OPEN SPACES:
There is no minimum lot area requirement in the GC-1 Zone except as may be dictated by off street parking
requirements, adequate circulation, and property site utilization. There will be a minimum of a seventy five foot (75')
frontage on a public street. All projects shall comply with the provisions of chapter 18.92, "Commercial Design
Standards", of this title which is on file in the City. (Ord. 2017-01, 4-19-2017, eff. 5-12-2017)
18.64.060: OUTSIDE STORAGE PROHIBITED:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 403/571
The outside storage of any equipment, vehicles or otherwise, is strictly prohibited within any required setback areas.
Any vacant land or parcel of property within the GC-1 Zone shall also be prohibited from storage of vehicles,
commercial vehicles, building materials, weeds, junk and other debris. (Ord. 2017-01, 4-19-2017, eff. 5-12-2017)
Chapter 18.72
I&M-1 INDUSTRIAL AND MANUFACTURING ZONE
18.72.010: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The I&M-1 Industrial and Manufacturing Zone is specific to areas of the City as identified on the Mapleton City General
Plan map. The I&M-1 Zone shall not be applied to areas designated on the General Plan map as "commercial" or any
other uses. The primary purpose of the I&M-1 Zone is to allow for general "cottage industry" activities such as
warehousing and incidental office space, light manufacturing, minor industrial uses and heavier commercial uses not
allowed in the GC-1 Zone. (Ord. 2004-30, 11-3-2004, eff. 12-1-2004)
18.72.020: PERMITTED USES:
The following principal uses are permitted in the I&M-1 Zone. Uses not specified as a permitted use or a conditional
use as defined in section 18.72.025 of this chapter, shall be considered "prohibited" in the I&M-1 Zone. The uses
below are permitted on individual lots or commercial condominium projects as defined by title 17, chapter 17.03,
"Condominiums", of this Code.
Agriculture.
Assembly use.
Cafes and delis, subject to the design standards found in chapter 18.92 of this title.
Car wash.
Child care, commercial.
Clinic, animal.
Commercial convenience store.
Commercial parking lot.
Commercial repair services.
Comprehensive mental care treatment.
Construction/contractor offices (no storage or fuel pumps).
Drive-through restaurant.
Entertainment center.
Financial institutions.
Gas station.
Gas station, cardlock fueling station.
Gas station with vehicle repair.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 404/571
Machine shop.
Manufacturing, light.
Office, general.
Office, intensive.
Office, medical.
Outdoor storage.
Parks.
Pawn shop.
Recreation facility, commercial.
Recreation facility, public.
Restaurant.
Retail and service commercial.
School.
Sewage pumping stations.
Sports facilities.
Vehicle assembly.
Vehicle-related use.
Vehicle rental.
Vehicle repair.
Vehicle sales (minor).
Veterinary hospital.
Warehouse/distribution. (Ord. 2018-08, 6-6-2018, eff. 6-28-2018)
18.72.025: CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES:
A. Conditions: Uses must be compatible with the intent of this zone. The conditions imposed upon these uses must fall
under one or more of the following categories:
1. Conditions relating to safety for persons and property;
2. Conditions relating to health and sanitation;
3. Conditions relating to environmental concerns;
4. Conditions relating to compliance with the General Plan or special characteristics of the zoning district;
5. Conditions relating to performance, specifically the developer's ability to complete the project;
6. Conditions relating to traffic circulation and parking;
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 405/571
7. Conditions relating to aesthetics, based on adopted design standards.
8. Compatibility with existing uses.
B. Plan Review: Prior to the City Council's review of a conditional use permit, the applicant must have the plan
reviewed by the Development Review Committee and the Planning Commission. Any new project, and all new
buildings within the I&M-1 Zone shall be a conditional use.
C. Uses: The following is a list of conditional uses:
Agribusiness.
Construction/contractor offices including outdoor storage areas and/or gasoline/diesel pumps and fuel storage
tanks shall be subject to the following requirements:
1. Outdoor storage and/or gasoline/diesel pumps shall be for company use only. No processing of materials or
retail uses are permitted.
2. Gasoline/diesel pumps and fuel storage tanks shall be subject to the requirements of section 18.84.210,
"Location Of Gasoline/Diesel Pumps And Fuel Storage Tanks", of this title.
3. Outdoor stored items shall not exceed ten feet (10') in height, and shall not include dirt, manure, gravel,
rocks, sand, bark, or similar materials, unless the items are stored in bags or other individually sealed
containers. Outdoor stored items shall be stored and maintained in a neat and orderly manner. No junk or
junked vehicles shall be stored within the outdoor storage areas.
4. The proposed office shall have frontage and access off of Highway 89 (1600 West).
5. The Planning Commission shall have the authority to require additional conditions to avoid the creation of
nuisances to adjacent properties and to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.
Salvage yard.
Storage yard. (Ord. 2018-08, 6-6-2018, eff. 6-28-2018)
18.72.030: SITE PLAN APPROVALS:
All proposed new development within the I&M-1 Zone shall be required to submit a site plan, which complies with all
the requirements listed in section 18.72.040 of this chapter. Said site plan shall be conditionally approved by the
Planning Commission. As a means of mitigating potential safety hazards or significant adverse visual impacts, the
Planning Commission may require the installation of landscape features or peripheral landscape screens. Where
landscaping is required the site plan shall, in addition to all other elements, contain a landscape plan showing the
locations of landscape areas, the location and types of all proposed plantings and other landscape features, and the
location of required sprinkler systems. The Planning Commission may also require additional fencing requirements,
changes to the parking lot and traffic flow. (Ord. 2004-30, 11-3-2004, eff. 12-1-2004)
18.72.040: LOTS, BUILDINGS, YARDS, AND OPEN SPACES:
There is no minimum lot area requirement in the I&M-1 Zone except as may be dictated by off street parking
requirements, adequate circulation, and property site utilization. There will be a minimum of a seventy five foot (75')
frontage on a public street. The maximum building height (including mechanical equipment) is forty feet (40') as
defined in section 18.08.010 of this title. (Ord. 2013-05, 6-18-2013, eff. 7-12-2013)
A. Setbacks: The following setback specifications are required:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 406/571
1. Thirty foot (30') front yard setback if parking areas are proposed or existing in front of the building or structure.
Within the front yard setback, there will be a six foot (6') separation between the back of the curb and edge of the
sidewalk (where required) nearest the curb. If the required parking areas are located on the side or in the back of
the building or structure, then the front yard setback shall be no less than twenty feet (20'). Corner lots shall be
considered a front yard, and all setbacks shall apply. On local streets, fifteen feet (15') of the front yard area shall
be maintained in landscaping in conformance to chapter 18.90 of this title. On collector or arterial streets, all of
the front yard shall be landscaped in conformance to chapter 18.90 of this title.
2. Except for corner lots, each lot in the I&M-1 Zone shall be required to have a ten foot (10') landscaped side yard
setback. The side yard shall be landscaped in conformance to chapter 18.90 of this title.
3. Each lot in the I&M-1 Zone shall be required to have a fifteen foot (15') landscaped rear yard setback. If all of the
required parking is located within a rear yard area, or in back of the building, then ten foot (10') landscaped
setback shall apply. The rear yard shall be landscaped in conformance to chapter 18.90 of this title.
B. Screening And Landscaping Requirements:
1. A sight obscuring fence of six feet (6') in height shall be required along all side and rear property lines behind the
front edge of the primary building. Said fence shall be masonry, vinyl, chainlink with closely prewoven vinyl
privacy slats, or other closely equivalent materials approved by the Planning Commission. The fence may be
topped by a set of 3-strand barbed wire up to twelve inches (12") in height. The applicant must demonstrate that
the landscaped screening will be sufficient to protect the future adjacent uses from noise, lights, glare, and other
commercial or industrial nuisances.
2. All landscaped areas shall conform to chapter 18.90 of this title. Furthermore, the landscaping will contain ten
(10) trees per acre, or a fraction thereof, and be at least one inch (1") caliper, measured three feet (3') from the
ground.
3. All mechanical equipment shall be located within or on the side of the building or on the roof with parapet walls
and not within the required setbacks. Any mechanical equipment located on the outside of the building must
have a visual/noise barrier that completely surrounds the equipment and extends at least one foot (1') above the
equipment.
C. Parking And Driveway Access: Parking will be required to be in compliance with section 18.84.270 of this title.
Parking areas will be screened from adjacent roads with landscaped berms. There shall be no parking allowed in
any required landscaping area. Driveways shall not encompass more than thirty percent (30%) of a required front
or side yard. Drive access for parcels or lots located along any State highway shall be limited to the adjoining side
street if present. Otherwise one curb cut and driveway access will be permitted regardless of what would be
allowed by the Utah Department of Transportation, however, the stricter requirement shall apply.
D. Drainage: All lot drainage shall be retained on site. (Ord. 2013-01, 1-15-2013, eff. 2-7-2013)
18.72.050: PROJECT PLAN APPROVALS:
Concurrent with any request to rezone property to the I&M-1 Zone; or if the property is currently zoned I&M-1, prior to
any approval for a building permit, a preliminary project plan shall be submitted to and approved by the Mapleton City
Planning Commission. Said preliminary project plan shall be drawn to scale and shall contain the following
information:
A. Location of all existing and proposed buildings and structures on the site, including an indication of the proposed
uses;
B. The location of all parking spaces as required by the Planning Commission, driveways and points of vehicular
ingress and egress;
C. A conceptual signing plan showing the location and size of typical signs;
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 407/571
D. A conceptual landscaping plan subject to the requirements in chapter 18.90 of this title showing planting materials
to be used together with the location of fence, walls, hedges, and decorative materials;
E. Preliminary elevations of the buildings showing the general appearance and types of exterior materials to be used.
F. Accessory structures less than five hundred (500) square feet in size shall be approved by the Planning Director as
long as the structure does not encroach on any of the required parking or required landscape areas. Furthermore,
building additions less than five hundred (500) square feet shall also be approved by the Planning Director so long
as they meet the aforementioned criteria, and as long as the addition does not physically alter the character of the
building. Accessory buildings and additions shall be architecturally compatible with the main structure, including
exterior building materials and colors.
G. Prior to the construction of any building or structure in the I&M-1 Zone, a final project plan shall be submitted and
approved by the City Council, after a recommendation from the Planning Commission. Said project plan shall be
drawn to scale and shall contain all required information designated on the application checklist. The Planning
Commission may require a traffic study be submitted prior to a final project plan recommendation.
H. Any failure to submit a final project plan within one year of the approval of the preliminary project plan shall
terminate all proceedings and render the preliminary plan null and void, and the Planning Commission may also
take further action to rezone the property as per section 18.12.010 of this title. (Ord. 2004-30, 11-3-2004, eff. 12-1-
2004)
18.72.060: UTILITY REQUIREMENTS:
All buildings used for human occupancy shall provide for culinary water and domestic sewage disposal. (Ord. 2004-30,
11-3-2004, eff. 12-1-2004)
18.72.070: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
Where the use of activity is one which requires the prior approval of other local, State or Federal review agencies,
evidence of such approval shall be submitted to the City as part of the application documents. (Ord. 2004-30, 11-3-
2004, eff. 12-1-2004)
Chapter 18.74
M&HM-1 MINING AND HEAVY MANUFACTURING ZONE
18.74.010: LEGISLATIVE INTENT:
The M&HM-1 mining and heavy manufacturing zone covers that portion of the city which, primarily due to access and
location is best suited as a location for mining and manufacturing activities that can be continued and established in a
manner that they will be protected from the encroachment of residential, commercial and similar incompatible uses
and in a manner which will serve to mitigate the effect of undesirable characteristics of industrial activity upon
surrounding areas. Uses characteristic of this zone are manufacturing, compounding and pressing. (Ord. 2002-01, 1-
9-2002)
18.74.020: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses and structures, and no others, are permitted in the M&HM-1 zone:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 408/571
Agriculture and agribusiness.
Converted paper and paperboard products manufacturing.
Cut stone and stone products production.
Cutlery, hand tools, and general hardware manufacturing.
Flat glass product manufacturing.
Furniture and fixtures.
Glass and glassware production (pressed or blown).
Manufacturing of aircraft and accessories.
Manufacturing of marine craft and accessories.
Manufacturing of new house trailers and campers.
Mining of aggregates or minerals.
Pottery and related products production.
Power substations.
Sewage pumping stations.
Sexually oriented business (SOB).
Storage and processing of mulch.
Textile mill. (Ord. 2002-01, 1-9-2002)
18.74.030: AREA AND WIDTH REQUIREMENTS:
There is no minimum lot area requirement in the M&HM-1 zone except as may be dictated by off street parking
requirements, adequate circulation, and property site utilization. There will be a minimum of one hundred fifty foot
(150') frontage on a public street.
The following landscaping and setback specifications are required:
A. Thirty foot (30') landscaped front yard setback. Within the front yard setback, there will be six foot (6') separation
between the back of the curb and the edge of sidewalk nearest the curb, landscaped with trees;
B. Ten foot (10') landscaped side yard setback;
C. Fifteen foot (15') landscaped rear yard setback from any uses abutting a residential zone. A decorative masonry
wall at least six feet (6') in height may be required along all property lines which lies immediately adjacent to any
residential zone.
D. The landscaping will contain trees of at least two inch (2") caliper, measured three feet (3') from the ground. (Ord.
2002-01, 1-9-2002)
E. The maximum building height (including mechanical equipment) is forty feet (40') as defined in section 18.08.010 of
this title. (Ord. 2013-05, 6-18-2013, eff. 7-12-2013)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 409/571
All mechanical equipment shall be located within or on the side of the building or on the roof with parapet walls and
not within the required setbacks.
Parking will be required to be in compliance with the ITE (Institute of Traffic Engineers) or American Planning
Association recommendations. Parking areas will be screened from adjacent roads with landscaped terms. No
parking will be allowed in any of the setbacks. (Ord. 2002-01, 1-9-2002)
18.74.040: ACCESS REQUIREMENTS:
A frontage road or perpendicular road to Highway 89. Access to the frontage road will be one thousand three hundred
twenty feet (1,320') apart and no minimum lot size. (Ord. 2002-01, 1-9-2002)
18.74.050: LOCATION REQUIREMENTS:
No frontage shall be allowed on Highway 89. (Ord. 2002-01, 1-9-2002)
18.74.060: UTILITY REQUIREMENTS:
Utility requirements shall meet Mapleton City standard drawings and specifications. (Ord. 2002-01, 1-9-2002)
18.74.070: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
A. Where the use or activity is one which requires the prior approval of State or Federal review agencies, evidence or
such approval shall be submitted to the City as part of the application documents.
B. As a means of mitigating potential safety hazards or significant adverse visual impacts, the City may require the
installation of landscape features or peripheral landscape screens. Where landscaping is required the site plan
shall, in addition to all other elements, contain a landscape plan showing the locations of landscape areas, the
location and types of all proposed plantings and other landscape features, and the location of required sprinkler
systems. (Ord. 2002-01, 1-9-2002)
Chapter 18.76
TDR TRANSFERABLE DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS OVERLAY ZONE
18.76.010: CREATED:
There is hereby created a transferable development rights (TDR) overlay zone which may be applied to parcels of
land in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. When applied to specific property, the TDR overlay zones shall
be denominated as a sending site (TDR-S) or a receiving site (TDR-R) as set forth in section 18.76.045 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2005-16, 11-16-2005, eff. 11-16-2005)
18.76.020: PURPOSE:
The purposes of the TDR overlay zone are to:
A. Promote the preservation of agricultural lands, rural open space, scenic vistas, critical and sensitive lands, natural
hazard areas, and natural features which are designated by the Mapleton City general plan as important to
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 410/571
preserve, and for the benefit of the citizens of Mapleton City;
B. Discourage development in areas deemed hazardous and in areas where delivery of city services may be difficult to
provide; or have extraordinary costs in servicing an area, such as hillsides and mountainsides;
C. Provide compensation to the owners of property from which development rights are transferred;
D. Provide a method whereby development rights may be transferred from sending sites to receiving sites in order to
accomplish the purposes set forth in subsections A, B, and C of this section. (Ord. 2005-16, 11-16-2005, eff. 11-16-
2005)
18.76.030: APPLICABILITY:
The procedures and requirements of this chapter shall apply to the creation and transfer of development rights from
sending sites to receiving sites. However, no property lying outside of the current corporate boundaries of Mapleton
City shall be eligible for consideration of a transferable development sending site. (Ord. 2005-16, 11-16-2005, eff. 11-
16-2005)
18.76.040: DESIGNATION OF SENDING AND RECEIVING AREAS:
A. The parcels of real property which may be preserved and protected by the transfer of development rights from such
parcels are those located within a sending area designated by the Mapleton City general plan, or as described in
this section. Those parcels of real property which are suitable for using development rights transferred from
sending sites are those parcels located within a receiving area designated by the Mapleton City general plan. In no
case shall an area be designated as a receiving area within any previously platted subdivision or land that has
previously received a change in the zone designation to a higher density zoning level. (Ord. 2005-16, 11-16-2005,
eff. 11-16-2005)
B. Receiving areas shall be located exclusively within the A-2, RA-1, planned residential community (PRC), planned
development (PD), planned residential development (PRD) and specific development plan (SDP) zones unless
otherwise authorized by the city council as part of an annexation agreement.
C. The city council may authorize the use of transferable development rights (TDRs) in conjunction with a rezone
request to A-2, RA-1, PRC, PRD, PD and SDP zones if the request is consistent with the general plan land use
map. (Ord. 2013-06, 7-16-2013, eff. 8-28-2013)
18.76.045: DESIGNATION OF SENDING AND RECEIVING SITES ON ZONING MAP:
Each sending site from which a development right is transferred shall be denominated on the official zoning map by
using the suffix "TDR-S" in combination with the underlying zoning designation of the property. However, if sending
site is property that is proposed to be deeded to the city, the land will be given the open space and parks (OS-P) zone
designation. Each receiving site to which a development right is transferred shall be denominated on the official zoning
map by using the suffix "TDR-R" in combination with the underlying zoning designation of the property. (Ord. 2005-16,
11-16-2005, eff. 11-16-2005)
18.76.050: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR A TRANSFER OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS
CERTIFICATE:
A. An eligible landowner or authorized representative must provide the following:
1. Name, address and telephone number of applicant and applicant's agent, if any;
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 411/571
2. Proof of ownership of the sending property;
3. Metes and bounds written legal description and plat prepared within ninety (90) days of the date of application
by a licensed surveyor;
4. Written description of the physical characteristics of the property;
5. Site plan which illustrates existing or proposed dwellings, historic structures, easements or other encumbrances;
and
6. The administrative fee relative to a transfer of development rights as established by the department of planning
and zoning ("the department"). (Ord. 2005-16, 11-16-2005, eff. 11-16-2005)
18.76.060: TRANSFERABLE DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS; CREATION; SENDING SITES:
A. Development rights shall be created and transferred only by means of documents, including a conservation
easement, and a severance of TDR credit certificate ("certificate of sending credits"), which meet the requirements
of this chapter.
B. In order to be eligible to transfer one or more development rights from a parcel of property, such property shall be
located within a sending area. If such property is located within the CE-1 zone, all property lying within this zone
and owned by the same person or related persons, as defined in section 1031 of the internal revenue service code,
shall be designated a sending site at the same time, whether the entire parcel is one parcel, contiguous parcels, or
noncontiguous parcels. The owner of such property shall apply for and receive approval to have the property
placed in the TDR overlay zone, pursuant to rezoning procedures set forth in this title.
1. Upon rezoning approval:
a. The property shall be shown on the official zoning map as a sending site by denominating it as a TDR-S
overlay zone;
b. A certificate of sending credits shall be issued to the property owner by the city recorder, pursuant to
subsection B2 of this section, indicating the total number of development rights which may be transferred from
the property; and
c. The property owner shall be eligible, after complying with subsection B2 of this section, to transfer
development rights from the property in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
2. No transferable development right certificate of sending credits shall be issued, until payment of an
administrative fee determined by the planning department, and no development right shall be transferred, unless
and until a conservation easement is recorded among the land records of Utah County, Utah, as required by
section 18.76.100 of this chapter on the property from which such development right originates.
3. After recordation of the easement, a landowner shall request that the city recorder issue the record owner of the
property a certificate of sending credits. Such certificate shall only be assigned in the name of the record owner
and only for the total number of credits assigned to the property.
C. Development rights attached to a particular sending site shall be determined and transferred by applying the
following rules:
1. Any sending site density bonus created by the application of this chapter shall be utilized only on a receiving
site.
2. Within all zones except the critical environment (CE-1) zone:
a. The total number of development rights which may be created for a sending site shall be equal to the site's
base zone density.
b. The number of development rights to be transferred at any one time may be determined by the sending site
owner so long as the total number of rights transferred does not exceed the total number of development
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 412/571
rights associated with the sending site. For example, if a property owner has ten (10) development rights in the
zone designation where the property is located, no more than ten (10) development rights can be transferred.
There shall be no additional density bonus except as allowed in this section.
3. Within the critical environment (CE-1) zone:
a. The total number of development rights which may be created for a sending site shall be equal to the site's
base zone density plus a density bonus granted pursuant to either subsection C3a(1) or C3a(2) of this section
(but not both):
(1) If a sending site owner transfers only the development rights associated with the site, the density bonus
shall be equal to three (3) times the site's base zone density. Thus, by way of example and not limitation, a
property owner who transfers only the development rights from a sending site having a base zone density of
ten (10) dwelling units would obtain a total of thirty (30) TDRs, illustrated as follows:
Base zone density: 10 TDRs (1 dwelling unit equals 1 TDR)
Density bonus: 20 TDRs
Total 30 TDRs
(2) If a sending site owner transfers fee title of the site to Mapleton City Corporation or the sending site owner
is Mapleton City Corporation, the density bonus shall be equal to five (5) times the site's base zone density.
Thus, by way of example and not limitation, a property owner who transfers development rights only from a
sending site having a base zone density of ten (10) dwelling units would obtain a total of fifty (50) TDRs,
illustrated as follows:
Base zone density: 10 TDRs (1 dwelling unit equals 1 TDR)
Density bonus: 40 TDRs
Total 50 TDRs
b. All development rights associated with property zoned CE-1 in a sending site shall be transferred at one time.
c. A parcel of land within the CE-1 zone may qualify as a sending site with the incentive bonuses established in
subsection C3a(1) or C3a(2) of this section only if the sending site parcel is the same parcel as it existed as of
December 15, 1998. Any parcel which has been subdivided, developed, or on which a structure has been built
after December 15, 1998, shall not qualify for the incentive bonuses established in subsection C3a(1) or
C3a(2) of this section. It is the intent of this chapter to cause owners of potential sending sites within the CE-1
zone to decide either to develop all or some portion of the potential sending sites, or to receive the incentive
bonus by transferring all development rights off of the land, but not to allow for both, or some degree of both.
D. The transfer of any development rights from a sending site shall be evidenced by a notice recorded among the land
records of Utah County, Utah, in a form approved by the city council, after receiving a recommendation from the
planning commission. Such notice shall indicate:
1. The total number of development rights which may be transferred from the sending site;
2. The number of development rights actually transferred at the time the notice is recorded;
3. The number of development rights remaining; and
4. Notice to any potential buyer of the sending site that:
a. Any remaining development rights may have been transferred from the property; and
b. The buyer should contact Mapleton City officials to determine the number of development rights, if any,
remaining on the sending site. (Ord. 2005-16, 11-16-2005, eff. 11-16-2005)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 413/571
18.76.070: TRANSFERABLE DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS; RECEIVING SITES:
A. Transferable development right receiving sites shall be limited to the A-2, RA-1, PRC, PRD, PD, SDP, and R-2-B
Zone designations exclusively unless otherwise authorized by the City Council as part of an annexation
agreement. (Ord. 2019-03, 3-6-2019, eff. 4-2-2019)
1. All areas shall be eligible to increase the density with the use of TDRs by no more than doubling what the
underlying zone designation allows. (Ord. 2018-03, 4-18-2018, eff. 5-15-2018)
B. In order to transfer one or more development rights to a parcel of property, such parcel shall be located within a
receiving area. The owner of such parcel shall apply for and receive approval to have the property placed in the
TDR Overlay Zone pursuant to rezoning procedures set forth in this title. In no case shall a receiving site rezone be
approved in any previously platted subdivision. Upon rezoning approval:
1. The property shall be shown on the official zoning map as a receiving site by denominating it as a TDR-R
Overlay Zone,
2. The property owner shall be eligible to transfer development rights to the property in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter, and
3. A certificate of receiving credits shall be issued upon payment of an administrative fee determined by the
Planning Department, to the property owner by the City Recorder indicating the total number of development
rights which may be transferred to the property in accordance to subsection A of this section.
The City Council, after receiving a recommendation from the Planning Commission, may approve a subdivision
or a concept plan for a receiving site at a density which equals the base zone density plus the number of
development rights which will be transferred to such site. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the development
density of a receiving site shall not be increased above the maximum density recommended for such site by the
Mapleton City General Plan. Any density bonus applicable to a receiving site shall not exceed density limitations
established by the General Plan. In no case shall the overall density exceed double of what the underlying zone
designation would allow.
C. No site shall be designated as a receiving site unless the Planning Department Commission finds that the site has
or will have adequate public facilities and other resources to accommodate the increased development authorized
by the transfer of development rights from the sending district. (Ord. 2005-16, 11-16-2005, eff. 11-16-2005)
18.76.080: DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL PROCEDURES:
The following development approval procedures shall apply to new developments within the A-2 and RA-1 Zone
designations:
A. A request to utilize development rights on a receiving site shall be in the form of a preliminary subdivision plan
submitted in accordance with regulations contained in title 17 of this Code or a site plan submitted in accordance
with regulations contained in this title.
B. In the event a receiving site is proposed to be subdivided, a site plan shall be submitted and approved in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter at the same time a preliminary subdivision plan is submitted.
C. The City Council, after receiving a recommendation from the Planning Commission, shall approve a request to
utilize development rights on a receiving site if the request:
1. Does not exceed the density limitations permitted by subsection 18.76.070B of this chapter;
2. Is in accordance with the provisions of this chapter;
3. Is in accordance with the subdivision and site plan regulations contained in title 17 of this Code and this title;
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 414/571
4. Is consistent with other recommendations of the Mapleton City General Plan; and
5. Achieves a desirable development compatible with both site conditions and surrounding existing and proposed
future development.
D. A final plan for a subdivision or a site plan which uses transferred development rights shall contain a statement
setting forth the development proposed, the zoning classification of the property, the number of development rights
used, and a notation of the recordation of the conveyance required by section 18.76.100 of this chapter. (Ord.
2005-16, 11-16-2005, eff. 11-16-2005)
18.76.090: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
A. The following development standards shall be applicable to receiving sites in the A-2 and RA-1 zones:
1. Each development in a TDR-R overlay zone shall conform to the development standards and permitted uses as
required by the underlying zone, except as may be modified by the provisions of this chapter. In such case, the
standards of this chapter shall apply.
2. If density proposed on a receiving site exceeds the density permitted by the underlying zone as per subsection
18.76.070A of this chapter, density, lot sizes, and other development standards shall be determined by the city
council, after receiving a recommendation from the planning commission, as part of the subdivision and/or site
plan review process. In making a determination of final density, the city council shall:
a. Consider the subdivision and site plan provisions of title 17 of this code and this title,
b. Consider whether a proposed plan has a design which:
(1) Provides a range of housing types;
(2) Takes advantage of existing topography and other natural features;
(3) Achieves a mutually compatible relationship between the proposed development and adjoining land uses;
and
(4) Implements the policies set forth in the Mapleton City general plan, and
c. Make findings regarding the matters set forth in subsections A2a and A2b of this section.
B. The following development standards shall be applicable to sending sites:
1. The uses permitted on a sending site shall be those uses allowed by the base zone applicable to the site, except
as diminished by the transfer therefrom the development rights and by the terms of any conservation easement
applicable to the site.
2. Any development request which is made for a sending site shall conform to the subdivision and site plan
provisions of title 17 of this code and this title and the following additional requirements of this subsection B.
3. The total number of dwelling units which may be constructed on a sending site shall be the number of units
allowed by the base zone density existing on the property when the property is designated as a sending site
minus all development rights transferred therefrom, excluding any density bonus that may be applicable to the
site.
a. Any sending site density bonus created by the application of this chapter shall be utilized only on a receiving
site.
b. No dwelling units may be constructed on a sending site located in a CE-1 zone where all development rights
have been transferred from the property.
4. Maximum lot size within any developable area shall be not greater than the minimum lot size of the underlying
zone.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 415/571
5. The impact on existing uses and the rural character of the area shall be included in the consideration of the
number of units allowed. Any new lots adjacent to an existing subdivision, or subdivision lot(s), shall be required
to have the same lot size to that which is adjacent to the proposed lot(s) within the TDR receiving site
development.
6. Residential lots shall be located adjacent to existing utilities and roads to minimize the amount of construction
and loss of agricultural land, unless such location directly conflicts with the preservation goals set forth in the
Mapleton City general plan or this chapter.
7. Where technically feasible, joint or common water and/or sanitation systems shall be used. (Ord. 2005-16, 11-
16-2005, eff. 11-16-2005)
18.76.100: CONSERVATION EASEMENT REQUIRED:
This section shall apply only to properties where the development rights have been transferred from the property, but
the ownership of the property remains private.
A. A conservation easement shall be established on each sending site from which development rights are transferred.
1. In CE-1 zones and in situations where all development rights attached to a sending site are transferred, the
easement shall cover the entire sending site.
2. If only a portion of the development rights attached to a sending site are transferred, the area of the easement
shall be the same as the total area of all the lots which could otherwise be established on the site but for the
transfer of development rights.
B. The conservation easement required by this chapter shall be in a recordable form approved by the City Attorney
and shall meet the requirements of section 57-18-1 et seq., of the Utah Code. The conservation easement shall
also include the following terms:
1. The holder of the easement shall be Mapleton City, another governmental entity, or a charitable organization
which:
a. Qualifies as being tax exempt under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code; and
b. Is organized in whole or in part for the purpose of accepting and managing conservation easements.
2. The easement shall require that the easement area shall be maintained as it exists when the easement is
created, including natural areas, wildlife preserves, trails, or other identified environmental or open land
resources. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City Council, after receiving a recommendation from the Planning
Commission, may approve the construction of improvements upon finding such improvements will be in harmony
with the purposes of the easement and intent of this chapter.
3. The easement shall include a reference to the extinguishment of the development rights transferred from the
sending site. If additional rights are transferred after the recordation of a conservation easement, the easement
shall be amended to reflect the extinguishment of those additional rights and shall be recorded thereafter.
4. All parties who have a declared interest in the property, recorded on the books of the Utah County Recorder,
must consent to the granting of a conservation easement.
C. If the holder of a conservation easement proposes to transfer the easement to another entity, the recipient of any
transferred interest shall meet the requirements of this section.
D. Any instrument purporting to convey a conservation easement pursuant to this section, but that the City has not
indicated its approval on the instrument is void, and shall not be recorded or accepted by the City Recorder for
recording at the County Recorder's Office. (Ord. 2005-16, 11-16-2005, eff. 11-16-2005)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 416/571
18.76.105: NOTIFICATION:
A. The City shall notify the County Tax Assessor of a transfer of development rights within thirty (30) days of:
1. The approval of a transfer of development rights pursuant to subsection 18.76.100B4 of this chapter;
2. The issuance of a certificate pursuant to subsection 18.76.070B3 of this chapter. (Ord. 2005-16, 11-16-2005, eff.
11-16-2005)
18.76.110: COORDINATION WITH OTHER PROVISIONS AND PROCESSES:
A. If subdivision review and approval is necessary, review of an application under this chapter shall be carried out
simultaneously, and under the same application, referral, notice, and public hearing procedural requirements as is
provided for a site plan review as set forth in this title.
B. In cases where a conditional use permit is required for a proposed use, review of an application under this chapter
shall be carried out simultaneously with the conditional use permit review as set forth in this title. (Ord. 2005-16,
11-16-2005, eff. 11-16-2005)
18.76.115: SAVINGS CLAUSE:
This section, or any provision thereof, shall not invalidate any completed transfer of development rights pursuant to
any earlier statute, ordinance, or regulation if said transfer was valid at that time. (Ord. 2005-16, 11-16-2005, eff. 11-
16-2005)
18.76.120: EXPIRATION AND APPLICABLE ACTION:
A. Section 18.76.060, "Transferable Development Rights; Creation; Sending Sites", of this chapter will expire on
December 31, 2010, after which time no application for the sending site (rezone application) will be accepted by
Mapleton City. (Ord. 2005-16, 11-16-2005, eff. 11-16-2005)
B. Once an application is made for a TDR sending site (TDR-S) Overlay Zone, and the City Council has taken action
to rezone the property, the applicant/property owner shall transfer title of the property to Mapleton City, or if
applicable, file the required conservation easement necessary to gain the TDR certificates by no later than
December 31, 2018. If no attempt by the property owner/applicant to convey title or have the conservation
easement recorded, then the City Council shall consider the application "expired" and shall have the authority to
rezone the property back to its original zone designation, and minus the TDR-S Overlay Zone. (Ord. 2018-01, 3-7-
2018, eff. 4-4-2018)
18.76.125: DEFINITIONS:
BASE ZONE DENSITY: The maximum number of dwelling units permitted by the zoning classification of a sending or
receiving site and not including any density increase resulting from an overlay zone.
COMPATIBLE: Once the City Council has granted a TDR-R Overlay rezone on a parcel, and the rezoned parcel meets
all other requirements under the City's ordinances, "compatible" includes among other planning and design issues,
street size, street alignment and design, curb, gutter and sidewalk design, traffic flow issues, delivery of service issues
such as size and location of pipes for culinary water, pressurized irrigation and sewer, surface water drainage and trail
system. "Compatible" does not refer to lot size beyond the requirements identified separately under this chapter.
DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS: The potential for the improvement of a legally established parcel of real property,
measured in dwelling units, existing as a result of the zoning classification of the parcel. One development right shall
be equal to the authority to establish and maintain one dwelling unit.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 417/571
RECEIVING AREA: A geographic area designated by the approved and adopted Mapleton City General Plan within
which one or more receiving sites may be located.
RECEIVING SITE: A legally created parcel of real property which has been zoned TDR-R and to which development
rights are transferred in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
RECEIVING ZONE: A zone designation wherein transferable development rights can be applied.
SENDING AREA: A geographic area designated by the approved and adopted Mapleton City General Plan within
which one or more sending sites may be located.
SENDING SITE: A legally created parcel of real property which has been zoned TDR-S and from which development
rights are transferred in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
SEVERANCE OF TRANSFER OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS (TDR) CREDIT CERTIFICATE (CERTIFICATE OF
SENDING CREDITS): The certificate issued by the City Recorder that represents the total number of development
credits recognized for and derived from the sending site that may be transferred.
TRANSFER OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS: The conveyance of one or more development rights by deed, easement,
or other legal instrument to another parcel of land in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2005-16,
11-16-2005, eff. 11-16-2005)
Chapter 18.77
PRD-1 PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT-1 WHISPER
ROCK DEVELOPMENT
18.77.010: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT-1 ORDINANCE or PRD-1
ORDINANCE. (Ord. 2009-06, 6-17-2009, eff. 8-19-2009)
18.77.020: PURPOSE:
A. The purpose of this chapter is to create diverse, quality housing in the city, while also providing a buffer from
anticipated commercial development along the state road corridor (Highway 89) and adjacent lower residential
uses.
B. The purpose of this chapter is accomplished by:
1. Allowing densities higher than a typical residential development;
2. Establishing standards for landscaping, building and site design, public safety, parking, aesthetics, traffic
circulation, fencing, lighting, and other similar site improvements; and
3. Requiring standards that enable the PRD-1 to fit into the surrounding neighborhoods. (Ord. 2009-06, 6-17-2009,
eff. 8-19-2009)
18.77.030: LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS:
The city council makes the following findings:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 418/571
A. Requiring standards for smaller lot housing will help preserve the quality of housing in the future within Mapleton
City.
B. Smaller lot housing may be utilized to help buffer commercial uses from low density residential development.
C. Although small lot housing has enjoyed a strong market demand as an alternative to the traditional large lot
housing, additional standards for small lot housing are necessary to ensure adequate light, air, privacy, and open
space for each dwelling unit, and to protect residents from the harmful effects of excessive noise, population
density, traffic congestion, and other adverse environmental effects. (Ord. 2009-06, 6-17-2009, eff. 8-19-2009)
18.77.040: WHERE ALLOWED; TYPES AND USES:
A. The area for the PRD-1 is located generally on the northwest corner of 1100 West and Maple Street, buffering
existing and anticipated future commercial developments from low density residential developments.
B. All uses within a PRD-1 shall comply with the development agreement provided under subsection 18.77.060M of
this chapter.
C. The PRD-1 includes single-family dwellings on lots smaller than typically allowed in other zones.
D. Accessory apartments may be allowed if determined with a development agreement provided under subsection
18.77.060M of this chapter.
E. Home occupations (subject to section 18.84.380 of this title) with the following additional restrictions:
1. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection 18.84.380D7 of this title, parking is further limited to the number of
available off street parking spaces at the home. The home occupation owner shall ensure that all off street
parking spaces shall be located in the driveway or garage. A client or employee shall park in the off street
parking spaces designated for the home.
2. A client or employee of the home occupation may not park or store a vehicle at the premises overnight. (Ord.
2011-16, 10-11-2011, eff. 11-28-2011)
18.77.050: BUILDING PERMITS:
The city shall not issue a building permit for any portion of the planned residential development until the final or final
phased plat has been approved by the city council and recorded at the Utah County recorder's office. (Ord. 2009-06,
6-17-2009, eff. 8-19-2009)
18.77.060: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS:
The city requires the following development standards and requirements within the PRD-1:
A. Density: A PRD-1 may be developed with overall densities of twelve thousand (12,000) square feet per unit with the
use of TDRs. A PRD-1 not utilizing TDRs shall not exceed densities of fourteen thousand five hundred (14,500)
square feet per unit.
Thus, by way of example and not limitation, a property owner who owns a total of ten (10) acres with an overall
density of twelve thousand (12,000) square feet per unit shall be required to submit a total of six (6) TDRs,
illustrated as follows:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 419/571
10 acres multiplied by 43,560 square feet = 435,600 square feet
435,600 square feet divided by 12,000 square feet = 36 units
435,600 square feet divided by 14,500 square feet = 30 units
Total number of TDRs required = 6 TDRs (36 units subtracted by 30 units)
For the purpose of determining fractions, any fractional number shall be rounded up. For example, if the TDR
calculation is 6.25, the property owner shall be required to submit a total of seven (7) TDRs.
B. Area: The minimum size requirement for any project applying for the PRD-1 shall be no less than ten (10) acres.
C. Minimum Floor Area: All dwelling units shall have a minimum main floor area of one thousand two hundred (1,200)
square feet. Two-story homes shall have a minimum area of one thousand (1,000) square feet on the main floor.
Main floor areas shall be exclusive of garages, porches, areas not normally considered occupied space.
D. Setbacks: All setbacks within the PRD-1 shall comply with the development agreement provided under subsection
M of this section.
E. General Height Requirement: A maximum of thirty feet (30') measured from the finished grade at the foundation to
the midpoint of the roof.
F. Fences:
1. Perimeter Fences: Developers shall erect a fence with a minimum height of six feet (6') on the perimeter of the
PRD-1, except that no fence is allowed along exterior street frontages. However, if the applicant desires a fence
along an exterior street frontage, the city council may approve the fence if the fence does not interfere with traffic
safety. The perimeter fence shall have a consistent design throughout the project and use the same construction
materials for the entire fence. The purpose of the fencing requirement is to buffer the surrounding residential
neighborhoods from the PRD-1 and to buffer the PRD-1 from surrounding commercial uses. The city council
may waive the fencing requirement if the topography is such that the fence does not meet the purpose of the
fencing requirement. Wood fences and chainlink fences with slats are not permitted in the PRD-1.
2. Patio/Limited Common Area Fences: A patio or limited common area adjacent to the rear of a dwelling unit may
be enclosed with a six foot (6') high maximum fence, provided that such fence includes an access gate from the
common area. The minimum width and length of the common area leading to the gate shall be fifteen feet (15').
G. Landscaping:
1. All land within a PRD-1 not covered by buildings, driveways, sidewalks, structures, and patios shall be
designated as common area and shall be permanently landscaped with trees, shrubs, lawn, or ground cover and
maintained in accordance with good landscaping practice. All required setback areas adjacent to public or
private streets shall be landscaped. All landscaping shall have a permanent underground sprinkling system.
2. At least one deciduous tree of two inch (2") caliper measured four feet (4') above the ground, one evergreen tree
at least five (5) gallons in size, and sixteen (16) evergreen shrubs at least five (5) gallons in size are required for
every dwelling.
H. Lighting Plan: The PRD-1 shall include a lighting plan. The lighting plan shall be designed to:
1. Discourage crime;
2. Enhance the safety of the residents and guests of the PRD-1;
3. Prevent glare into the sky and onto adjacent properties; and enhance the appearance and design of the project;
4. The PRD-1 homeowners' association is required to control, meter, and pay for all power costs for all outside
lighting shown on the lighting plan except for front and back door lighting. The lighting plan shall designate which
lighting shall be commonly metered to the association or owner.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 420/571
I. Parking: Each residential unit shall have an attached or detached two (2) car garage. There shall be a minimum of
four (4) parking spaces provided for each dwelling, two (2) in the garage and two (2) in the driveway directly in front
of the garage. All parking spaces shall measure at least nine feet by eighteen feet (9' x 18'). Developers shall pave
with asphalt and/or concrete all parking spaces, parking areas, and driveways and provide proper drainage.
Drainage shall not be channeled or caused to flow across pedestrian walkways.
J. Streets:
1. All streets within a PRD-1 zone shall comply with the development agreement provided under subsection M of
this section.
2. A traffic study will be required for the PRD-1.
3. All streets that are shown on the Mapleton City transportation master plan shall be developed as public streets
according to the size and general location shown on the Mapleton City master street plan.
4. The city council has the authority to require streets in a PRD-1 to connect with other public streets outside the
PRD-1 where such connection is necessary for good traffic circulation in the area.
5. All streets in a PRD-1 shall be public streets constructed to city standards and specifications and dedicated to
the city. However, private drives may be permitted, provided that:
a. They will not extend to or provide service to another property or parcel not included in the PRD-1.
b. They shall be paved with either concrete or asphalt and shall not access or service more than five (5) units.
c. They will not provide access or travel between, or otherwise connect with two (2) or more public streets.
d. They are designed by a qualified civil engineer and constructed to city standards and specifications.
e. They are designated on the final plat as perpetual rights of way and public utility easements.
f. All access points from public streets have "Private Street" or "Private Drive" signs installed.
g. They are no less than twenty four feet (24') in width.
h. The city council or city engineer may require private streets/drives to be wider if necessary to ensure traffic
and pedestrian safety and to reduce traffic congestion.
K. Exterior Finishing Materials: The front elevation shall be of either brick, stone, cultured stone, stucco, or a
combination of these materials. The rear and side elevations shall be of either brick, stone, cultured stone, stucco,
or hard surface siding (hardy plank).
L. Homeowners' Association: The applicant shall establish a homeowners' association for the PRD-1. The
homeowners' association shall maintain all common and open areas, including any amenities provided within the
project.
M. Development Agreement Required: Prior to the rezone hearing before the planning commission and city council for
the PRD-1, the applicant shall provide a detailed development agreement that details the entire project, an
accurate legal description, the total number of units, the number of TDRs being used, the amount of, and design of
open spaces, fencing and any other amenities the developer is going to provide. The agreement will be recorded
with the Utah County recorder and will be attached to the title of the property. (Ord. 2009-06, 6-17-2009, eff. 8-19-
2009)
18.77.070: BONDING:
Meet all requirements of chapter 17.20, "Performance Guarantees", of this code. (Ord. 2009-06, 6-17-2009, eff. 8-19-
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 421/571
2009)
Chapter 18.78
PD PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ZONES
18.78.010: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of the PD zone is to provide flexibility in the city's zoning scheme in order to allow for unique, innovative
and well planned developments that would not be possible under one of the city's existing zoning classifications. PD
zones are not intended for use in situations where a proposed development is reasonably feasible under one of the
city's existing zoning classifications or in situations where the primary purpose is to obtain a relaxation of standards
applicable to similar types of development in other zones.
PD zones are intended for use primarily in the following situations:
A. High density residential projects near or adjacent to Highway 89, south of city limits to include parcels of land in and
within the application of annexation and adjacent parcels.
B. Mixed use projects near or adjacent to Highway 89.
C. Where no existing zoning classification is both sufficiently permissive to allow uses that would be suitable on the
property and sufficiently restrictive to protect the character and quality of neighboring properties. Examples of this
type of situation may include the following:
1. Where the setbacks, building height limits or other standards of an existing zone are not necessary for the
protection of neighboring properties or the general welfare of the city because of the proximity of a parcel of
property to a particular landscape feature such as a cliff or a hillside where there would be no negative impact
from a relaxation of such standards;
2. Where a few uses in an existing zone would be appropriate on a particular parcel of property, but the remainder
of the uses in that zone would not be appropriate; or
3. Where additional setbacks, or other buffers are needed to protect neighboring properties from uses to be
employed on a parcel of property.
D. PD zones shall not be created for residential development except in the following situations:
1. Subsections A and B of this section.
2. Residential development that is significantly different in design, layout or characteristics from the type of
residential development allowed under existing zoning classifications. PD zones will not be available merely to
increase density or to relax development requirements normally applicable to similar types of residential
development in existing residential zones.
3. Parcels that are unsuitable for single-family dwellings or duplexes due to location or topography of the land.
E. In order to utilize TDRs in an efficient manner. (Ord. 2006-31, 11-7-2006, eff. 11-7-2006)
18.78.020: CONCEPT PLAN:
A concept plan shall be submitted prior to or with every application to create a new PD zone. The planning
commission shall review the concept plan and shall provide its recommendation to the city council. The concept plan
shall at a minimum include the following:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 422/571
A. A layout of all parking areas, amenities, open spaces, landscaped areas and drive accesses.
B. The number of residential units per acre, if applicable.
C. The legal description of the subject property.
D. A topographic map of the subject property and adjacent property within fifty feet (50') of the subject property.
E. A tabulation of the total land area and the percentage thereof designated for various proposed uses.
F. A general circulation plan indicating both public and private vehicular and pedestrianways.
G. Any additional information that the city may deem necessary to determine whether the proposed PD zone is in the
interest of the public health, safety and welfare. Information may include, but is not limited to: proposed building
footprints, building heights and the orientation of all buildings; architectural renderings that illustrate the
architectural style(s), materials and the designs to be employed in the development; a preliminary title report; a
preliminary plan for storm drainage, sewage disposal, grading and public utilities and statement indicating the
future form of ownership (e.g., sole owner, condominiums, etc.) and responsibility for maintenance of the project
areas such as streets, structures and open spaces.
The text of any particular PD zone may modify the requirements of the concept plan required for that specific PD
zone. All development in a PD zone shall conform to the concept plan unless as otherwise modified as noted
below. (Ord. 2006-31, 11-7-2006, eff. 11-7-2006)
18.78.030: MODIFICATION OF CONCEPT PLAN:
An approved concept plan may be modified in the same manner as an amendment to the zoning ordinance. The
planning director may (but shall not be obligated to) administratively approve minor modifications to a concept plan. A
modification may be considered minor if it does not:
A. Increase the density of residential units (if applicable) or change the approved uses;
B. Detract from the overall safety or aesthetics of the original concept plan;
C. Substantially alter the architecture of design characteristics of the original concept plan;
D. Create a greater adverse impact on neighboring properties than the original concept plan; and
E. Increase the proposed square footage of buildings by more than ten percent (10%). (Ord. 2006-31, 11-7-2006, eff.
11-7-2006)
18.78.035: PHASING:
All phases of the final approved overall phasing plan may expire and become null and void after eight (8) years from
the original city council approval of the preliminary plat. The eight (8) year time period may be extended by the
planning commission. The planning commission may not grant an extension unless it finds, based on substantial
evidence placed in the record, that:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 423/571
A. Substantial progress is being made toward recording of the first phase; and
B. The preliminary plat conditions of approval are still viable based on currently applicable requirements of this code;
and
C. An ordinance change has not occurred or is being considered that may substantially affect the activity of the
subdivision authorized by the preliminary plat approval. (Ord. 2008-03, 1-23-2008, eff. 4-2-2008)
18.78.040: MINIMUM AREA REQUIREMENT:
A PD zone may only be applied to a parcel or combination of parcels totaling at least one hundred (100) acres. (Ord.
2006-31, 11-7-2006, eff. 11-7-2006)
18.78.050: TRANSFERABLE DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS (TDRs):
A. PD zones may contain TDR sending and receiving areas. If a PD zone application requests a higher residential
density than the existing general plan designation, the city council may require the applicant to utilize TDRs to
achieve some or all of the increased density. (Ord. 2006-31, 11-7-2006, eff. 11-7-2006)
Chapter 18.78A
PD-1 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT-1 MAPLETON VILLAGE
DISTRICT
18.78A.010: PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES:
The planned development-1 Mapleton Village district (PD-1 MV) describes a proposed residential mixed use
development set in the southern area of Mapleton City, east of Highway 89. This zone consists of six hundred
seventeen (617) residential dwelling units, not counting accessory apartments as permitted by this chapter, on
properties identified in the Mapleton Village and Twin Hollow concept plans. (Ord. 2007-30, 12-4-2007, eff. 1-4-2008)
18.78A.020: ADEQUATE PUBLIC FACILITIES:
In addition to the specific development standards contained in this chapter, areas zoned to the PD-1 MV shall comply
with section 17.04.130, "Availability Of Adequate Public Facilities", of this code. (Ord. 2007-30, 12-4-2007, eff. 1-4-
2008)
18.78A.030: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory buildings, in conjunction with and incidental to the main use of the property, such as a shed or detached
garage no larger than forty percent (40%) of the main building footprint.
Attached townhomes, row houses, and condominiums.
Clubhouse and other recreational amenities for the development.
Cultural or civic uses.
Detached single-family residential dwelling unit.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 424/571
Duplex (vertical or horizontal).
Home occupations, subject to the provisions of section 18.84.380 of this title.
Park and playground areas.
Public parks and recreation.
Swimming pools and related equipment.
Utility facilities. (Ord. 2007-30, 12-4-2007, eff. 1-4-2008)
18.78A.040: CONDITIONAL USES:
Accessory apartment that may or may not be located within the primary dwelling unit, with no more than thirty (30)
accessory apartment units for single-family detached homes in the lower village portion of the development. There
shall be no limit to the total number of accessory apartments in detached single-family homes outside the lower village
portion of the development. Section 18.84.030 of this title shall not be construed to prohibit accessory apartments
within the PD-1 MV. Section 18.84.410 of this title shall apply to accessory apartments within the PD-1 MV district with
the following limited exceptions:
The minimum lot size where the home is located shall not be less than five thousand (5,000) square feet (subsection
18.84.410C1d of this title).
A single-family dwelling with an owner occupied accessory apartment shall provide at least one additional parking
space (subsection 18.84.410C2 of this title).
Detached buildings (second floor of a garage) may be permitted as accessory apartments in the PD-1 MV district and
may have external entrances (subsection 18.84.410C7 of this title).
Daycare nursery.
Educational institutions. (Ord. 2007-30, 12-4-2007, eff. 1-4-2008)
18.78A.050: LOT AREA:
There shall be no minimum lot size requirement; however the total number of residential dwelling units shall not
exceed six hundred seventeen (617), not counting accessory apartments permitted by this chapter. (Ord. 2007-30, 12-
4-2007, eff. 1-4-2008)
18.78A.060: LOT REQUIREMENTS:
There are no lot requirements other than the general layout of the lots as presented in the PD-1 MV final plat. (Ord.
2007-30, 12-4-2007, eff. 1-4-2008)
18.78A.070: RESIDENTIAL DENSITY:
The overall residential density in the PD-1 MV shall not exceed six hundred seventeen (617) dwelling units as defined
in this chapter, not counting accessory apartments permitted by this chapter. (Ord. 2007-30, 12-4-2007, eff. 1-4-2008)
18.78A.080: SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 425/571
For the purpose of this chapter, the "lower village" is defined as those lands within the PD-1 MV west of the irrigation
canal. The "estate" is defined as lands within the PD-1 MV east of the irrigation canal and west of the CE-1 district.
A. Lower village lot setbacks:
1. Front yard setbacks shall be no less than zero feet (0') and no more than fifteen feet (15') measured from the
property line to the foundation of the home. Front porches, stairs and other features may encroach into the
setback no more than five feet (5').
2. Corner lot side yard setbacks at the street side shall be treated as front yards.
3. Rear yard setbacks shall be no less than ten feet (10') measured from the rear property line to the foundation of
the dwelling unit or garage (whichever is closer).
4. Side yard setbacks shall be no less than:
a. 3.5 feet measured from the property line to the foundation of the single-family detached dwelling unit.
b. 7.5 feet measured from the property line to the foundation of the attached dwelling units (duplex, townhome,
etc.).
B. Estate lot setbacks:
1. Front yard setbacks shall be no less than fifteen feet (15') measured from the property line to the foundation of
the home. Front porches, stairs and other features may encroach on the setback no more than five feet (5').
Notwithstanding a lesser setback for the main building, garages, whether attached or not, shall be set back at
least twenty feet (20'), measured from the back of sidewalk.
2. Rear yard setbacks shall be no less than fifteen feet (15') measured from the rear property line to the foundation
of the dwelling unit.
3. Side yard setbacks shall be no less than ten feet (10') measured from the property line to the foundation of the
dwelling unit. (Ord. 2007-30, 12-4-2007, eff. 1-4-2008)
18.78A.090: BUILDING HEIGHT:
Single-family detached dwelling units shall not exceed thirty five feet (35') maximum height from the existing grade at
the foundation (as depicted on the final plat) to the highest point of the roof. Chimneys and other minor features may
exceed this height but may not exceed forty feet (40').
Townhomes, other attached dwelling units and community structures shall not exceed forty five feet (45') measured
from the existing grade at the foundation (as depicted on the final plat) to the midpoint of the roof. This height limit may
be exceeded with the permission of the city council if site conditions warrant such a waiver. However, under no
circumstance shall the height of any structure exceed fifty five feet (55') in height. (Ord. 2007-30, 12-4-2007, eff. 1-4-
2008)
18.78A.100: ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW:
A licensed architect ("the village architect") shall be employed by the homeowners' associations in the PD-1 zone to
review the applicable covenants, conditions, and restrictions (CC&Rs) and to verify and enforce design. No building
permit or fence application will be accepted by the city without a stamp from the village architect. All building
guidelines will meet applicable Mapleton City and international building code standards as well as the standards in the
CC&Rs and any design guidelines created by the homeowners' associations. While these standards may be more
strict than this code, Mapleton City shall not be involved in the review of such CC&Rs or design guidelines. (Ord.
2007-30, 12-4-2007, eff. 1-4-2008)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 426/571
18.78A.110: PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
Parking requirements shall be governed by section 18.84.270 of this title. However, given the pedestrian friendly
nature of the PD-1 MV, exceptions to section 18.84.270 of this title regarding minimum number of parking spaces may
be granted by the city council. Additionally, no dwelling unit shall have more than two (2) on site parking spaces
outside of the garage. (Ord. 2007-30, 12-4-2007, eff. 1-4-2008)
18.78A.120: OPEN SPACE, STREET TREE AND LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS:
A minimum of thirty five percent (35%) of the site shall be preserved as permanent open space designated for public
recreation and/or natural habitat. Open space may include stormwater management facilities, trails, play fields,
greens, and natural areas. Such preserved open space shall be preserved in perpetuity through a deed restriction as
approved by the city council. (Ord. 2007-30, 12-4-2007, eff. 1-4-2008)
18.78A.130: DESIGN STANDARDS:
Design elements including, but not limited to, street width, curb radii, drainage facilities, sidewalks, curb and gutter,
and block standards shall conform to the Mapleton Village plan. Where the Mapleton Village plan conflicts with chapter
17.12 of this code, the Mapleton Village plan shall govern.
All landscaping shall conform to the requirements found in chapter 18.90 of this title and the master landscape plan for
the PD-1 MV.
Street trees shall be required, where appropriate, between the sidewalk and the curb of every street. Said trees shall
be a minimum size of no less than two inch (2") caliper and one tree shall be placed at least every twenty feet (20')
and no closer than is recommended by a landscape architect for each specific species of street tree. Tree species
shall be the same as required in the adopted street tree list for the city of Mapleton City or as otherwise approved by
the city council. (Ord. 2007-30, 12-4-2007, eff. 1-4-2008)
18.78A.140: ENFORCEMENT:
If the city deems that open space and parks owned by homeowners' associations are not being kept to Mapleton City
standards, the city shall have said improvements and maintenance done and any such expenses by the city shall be
assessed to any of the homeowners' associations of the PD-1 MV. In the event of the default of any homeowners'
associations in the PD-1 MV, title of the open space and parks shall revert to Mapleton City, and the city shall charge
the individual property owners within the applicable areas for the maintenance required for the above mentioned open
space and parks. (Ord. 2007-30, 12-4-2007, eff. 1-4-2008)
Chapter 18.78B
PD-2 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT-2 ZONE
18.78B.010: PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES:
The City intends the PD-2 Zone to permit and regulate reasonable, single-family residential use of tracts of hillside
property having a slope of less than thirty percent (30%), lying within the PD-2 Zone, the development of which might
otherwise be unreasonably restricted. Uses permitted in the PD-2 Zone must be incidental to the essentially residential
purposes thereof, and should not change the basic character of the zone. The PD-2 Zone, moreover, should
encourage imaginative and efficient utilization of hillside land while ensuring compatibility with the surrounding
environment. This is accomplished by providing greater flexibility in the location of buildings on the land, the
consolidation of open spaces, and the clustering of some or all dwelling units. (Ord. 2007-17, 8-21-2007, eff. 9-2-2007)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 427/571
18.78B.020: LOCATION:
As depicted on the Mapleton City official zoning map (as hereafter amended), the PD-2 Zone designation describes a
proposed residential development located on approximately one hundred eighteen (118) acres in the eastern area of
Mapleton City, generally at and around 2100 East and 200 South. (Ord. 2007-17, 8-21-2007, eff. 9-2-2007)
18.78B.030: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses shall be permitted in the PD-2 Zone:
Agriculture (the science and art of farming; work of cultivating the soil, producing crops, and raising livestock).
Customary residential household pets as defined in section 18.08.010 of this title.
Home occupations, subject to the provisions of section 18.84.380 of this title.
Public utilities, drainage facilities, water wells and facilities; walls, ornamental ponds; fences subject to section
18.84.130 of this title.
Single-family dwellings.
Temporary fruit and vegetable stands, for the sale of produce raised on the premises, that shall not exceed one
hundred (100) square feet; and are maintained in an orderly manner.
Temporary office building used as an office in connection with the sale of property within a subdivision under
construction, provided that the temporary office is located on the same tract of land as the subdivision. A permit
therefor shall be valid for not more than one year, and shall be renewable on an annual basis. This use subject to
subsection 18.84.200B of this title (temporary building during construction).
The raising, care and keeping of limited numbers of livestock and fowl, excluding swine, for family food production or
recreation. Also barns, corrals, pens and coops and other structures for the care and keeping of domestic livestock
and fowl, subject to the following:
A. The number of animals kept shall not exceed one animal unit for each twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of
lot area.
B. No structure for the housing of livestock or fowl or corrals for the close confinement of livestock shall be located
closer than one hundred feet (100') from an existing dwelling on an adjacent lot or fifty feet (50') from such a
dwelling on the same lot. (Ord. 2007-17, 8-21-2007, eff. 9-2-2007)
18.78B.040: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses and structures are permitted in the PD-2 zone, provided they are incidental to the main residential
dwelling unit, and do not substantially alter the character of the permitted principal use or structure. Such permitted
accessory uses and structures include, but are not limited to, the following:
In areas having a slope of less than thirty percent (30%), accessory buildings such as barns, garages, carports,
greenhouses, gardening sheds, recreation rooms, and similar structures which are customarily used in conjunction
with and are incidental to a principal use or structure.
Private parks and playgrounds.
Swimming pools and incidental cabanas, subject to any and all requirements of the international building code (IBC).
(Ord. 2007-17, 8-21-2007, eff. 9-2-2007)
18.78B.050: CONDITIONAL USES:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 428/571
The uses listed below may be approved by issuance of a conditional use permit from the planning commission. Uses
not specified herein as "permitted" or "conditional" shall be considered prohibited. The following is a list of possible
conditional uses within the PD-2 zone:
Exotic pets, so long as the petitioner provides sufficient evidence demonstrating that such pets will be prevented from
endangering the health, safety, and welfare of other persons; causing damage to property of others; or otherwise
creating a public nuisance.
In areas having a slope of greater than thirty percent (30%), accessory buildings such as barns, garages, carports,
greenhouses, gardening sheds, recreation rooms, and similar structures which are customarily used in conjunction
with and are incidental to a principal use or structure.
Owner occupied accessory apartments per section 18.84.410 of this title.
Places of worship, parks and playgrounds for multiple residential use, subject to section 18.84.320 of this title.
Residential healthcare facilities (nursing homes, including skilled nursing and intermediate healthcare facilities),
subject to compliance with the standards for such uses as set forth in section 18.84.370 of this title and the approval of
site plan in accordance with the provisions of section 18.84.320 of this title. (Ord. 2007-17, 8-21-2007, eff. 9-2-2007)
18.78B.060: LOTS, BUILDINGS, AND YARDS:
Each lot or parcel of property in the PD-2 zone shall meet all of the following requirements:
A. Lot Size And Area Per Dwelling: The minimum lot size in the PD-2 zone shall be twenty one thousand seven
hundred eighty (21,780) square feet. Except as otherwise provided in section 18.78B.080 of this chapter, not more
than one single-family dwelling may be placed upon a legally created lot or parcel of land in the PD-2 zone.
B. Lot Width: Each lot or parcel of land in the PD-2 zone shall have a width of at least one hundred feet (100').
C. Front Yard Requirements: No home shall have a front yard of less than thirty feet (30') measured from the front
property line or the right of way to the foundation of the home.
D. Side And Rear Yard: Each lot or parcel of land in the PD-2 zone shall have a side yard of not less than ten feet
(10'). Each lot or parcel of land in the PD-2 zone shall have a rear yard of not less than twenty five feet (25').
E. Corner Lots: Setbacks for corner lots shall not be less than thirty feet (30'), as measured for the front yard setback.
F. Accessory Buildings:
1. Accessory buildings may be located no closer than three feet (3') from a property line. However, buildings with
fire rated walls, built to the standards outlined in the international residential building code (IRC), may be placed
up to the property line.
2. a. Accessory buildings shall not exceed thirty five feet (35') in height.
b. Notwithstanding subsection F2a of this section, within ten feet (10') of a property line, accessory buildings
shall not exceed twelve feet (12') in height.
3. All roof drainage shall be directed away from any adjacent property lines, and shall be drained to the property
wherein the building is located.
G. Projections Into Yards: The following structures may be erected on or projected into any required yard:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 429/571
1. Fences and walls in conformance with this code and approval by the planning and zoning director. Other city
codes or ordinance also apply.
2. Landscape elements including trees, shrubs, agricultural crops, and other plants.
3. Necessary appurtenances for utility service.
4. The structures listed below may project into a minimum front or rear yard not more than four feet (4'), and into a
minimum side yard not more than two feet (2'):
a. Cornices, eaves, belt courses, sills, buttresses, or other similar architectural features.
b. Fireplace structures and bays, provided that they are not wider than eight feet (8') measured generally parallel
to the wall of which they are a part.
c. Stairways, balconies, door stoops, fire escapes, awnings, and planter boxes or masonry planters not
exceeding twenty four inches (24") in height.
d. Porte-cochere over a driveway in a side yard, providing such structure is not more than one story in height
and twenty four feet (24') in length, and is entirely open on at least three (3) sides except for necessary
supporting columns and customary architectural features.
H. Building Height: No lot or parcel of land in the PD-2 zone shall have a building or structure used for dwelling or
public assembly which exceeds a maximum of thirty five feet (35') measured from the finished grade of the lot to
the midpoint of the roof pitch. Measurement shall be taken on three (3) sides of the home. Finished grade shall be
established thirty feet (30') away from the front of the home, or from top of the curb (if present) or the middle point
of the street directly in front of the home. If the home is located farther than thirty feet (30') from a city street, then
the measurement shall be taken of the established grade ten feet (10') from the home.
I. Permissible Lot Coverage: All buildings, including accessory buildings and structures, shall cover not more than
thirty five percent (35%) of the area of the lot or parcel of land. (Ord. 2007-17, 8-21-2007, eff. 9-2-2007)
18.78B.070: PARKING AND DRIVEWAY REQUIREMENTS:
A. Each home located on a lot or parcel in the PD-2 zone shall have on the same lot or parcel at least two (2) off street
enclosed parking spaces.
B. Each home shall also have a driveway that leads from a public street to the required enclosed parking spaces. Said
driveway shall be:
1. At least twelve feet (12') wide, and
2. Constructed of a hard surface material. (Ord. 2007-17, 8-21-2007, eff. 9-2-2007)
18.78B.080: DENSITY:
A. Maximum Overall Density: Notwithstanding the twenty one thousand seven hundred eighty (21,780) square foot
PD-2 zone minimum lot size set forth in subsection 18.78B.060A of this chapter, the PD-2 zone (as depicted on the
Mapleton City official zoning map, as hereafter amended), shall include no more than forty seven (47) single-family
homes.
B. Clustering (Applicable Only If Clustering Is Used):
1. Purpose: Clustering within the PD-2 zone is meant to protect and preserve open space, encourage its more
efficient and aesthetic use for scenic as well as recreational purposes. Clustering also offers the developer some
flexibility in addressing land development issues.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 430/571
2. Development Clusters: Development clusters are permitted within the PD-2 zone, subject to the following
guidelines:
a. Each development cluster shall be a contiguous area containing at least twenty one thousand seven hundred
eighty (21,780) square feet for each single-family residence therein.
b. No development cluster shall contain fewer than three (3) or more than seven (7) single-family residences, nor
shall any development cluster contain more than ten (10) acres.
3. Designated Build Areas: Each development cluster shall contain a contiguous designated build area of at least
eleven thousand (11,000) square feet per single-family residence.
a. All dwellings and accessory buildings in a given development cluster shall be located within the designated
build area, having a slope of less than thirty percent (30%).
b. The location of each designated build area shall be designated on the preliminary plat and shall be identified
and described on the final recorded plat, together with a notation to the effect that all dwellings and accessory
buildings shall be located within such designated build area.
4. Applicability Of Development Code: All construction within a development cluster in the PD-2 zone shall be
subject to all requirements of the development code of Mapleton City, Utah. (Ord. 2007-17, 8-21-2007, eff. 9-2-
2007)
18.78B.090: HILLSIDE PRESERVATION:
A. General Purpose: To help accomplish the objectives of this zone, all land surface having a slope of thirty percent
(30%) or greater shall remain in its natural state and shall not be graded or otherwise disturbed except for the
planting of additional vegetation, the addition of sprinkler irrigation systems, the establishment of required
firebreaks or the required access easements.
B. Restrictions: To help preserve the hillside areas comprising this zone, the following restrictions on use shall apply to
areas having a slope of thirty percent (30%) or greater:
1. Conditional Uses: The following shall be conditional uses:
Private roads leading to a permitted or conditional accessory use.
2. Prohibited Uses: The following shall be prohibited uses:
Grading, plowing, excavating, cutting or filling without a permit from the city. The permit from the city will be
issued if it is shown that such activity can be performed without unreasonable risk of erosion, flooding, or
landslide.
3. Additional Restrictions On Use Of Land:
a. Fences and walls shall only be constructed after obtaining a building permit.
b. Fences and walls shall only be constructed of low visibility see through materials not more than forty two
inches (42") above the natural grade.
c. Existing surface of the ground shall not be changed by grading activities when erecting boundary fences.
d. No fencing shall be erected that interferes with dedicated easements.
e. All proposals to grade, fill, or excavate land shall be referred to the city engineer who shall make a preliminary
determination if any erosion, flooding or landslide concerns exist that must be mitigated before a permit is
issued. (Ord. 2007-17, 8-21-2007, eff. 9-2-2007)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 431/571
Chapter 18.78C
PD-3 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT-3 HARMONY RIDGE DISTRICT
18.78C.010: PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES:
The planned development-3 Harmony Ridge district (PD-3HR) describes a proposed commercial, retail, light industrial
and master planned mixed use development set in the southern area of Mapleton City, east of Highway 89. This
district consists of a maximum of eight hundred fifty (850) residential dwelling units, not counting accessory
apartments as permitted by this chapter. The district allows a maximum of one hundred seventy (170) residential
dwelling units or twenty percent (20%) of the eight hundred fifty (850) units listed above within the mixed use zones of
commercial/retail and flex space. (Ord. 2011-07, 4-19-2011, eff. 6-5-2011)
18.78C.020: ADEQUATE PUBLIC FACILITIES:
In addition to the specific development standards contained in this chapter, areas zoned to the PD-3HR shall comply
with section 17.04.130, "Availability Of Adequate Public Facilities", of this code. (Ord. 2011-07, 4-19-2011, eff. 6-5-
2011)
18.78C.030: ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW:
An architectural committee (AC) shall be employed by the homeowners' associations in the PD-3HR zone to review
the applicable covenants, conditions, and restrictions (CC&Rs) and to verify and enforce the established Harmony
Ridge residential and commercial/industrial design standards.
No building permit application will be accepted by the city without an approval stamp from the AC. All building
guidelines will meet applicable Mapleton City and international building code standards. (Ord. 2011-07, 4-19-2011, eff.
6-5-2011)
18.78C.040: OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS:
A minimum of forty percent (40%) of the site shall be preserved as permanent open space designated for public
recreation and/or natural habitat. Open space may include stormwater management facilities, trails, play fields,
greens, and natural areas. Such preserved open space shall be preserved in perpetuity through a deed restriction as
approved by the city. (Ord. 2011-07, 4-19-2011, eff. 6-5-2011)
18.78C.050: DESIGN STANDARDS:
Design elements including, but not limited to, street width, curb radii, drainage facilities, sidewalks, curb and gutter,
fencing, and block standards shall conform to the Harmony Ridge preliminary plan and Mapleton City standards. (Ord.
2011-07, 4-19-2011, eff. 6-5-2011)
18.78C.060: ENFORCEMENT:
If the city deems that open space and parks owned by homeowners' associations are not being kept to Mapleton City
standards, the city shall have the right to cause such improvements and maintenance to be done and any such
expenses by the city shall be assessed to any of the homeowners' associations of the PD-3HR. In the event of the
dissolution or inactivity of any homeowners' associations in the PD-3HR, Mapleton City shall have the right to assume
title of the open space and parks, and the city shall then charge the individual property owners within the applicable
areas for the improvements, maintenance, and administrative fees required for the above mentioned open space and
parks. (Ord. 2011-07, 4-19-2011, eff. 6-5-2011)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 432/571
18.78C.070: ADDITIONAL SETBACK REQUIREMENTS OR LIABILITY DISCLAIMERS:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to preclude Mapleton City from setting additional setback requirements, or
requiring inclusion of liability disclaimers associated with physical hazards of a geologic nature. Such additional
requirements are to be part of any final plat or development agreement. (Ord. 2011-07, 4-19-2011, eff. 6-5-2011)
18.78C.080: RESIDENTIAL DETACHED:
The planned development-3 Harmony Ridge district (PD-3HR) incorporates a residential detached land use element
within the overall development with the associated requirements as contained herein. (Ord. 2011-07, 4-19-2011, eff. 6-
5-2011)
18.78C.080.010: PERMITTED USES:
Cultural, religious activities, or civic uses.
Detached single-family residential dwelling units.
Educational institutions.
Home occupations, subject to the provisions of section 18.84.380 of this title.
Public parks and recreation.
Utility facilities. (Ord. 2011-07, 4-19-2011, eff. 6-5-2011)
18.78C.080.020: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory buildings are subject to the provisions of section 18.26.020 of this title.
Parks and playgrounds and other associated recreational amenities.
Swimming pools and related equipment. (Ord. 2011-07, 4-19-2011, eff. 6-5-2011)
18.78C.080.030: CONDITIONAL USES:
Accessory apartments that may or may not be located within the primary dwelling unit. Section 18.84.030 of this title
shall not be construed to prohibit accessory apartments within the PD-3HR. Section 18.84.410 of this title shall apply
to accessory apartments within the PD-3HR district with the following limited exceptions:
A. The minimum lot size where the home is located shall not be less than twelve thousand (12,000) square feet.
B. A single-family dwelling with an owner occupied accessory apartment shall provide at least one additional
parking stall. The designated parking stall for the accessory apartment may not be located within the front yard
setback or side yard setback that is adjacent to a street. The designated parking stall may not be located within a
garage, unless at least two (2) other parking stalls within a garage are available for the primary dwelling unit.
C. Detached buildings (second floor of a garage) may be permitted as accessory apartments in the PD-3HR district
and may have external entrances and a maximum height not to exceed the height of the main structure. (Ord.
2011-07, 4-19-2011, eff. 6-5-2011)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 433/571
18.78C.080.040: LOT REQUIREMENTS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the detached residential lots are separated info four (4) different districts, according to
the Harmony Ridge conceptual plan, each with unique requirements:
A. Bench Estate lot requirements:
1. Minimum area: 12,000 square feet.
2. Minimum frontage: 70 feet.
3. Minimum depth: 100 feet.
B. Estate lot requirements:
1. Minimum area: 6,000 square feet.
2. Minimum frontage: 55 feet.
3. Minimum depth: 75 feet.
C. Cottage Estate lot requirements:
1. Minimum area: 5,500 square feet.
2. Minimum frontage: 50 feet.
3. Minimum depth: 75 feet.
D. Garden Estate lot requirements:
1. Minimum area: 3,200 square feet.
2. Minimum frontage: 45 feet.
3. Minimum depth: 65 feet. (Ord. 2011-07, 4-19-2011, eff. 6-5-2011)
18.78C.080.050: SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the detached residential lots are separated into four (4) different districts according to
the Harmony Ridge conceptual plan, each with unique requirements:
A. Bench Estate lot setbacks:
1. Garage setback with direct access to a public roadway shall be no less than twenty five feet (25') measured from
the property line to the face of the garage door. In no case shall the driveway length be less than twenty five feet
(25') measured from the back of sidewalk to the face of the garage door.
2. Front and corner side yard setbacks shall be no less than fifteen feet (15') measured from the property line to
the porch, exterior wall of the house or side entry garage. Roof eaves and uncovered steps may extend into this
setback a maximum of two feet (2').
3. Rear yard setbacks shall be no less than fifteen feet (15') measured parallel from the rear lot line to the exterior
wall of the garage, porch, or living space. Roof eaves and uncovered steps may extend into this setback a
maximum of two feet (2').
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 434/571
4. Side yard setbacks shall be no less than eight feet (8') measured parallel from the side lot line to the exterior
wall of the garage, porch or living space. Roof eaves and uncovered steps may extend into this setback a
maximum of two feet (2').
B. Estate lot setbacks:
1. Garage setbacks with direct access to a public roadway shall be no less than twenty feet (20') measured from
the property line to the face of the garage door. In no case shall the driveway length be less than twenty feet
(20') measured from the back of sidewalk to the face of the garage door.
2. Front and corner side yard setbacks shall be no less than fifteen feet (15') measured from the property line to
the front porch, exterior wall of the house or side entry garage. Roof eaves and uncovered steps may extend into
this setback a maximum of two feet (2').
3. Rear yard setbacks shall be no less than ten feet (10') measured parallel from the rear lot line to the exterior wall
of the garage, porch, or living space. Roof eaves and uncovered steps may extend into this setback a maximum
of two feet (2').
4. Side yard setbacks shall be no less than five feet (5') measured parallel from the side lot line to the exterior wall
of the garage, porch or living space. Roof eaves and uncovered steps may extend into this setback a maximum
of two feet (2').
C. Cottage Estate lot setbacks:
1. Garage setbacks with direct access to a public roadway shall be no less than twenty feet (20') measured from
the property line to the face of the garage door. In no case shall the driveway length be less than twenty feet
(20') measured from the back of sidewalk to the face of the garage door.
2. Front and corner side yard setbacks shall be no less than twelve feet (12') measured from the property line to
the front porch, exterior wall of the house or side entry garage. Roof eaves and uncovered steps may extend into
this setback a maximum of two feet (2').
3. Rear yard setbacks shall be no less than ten feet (10') measured parallel from the rear lot line to the exterior wall
of the garage, porch, or living space. Roof eaves and uncovered steps may extend into this setback a maximum
of two feet (2').
4. Side yard setbacks shall be no less than five feet (5') measured parallel from the side lot line to the exterior wall
of the garage, porch or living space. Roof eaves and uncovered steps may extend into this setback a maximum
of two feet (2').
D. Garden Estate (alley loaded) lot setbacks:
1. Front and corner side yard setbacks shall be no less than twelve feet (12') measured from the property line to
the porch, exterior wall of the house or side entry garage. Roof eaves and uncovered steps may extend into this
setback a maximum of two feet (2').
2. Rear yard setbacks shall be no less than twenty feet (20') measured perpendicular from the edge of alley
roadway improvements to the face of the garage door. Setbacks for porch or exterior wall of the house or side
entry garage shall be no less than five feet (5'). Roof eaves and uncovered steps may extend into this setback a
maximum of two feet (2').
3. Side yard setbacks shall be no less than five feet (5') measured parallel from the side lot line to the exterior wall
of the garage, porch or living space. Roof eaves and uncovered steps may extend into this setback a maximum
of two feet (2'). (Ord. 2011-07, 4-19-2011, eff. 6-5-2011)
18.78C.080.060: BUILDING HEIGHT:
The following standards apply to all structures within the residential detached:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 435/571
A. Except as provided under subsection B of this section, the building height for the main structure may not exceed
thirty feet (30') to the midpoint of the structure.
B. If the entire main structure is equipped with an automatic fire sprinkler system, a main structure may be a maximum
height of forty five feet (45') measured to the highest point of the roof.
C. For measurement purposes:
1. The height of a structure is measured from the top of the established natural grade of the highest point of the lot;
2. If the natural grade is lower than the established elevation of the street directly in front of the proposed structure,
the grade elevation is established from the highest point of the curb or if a curb is not present six inches (6")
above the existing asphalt of the road;
3. The midpoint of the structure is established by measuring from the lowest roof eave to the highest portion of the
roofline, then calculating the average of the two (2) points; and
4. Decorative elements of the structure, including a clock tower, weather vane, steeple, or uninhabitable penthouse
structure for the housing of an elevator shaft, is not counted in the overall height of a structure. (Ord. 2011-07, 4-
19-2011, eff. 6-5-2011)
18.78C.080.070: LANDSCAPING AND STREET TREE REQUIREMENTS:
All landscaping shall conform to the requirements found in chapter 18.90 of this title and the master landscape plan for
the development.
Street trees shall be required, where appropriate, between the sidewalk and the curb of every street. Said trees shall
be a minimum size of no less than two inch (2") caliper and one tree shall be placed at least every thirty feet (30').
Tree species shall be the same as required in the adopted street tree list for Mapleton City or as otherwise approved
by the city. (Ord. 2011-07, 4-19-2011, eff. 6-5-2011)
18.78C.090: RESIDENTIAL ATTACHED:
The planned development-3 Harmony Ridge district (PD-3HR) incorporates a residential attached land use element
within the overall development with the associated requirements as contained herein. (Ord. 2011-07, 4-19-2011, eff. 6-
5-2011)
18.78C.090.010: PERMITTED USES:
Attached townhomes, condominiums, apartments or other similar uses.
Cultural, religious activities, or civic uses.
Educational institutions.
Home occupations, subject to the provisions of section 18.84.380 of this title.
Public parks and recreation.
Utility facilities. (Ord. 2011-07, 4-19-2011, eff. 6-5-2011)
18.78C.090.020: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 436/571
Accessory buildings are subject to the provisions of section 18.26.020 of this title.
Parks and playgrounds and other associated recreational amenities.
Swimming pools and related equipment. (Ord. 2011-07, 4-19-2011, eff. 6-5-2011)
18.78C.090.030: SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
For the purpose of this chapter, attached residential units are separated into two (2) different districts according to the
Harmony Ridge conceptual plan, each with unique requirements:
A. Rear loaded (alley) townhome unit setbacks:
1. Front yard setbacks shall be no less than twelve feet (12') measured from the front property line to the front
porch, exterior wall of the house or side entry garage. Roof eaves and uncovered steps may extend into this
setback a maximum of two feet (2').
2. Rear yard setbacks shall be no less than twenty feet (20') measured perpendicular from the edge of alley
roadway improvements to the face of the garage door. Setbacks for porch or exterior wall of the house or side
entry garage shall be no less than five feet (5'). Roof eaves and uncovered steps may extend into this setback a
maximum of two feet (2').
3. Corner unit side setback shall not be less than ten feet (10') measured from the property line to the face of the
exterior wall.
4. A minimum distance between adjacent buildings shall be ten feet (10') measured from wall to wall. Roof eaves
and uncovered steps may extend into this setback a maximum of two feet (2').
B. Front loaded townhome unit setbacks:
1. Garage setbacks with direct access to a public roadway shall be no less than twenty feet (20') measured from
the property line to the face of the garage door. In no case shall the driveway length be less than twenty feet
(20') measured from back of sidewalk to the face of the garage door.
2. Front yard setbacks shall be no less than twelve feet (12') measured from the front property line to the front
porch, exterior wall of the house or side entry garage. Roof eaves and uncovered steps may extend into this
setback a maximum of two feet (2').
3. Rear yard setbacks shall be no less than ten feet (10') measured parallel from the rear lot line to the exterior wall
of the garage, porch, or living space. Roof eaves and uncovered steps may extend into this setback a maximum
of two feet (2').
4. Corner unit side setback shall not be less than ten feet (10') measured from the property line to the face of the
exterior wall.
5. A minimum distance between adjacent buildings shall be ten feet (10') measured from wall to wall. Roof eaves
and uncovered steps may extend into this setback a maximum of two feet (2').
C. Condominium or apartment setbacks:
1. Front, side and rear yard setbacks shall be no less than fifteen feet (15') minimum between buildings, parking,
other structures and all public roadways. Roof eaves and uncovered steps may extend into this setback a
maximum of two feet (2'). (Ord. 2011-07, 4-19-2011, eff. 6-5-2011)
18.78C.090.040: BUILDING HEIGHT:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 437/571
The following standards apply to all structures within the residential attached:
A. Except as provided under subsection B of this section, the building height for the main structure may not exceed
thirty feet (30') to the midpoint of the structure.
B. If the entire main structure is equipped with an automatic fire sprinkler system, a main structure may be a maximum
height of forty five feet (45') measured to the highest point of the roof.
C. For measurement purposes:
1. The height of a structure is measured from the top of the established natural grade of the highest point of the lot;
2. If the natural grade is lower than the established elevation of the street directly in front of the proposed structure,
the grade elevation is established from the highest point of the curb or if a curb is not present six inches (6")
above the existing asphalt of the road;
3. The midpoint of the structure is established by measuring from the lowest roof eave to the highest portion of the
roofline, then calculating the average of the two (2) points; and
4. Decorative elements of the structure, including a clock tower, weather vane, steeple, or uninhabitable penthouse
structure for the housing of an elevator shaft, is not counted in the overall height of a structure. (Ord. 2011-07, 4-
19-2011, eff. 6-5-2011)
18.78C.090.050: LANDSCAPING AND STREET TREE REQUIREMENTS:
All landscaping shall conform to the requirements found in chapter 18.90 of this title and the master landscape plan for
the PD-3HR.
Street trees shall be required, where appropriate, between the sidewalk and the curb of every street. Said trees shall
be a minimum size of no less than two inch (2") caliper and one tree shall be placed at least every twenty feet (20')
and no closer than is recommended by a landscape architect for each specific species of street tree. Tree species
shall be the same as required in the adopted street tree list for Mapleton City or as otherwise approved by the city.
All parking lots designed for six (6) or more parking spaces shall provide landscaping in accordance with the
provisions of this section. Parking lots less than six (6) parking spaces shall not be required to provide landscaping
other than yard area landscaping and landscaped buffer requirements as specified in other sections of this chapter.
A total of twenty five percent (25%) of the paved surface area of the parking area will be shaded at tree maturity when
the sun is directly overhead.
Landscaped areas shall be improved in conformance with the following requirements:
A. Interior parking lot landscaping shall be improved in conformance with the following:
1. Interior parking lot landscaping areas shall be dispersed throughout the parking lot. Landscaped islands shall
be required at the end of the parking rows, and at the midpoint of parking rows which exceed ten (10) parking
stalls, or every ten (10) stalls if parking rows exceed twenty (20) stalls.
2. Interior parking lot landscaping areas shall be a minimum of one hundred twenty (120) square feet in area and
shall be a minimum of five feet (5') in width, as measured from back of curb to back of curb.
B. The plants used to improve the landscape areas defined above shall conform to the following:
1. Primary plant materials used in the interior parking lots shall be deciduous shade tree species in conformance
with applicable provisions of section 18.90.070 of this title. Ornamental trees, shrubbery, hedges, and other
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 438/571
plants may be used to supplement the shade tree plantings in perimeter planting areas, but shall not be the
only plants used in such landscaping.
2. One shade tree shall be provided for every one hundred twenty (120) square feet of landscaping area.
3. A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of every interior parking lot landscaping area shall be planted with ground
cover at a density that will achieve complete cover within two (2) years.
C. Six inch by six inch (6" x 6") minimum poured concrete curb controls shall be constructed around all required
landscaping within the interior of parking lots for the protection of the landscaping. (Ord. 2011-07, 4-19-2011, eff.
6-5-2011)
18.78C.100: COMMERCIAL/RETAIL/MIXED USE:
The planned development-3 Harmony Ridge district (PD-3HR) incorporates a commercial/retail/mixed use land use
element within the overall development with the associated requirements as contained herein. (Ord. 2011-07, 4-19-
2011, eff. 6-5-2011)
18.78C.100.010: INTENT:
The intent of the commercial/retail/mixed use zone within the PD-3HR district is to provide a zone primarily for the
accommodation of commercial, retail and mixed uses to serve the residential areas. (Ord. 2011-07, 4-19-2011, eff. 6-
5-2011)
18.78C.100.020: PERMITTED USES:
The following principal uses are permitted in the commercial/retail/mixed use zone within the PD-3HR district. Any use
of land contrary to those uses specifically allowed herein, shall be considered "prohibited" in the
commercial/retail/mixed use zone.
Antiques (indoor display only) sales.
Apparel and accessories - retail sales.
Art studio, sales and galleries.
Athletic clubs, bodybuilding studios, spas, aerobic centers.
Auto washing, detailing, and polishing.
Bakery.
Banks and credit unions (excluding check cashing, "payday" loans and title loan services).
Beauty supplies.
Books, stationery, art, and hobby supplies sales.
Bookstore.
Camera and photograph supply stores.
Clothing and apparel - retail sales (excludes manufacturing).
Commercial printing (only related to retail sales of printed products).
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 439/571
Computer goods and services.
Dancing schools, martial arts studio.
Delicatessen and sandwiches.
Doctors' offices and dental offices.
Drug and proprietary stores.
Drugstores.
Educational services.
Employment services.
Fitness centers.
Florists.
Frames and art supplies.
Furniture, home furnishings, and equipment retail sales.
Garden supplies.
Government and quasi-governmental offices.
Grocery stores and convenience food stores.
Hair salon and cosmetics (including barbershop).
Hardware sales including plumbing and garden supplies.
Health food stores.
Hobbies and games.
Hotels and motels.
Ice cream parlor.
Insurance sales office.
Jewelry sales and repair.
Paint, glass, and wallpaper retail sales.
Personal services - includes laundry, dry cleaning, photography, beauty and barber services, clothing repair, shoe
repair, etc.
Picture frames, mirrors, etc.
Professional offices (general).
Professional offices (miscellaneous uses, including tax preparation, CPA and legal services, insurance sales, and
similar professional uses).
Real estate office.
Residential uses when located above the first floor.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 440/571
Restaurants.
Restaurants (drive-through).
Shoe store and shoe repair.
Small appliance center.
Specialty shops.
Sporting goods.
Sporting goods, bicycles, and toys sales.
Sundries (newspapers, candy, soda and gifts).
Travel agencies.
Video rental (excludes "sexually oriented businesses" as defined in section 5.06.040 of this code).
Video rental shops (excludes adult video).
Watch, clock, jewelry repair, etc.
Wedding reception center. (Ord. 2011-07, 4-19-2011, eff. 6-5-2011)
18.78C.100.030: MIXED USE:
Mixed use structures are subject to provisions of this section:
A. A mixed use commercial and single-family residential structure shall be permitted subject to the following required
conditions:
1. Single-family residential dwelling units shall be located directly above the commercial use on the second or third
story of the building. No basement units shall be permitted. No residential units shall be permitted above or
below another residential dwelling unit.
2. All residential dwelling units must meet all applicable requirements of the international residential building code
as adopted by Mapleton City. Each dwelling unit will be of sufficient size to provide for a salubrious environment
for the enjoyment of the residents who will occupy it. Each dwelling unit shall have a kitchen suitable for cooking
and preparing meals, a bathroom with shower and bathing facilities, a living room and a bedroom. Studio
apartments are permitted so long as they provide space for the amenities as described in this subsection.
3. In addition to the required parking for the commercial use, there shall be no less than two (2) parking spaces per
residential dwelling unit provided. Shared parking, which may reduce the overall parking requirement, may be
utilized based on a parking study performed and certified by a qualified and licensed traffic engineer and as
approved by the city. The traffic study shall take into account proposed and future allowable uses, residential
densities, hours of operation, accessibility and circulation requirements.
4. The maximum density is outlined under section 18.78C.010 of this chapter. The site and parking requirements
will be the limiting factor to the overall number of residential dwelling units. However, the planning commission,
based on concern for health, safety and welfare, may limit the total number of proposed residential dwelling
units.
B. Design standards for mixed use structures:
1. The structure shall not have the appearance of an apartment building, meaning that residential entrances and
entryways shall not be visible on the front facade of the building.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 441/571
2. The combined height of commercial and residential structures shall not exceed the height requirement
established in this chapter.
3. Mixed use structures shall appear as if they were a well designed commercial/retail structure. Building signage
shall be limited to only the entrance or entrances of the commercial portion(s) of the building.
4. Flat or parapet roofs shall be prohibited. Furthermore, any mechanical equipment on the roof shall be
appropriately screened by the same exterior building materials used on the facade of the structure and shall be
used for the screening of the mechanical equipment.
5. Section 17.12.090 of this code shall not apply to buildings or structures within this land use area. Amended
requirements are as follows:
a. Building materials shall be approved by the Mapleton City planning commission.
b. Colors shall reflect the natural surroundings in Mapleton City. Bright colors shall not be permitted.
c. Carports shall be allowed, but shall not be permitted in front of the building. Other appropriate locations shall
be approved by the Mapleton City planning commission. (Ord. 2011-07, 4-19-2011, eff. 6-5-2011)
18.78C.100.040: LOTS, BUILDINGS, YARDS, AND OPEN SPACES:
A. Setbacks: The following setback specifications are required:
1. A minimum ten foot (10') landscaped front yard setback is required.
2. A ten foot (10') landscaped side or rear setback is required for all lot lines along the exterior boundary of
Harmony Ridge or between different land use classifications. A five foot (5') landscaped rear and side yard
setback is required for all other side and rear lot lines.
B. Buildings: The following standards apply to all structures within the commercial/retail/mixed use:
1. Except as provided under subsection B2 of this section, the building height for the main structure may not
exceed thirty feet (30') to the midpoint of the structure.
2. If the entire main structure is equipped with an automatic fire sprinkler system, a main structure may be a
maximum height of forty five feet (45') measured to the highest point of the roof.
3. For measurement purposes:
a. The height of a structure is measured from the top of the established natural grade of the highest point of the
lot;
b. If the natural grade is lower than the established elevation of the street directly in front of the proposed
structure, the grade elevation is established from the highest point of the curb or if a curb is not present six
inches (6") above the existing asphalt of the road;
c. The midpoint of the structure is established by measuring from the lowest roof eave to the highest portion of
the roofline, then calculating the average of the two (2) points; and
d. Decorative elements of the structure, including a clock tower, weather vane, steeple, or uninhabitable
penthouse structure for the housing of an elevator shaft, is not counted in the overall height of a structure.
C. Screening And Landscaping Requirements:
1. All required setback areas shall be landscaped and shall conform to chapter 18.90 of this title. Furthermore, the
landscaping will contain fifteen (15) trees per acre, or a fraction thereof, and be of at least two inch (2") caliper,
measured three feet (3') from the ground. All evergreen trees shall be at least six feet (6') in height.
2. All fencing and screening treatments shall be designed as an integral part of the overall site architecture and
landscaping and approved by the Mapleton City planning commission. Allowable fencing and screening material
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 442/571
includes wrought iron, masonry, or materials matching those of the main building. Black vinyl coated fencing may
be used for areas not requiring screening and as specifically approved by the Mapleton City planning
commission.
3. Waste receptacles, storage tanks, or other similar items are not permitted in the front setback, and shall be
screened from public view with allowable fencing and materials as approved by the Mapleton City planning
commission.
D. Parking: Parking will be required to be in compliance with section 18.84.270 of this title. No vehicle parking will be
allowed in any required setback area. Shared parking, which may reduce the overall parking requirement, may be
utilized based on a parking study performed and certified by a qualified and licensed traffic engineer and as
approved by the city. The traffic study shall take into account proposed and future allowable uses, residential
densities, hours of operation, accessibility and circulation requirements.
E. Driveway Access: No private accesses will be allowed onto Highway 89 or U.S. 6.
F. Frontage: No minimum frontage on a public street is required as long as adequate and permanent access, parking
and circulation is provided from a public street. (Ord. 2011-07, 4-19-2011, eff. 6-5-2011)
18.78C.100.050: PROJECT PLAN APPROVALS:
Project plan approval will be required to be in compliance with section 18.64.060, "Project Plan Approvals", of this title.
(Ord. 2011-07, 4-19-2011, eff. 6-5-2011)
18.78C.100.060: ARCHITECTURAL REQUIREMENTS:
Section 17.12.090 of this code shall not apply to buildings or structures within this land use area. Amended
requirements are as follows:
A. Building materials shall be approved by the Mapleton City planning commission.
B. Colors shall reflect the natural surroundings in Mapleton City. Bright colors shall not be permitted.
C. Carports shall be allowed, but shall not be permitted in front of the building. Other appropriate locations shall be
approved by the Mapleton City planning commission. (Ord. 2011-07, 4-19-2011, eff. 6-5-2011)
18.78C.100.070: OUTSIDE STORAGE PROHIBITED:
The outside storage of any equipment, vehicles or product, is strictly prohibited. Any vacant land or parcel of property
within the commercial/retail/mixed use zone of the PD-3HR district shall also be prohibited from storage of vehicles,
commercial vehicles, building materials, weeds, junk and other debris. (Ord. 2011-07, 4-19-2011, eff. 6-5-2011)
18.78C.110: FLEX SPACE:
The planned development-3 Harmony Ridge district (PD-3HR) incorporates a flex space land use element within the
overall development with the associated requirements as contained herein. (Ord. 2011-07, 4-19-2011, eff. 6-5-2011)
18.78C.110.010: INTENT:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 443/571
The intent of the flex space zone within the PD-3HR district is to provide a zone that transitions from the heavier land
uses associated with the commercial/light industrial to the residential uses. (Ord. 2011-07, 4-19-2011, eff. 6-5-2011)
18.78C.110.020: PERMITTED USES:
The following principal uses are permitted in the flex space zone within the PD-3HR district. Any use of land contrary
to those uses specifically allowed herein, shall be considered "prohibited" in the flex space zone.
Antiques (indoor display only) sales.
Apparel and accessories - retail sales.
Art studio, sales and galleries.
Athletic clubs, bodybuilding studios, spas, aerobic centers.
Auto washing, detailing, and polishing.
Bakery.
Banks and credit unions (excluding check cashing, "payday" loans and title loan services).
Beauty supplies.
Books, stationery, art, and hobby supplies sales.
Bookstore.
Camera and photograph supply stores.
Clothing and apparel - retail sales (excludes manufacturing).
Commercial printing (only related to retail sales of printed products).
Computer goods and services.
Dancing schools, martial arts studio.
Delicatessen and sandwiches.
Doctors' offices and dental offices.
Drug and proprietary stores.
Drugstores.
Educational services.
Employment services.
Fitness centers.
Florists.
Frames and art supplies.
Furniture, home furnishings, and equipment retail sales.
Garden supplies.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 444/571
Government and quasi-governmental offices.
Grocery stores and convenience food stores.
Hair salon and cosmetics (including barbershop).
Hardware sales including plumbing and garden supplies.
Health food stores.
Hobbies and games.
Hotels and motels.
Ice cream parlor.
Insurance sales office.
Jewelry sales and repair.
Paint, glass, and wallpaper retail sales.
Personal services - includes laundry, dry cleaning, photography, beauty and barber services, clothing repair, shoe
repair, etc.
Picture frames, mirrors, etc.
Professional offices (general).
Professional offices (miscellaneous uses, including tax preparation, CPA and legal services, insurance sales, and
similar professional uses).
Real estate office.
Residential uses when located above the first floor.
Restaurants.
Restaurants (drive-through).
Shoe store and shoe repair.
Small appliance center.
Specialty shops.
Sporting goods.
Sporting goods, bicycles, and toys sales.
Sundries (newspapers, candy, soda and gifts).
Travel agencies.
Video rental (excludes "sexually oriented businesses" as defined in section 5.06.040 of this code).
Video rental shops (excludes adult video).
Watch, clock, jewelry repair, etc.
Wedding reception center. (Ord. 2011-07, 4-19-2011, eff. 6-5-2011)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 445/571
18.78C.110.030: MIXED COMMERCIAL AND RESIDENTIAL USES:
Mixed use structures are subject to provisions of this section:
A. A mixed use commercial and single-family residential structure shall be permitted subject to the following required
conditions:
1. Single-family residential dwelling units shall be located directly above the commercial use on the second or third
story of the building. No basement units shall be permitted. No residential units shall be permitted above or
below another residential dwelling unit.
2. All residential dwelling units must meet all applicable requirements of the international residential building code
as adopted by Mapleton City. Each dwelling unit will be of sufficient size to provide for a salubrious environment
for the enjoyment of the residents who will occupy it. Each dwelling unit shall have a kitchen suitable for cooking
and preparing meals, a bathroom with shower and bathing facilities, a living room and a bedroom. Studio
apartments are permitted so long as they provide space for the amenities as described in this subsection.
3. In addition to the required parking for the commercial use, there shall be no less than two (2) parking spaces per
residential dwelling unit provided. Shared parking, which may reduce the overall parking requirement, may be
utilized based on a parking study performed and certified by a qualified and licensed traffic engineer and as
approved by the city. The traffic study shall take into account proposed and future allowable uses, residential
densities, hours of operation, accessibility and circulation requirements.
4. The maximum density is outlined under section 18.78C.010 of this chapter. The site and parking requirements
will be the limiting factor to the overall number of residential dwelling units. However, the planning commission,
based on concern for health, safety and welfare, may limit the total number of proposed residential dwelling
units.
B. Design standards for mixed use structures:
1. The structure shall not have the appearance of an apartment building, meaning that residential entrances and
entryways shall not be visible on the front facade of the building.
2. The combined height of commercial and residential structure shall not exceed the height requirement
established in this chapter.
3. Mixed use structures shall appear as if they were a well designed commercial/retail structure. Building signage
shall be limited to only the entrance or entrances of the commercial portion(s) of the building.
4. Flat or parapet roofs shall be prohibited. Furthermore, any mechanical equipment on the roof shall be
appropriately screened by the same exterior building materials used on the facade of the structure and shall be
used for the screening of the mechanical equipment.
5. Section 17.12.090 of this code shall not apply to buildings or structures within this land use area. Amended
requirements are as follows:
a. Building materials shall be approved by the Mapleton City planning commission.
b. Colors shall reflect the natural surroundings in Mapleton City. Bright colors shall not be permitted.
c. Carports shall be allowed, but shall not be permitted in front of the building. Other appropriate locations shall
be approved by the Mapleton City planning commission. (Ord. 2011-07, 4-19-2011, eff. 6-5-2011)
18.78C.110.040: LOTS, BUILDINGS, YARDS, AND OPEN SPACES:
A. Setbacks: The following setback specifications are required:
1. A minimum ten foot (10') landscaped front yard setback is required.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 446/571
2. A ten foot (10') landscaped side or rear setback is required for all lot lines along the exterior boundary of
Harmony Ridge or between different land use classifications.
B. Buildings: The following standards apply to all structures within the flex space:
1. Except as provided under subsection B2 of this section, the building height for the main structure may not
exceed thirty feet (30') to the midpoint of the structure.
2. If the entire main structure is equipped with an automatic fire sprinkler system, a main structure may be a
maximum height of forty five feet (45') measured to the highest point of the roof.
3. For measurement purposes:
a. The height of a structure is measured from the top of the established natural grade of the highest point of the
lot;
b. If the natural grade is lower than the established elevation of the street directly in front of the proposed
structure, the grade elevation is established from the highest point of the curb or if a curb is not present six
inches (6") above the existing asphalt of the road;
c. The midpoint of the structure is established by measuring from the lowest roof eave to the highest portion of
the roofline, then calculating the average of the two (2) points; and
d. Decorative elements of the structure, including a clock tower, weather vane, steeple, or uninhabitable
penthouse structure for the housing of an elevator shaft, is not counted in the overall height of a structure.
C. Screening And Landscaping Requirements:
1. All required setback areas shall be landscaped, and shall conform to chapter 18.90 of this title. Furthermore, the
landscaping will contain fifteen (15) trees per acre, or a fraction thereof, and be of at least two inch (2") caliper,
measured three feet (3') from the ground. All evergreen trees shall be at least six feet (6') in height.
2. Fencing and screening treatments shall be designed as an integral part of the overall site architecture and
landscaping and approved by the Mapleton City planning commission. Allowable fencing and screening material
includes wrought iron, masonry, or materials matching those of the main building. Black vinyl coated fencing may
be used for areas not requiring screening and as approved by the Mapleton City planning commission.
3. Waste receptacles, storage tanks, or other similar items are not permitted in the front setback, and shall be
screened from public view with allowable fencing and materials as approved by the Mapleton City planning
commission.
D. Parking: Parking will be required to be in compliance with section 18.84.270 of this title. No vehicle parking will be
allowed in any required setback area. Shared parking, which may reduce the overall parking requirement, may be
utilized based on a parking study performed and certified by a qualified and licensed traffic engineer and as
approved by the city. The traffic study shall take into account proposed and future allowable uses, residential
densities, hours of operation, accessibility and circulation requirements.
E. Driveway Access: No private accesses will be allowed onto U.S. 6.
F. Frontage: No minimum frontage on a public street is required as long as adequate and permanent access, parking
and circulation is provided from a public street. (Ord. 2011-07, 4-19-2011, eff. 6-5-2011)
18.78C.110.050: PROJECT PLAN APPROVALS:
Project plan approval will be required to be in compliance with section 18.64.060, "Project Plan Approvals", of this title.
(Ord. 2011-07, 4-19-2011, eff. 6-5-2011)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 447/571
18.78C.110.060: ARCHITECTURAL REQUIREMENTS:
Section 17.12.090 of this code shall not apply to buildings or structures within this land use area. Amended
requirements are as follows:
A. Building materials shall be approved by the Mapleton City planning commission.
B. Colors shall reflect the natural surroundings in Mapleton City. Bright colors shall not be permitted.
C. Carports shall be allowed, but shall not be permitted in front of the building. Other appropriate locations shall be
approved by the Mapleton City planning commission.
As the flex space zone is intended to be a transitional area from commercial/retail uses to residential
neighborhoods, exterior materials are to match the established commercial design standards of Harmony Ridge.
(Ord. 2011-07, 4-19-2011, eff. 6-5-2011)
18.78C.110.070: OUTSIDE STORAGE PROHIBITED:
The outside storage of any equipment, vehicles or product, is strictly prohibited unless specifically approved by the
Mapleton City planning commission. Such approval will also include conditions for appropriate screening methods and
materials. Any vacant land or parcel of property within the flex space zone of the PD-3HR district shall also be
prohibited from storage of vehicles, commercial vehicles, building materials, weeds, junk and other debris. (Ord. 2011-
07, 4-19-2011, eff. 6-5-2011)
18.78C.120: COMMERCIAL/LIGHT INDUSTRIAL:
The planned development-3 Harmony Ridge district (PD-3HR) incorporates a commercial/light industrial land use
element within the overall development with the associated requirements as contained herein. (Ord. 2011-07, 4-19-
2011, eff. 6-5-2011)
18.78C.120.010: INTENT:
The intent of the commercial/light industrial zone within the PD-3HR district is to provide employment related uses
including light manufacturing, assembling, warehousing, and wholesale activities. Associated office and support
commercial uses are allowed. Uses that emit significant amount of air, water or noise pollution will not be allowed.
(Ord. 2011-07, 4-19-2011, eff. 6-5-2011)
18.78C.120.020: PERMITTED USES:
The following principal uses are permitted in the commercial/light industrial zone within the PD-3HR district. Any use of
land contrary to those uses specifically allowed herein, shall be considered "prohibited" in the commercial/light
industrial zone.
Accounting, auditing, bookkeeping services.
Advertising services.
Aircraft and accessories sales, service, and manufacturing.
Apparel and other finished products made from fabrics, leathers, etc.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 448/571
Art studios, including the sculptures, ironwork, pottery, etc.
Audio visual production.
Automotive repair, including brakes, mufflers, tire repair and replacement, body shops, etc.
Bakery products.
Bottling and canning soft drinks and carbonated waters.
Building materials, hardware, farm equipment, and supplies sales.
Commercial testing laboratories and services.
Confectionery and related products.
Consumer and mercantile credit reporting services; adjustment and collection services.
Converted paper and paperboard products manufacturing.
Cut stone and stone products production.
Cutlery, hand tools, and general hardware manufacturing.
Data processing services.
Drugs (manufacturing).
Duplicating, mailing and stenographic services.
Educational services.
Electrical appliance repair.
Engineering and planning services.
Farm and construction vehicles sales and manufacturing.
Finance, insurance, and real estate services.
Flat glass product manufacturing.
Gas and electric utility company office.
Glass and glassware production (pressed or blown).
Governmental and postal services.
Gymnasiums, athletic clubs, bodybuilding studios.
Hotels and motels.
Insurance carriers, agents, brokers, and services.
Legal services.
Light manufacturing of furniture and fixtures.
Mail order houses.
Microfilming services.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 449/571
Miscellaneous machinery sales, service, repair, and manufacturing.
Office machine sales, repair, and manufacturing (small).
Parks.
Perfumes, cosmetics, and other toiletries preparations.
Physician's medical and dental offices and laboratory services in single offices or medical centers.
Pottery and related products production.
Printing, publishing, and allied industries.
Professional, scientific and controlling instruments; photographic and optical goods; watches and clocks.
Recreation and community centers.
Research services.
Security and commodity brokers, dealers, exchange, and services.
Sewage pumping stations.
Textile mill products.
Warehousing with office spaces. (Ord. 2011-07, 4-19-2011, eff. 6-5-2011)
18.78C.120.030: LOTS, BUILDINGS, YARDS, AND OPEN SPACES:
A. Setbacks: The following setback specifications are required:
1. A minimum ten foot (10') landscaped front yard setback is required.
2. A ten foot (10') landscaped side or rear setback is required for all lot lines along the exterior boundary of
Harmony Ridge or between different land use classifications.
B. Buildings: The following standards apply to all structures within the commercial/light industrial:
1. Except as provided under subsection B2 of this section, the building height for the main structure may not
exceed thirty feet (30') to the midpoint of the structure.
2. If the entire main structure is equipped with an automatic fire sprinkler system, a main structure may be a
maximum height of forty five feet (45') measured to the highest point of the roof.
3. For measurement purposes:
a. The height of a structure is measured from the top of the established natural grade of the highest point of the
lot;
b. If the natural grade is lower than the established elevation of the street directly in front of the proposed
structure, the grade elevation is established from the highest point of the curb or if a curb is not present six
inches (6") above the existing asphalt of the road;
c. The midpoint of the structure is established by measuring from the lowest roof eave to the highest portion of
the roofline, then calculating the average of the two (2) points; and
d. Decorative elements of the structure, including a clock tower, weather vane, steeple, or uninhabitable
penthouse structure for the housing of an elevator shaft, is not counted in the overall height of a structure.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 450/571
C. Screening And Landscaping Requirements:
1. All required setback areas shall be landscaped and shall conform to chapter 18.90 of this title. Furthermore, the
landscaping will contain fifteen (15) trees per acre, or a fraction thereof, and be of at least two inch (2") caliper,
measured three feet (3') from the ground. All evergreen trees shall be at least six feet (6') in height.
2. All fencing and screening treatments shall be designed as an integral part of the overall site architecture and
landscaping and approved by the Mapleton City planning commission. Allowable fencing and screening material
includes wrought iron, masonry, or materials matching those of the main building. Black vinyl coated fencing may
be used for areas not requiring screening and as specifically approved by the Mapleton City planning
commission.
3. Waste receptacles, storage tanks, or other similar items are not permitted in the front setback, and shall be
screened from public view with allowable fencing and materials as approved by the Mapleton City planning
commission.
D. Parking: Parking will be required to be in compliance with section 18.84.270 of this title. No vehicle parking will be
allowed in any required setback area. Shared parking, which may reduce the overall parking requirement, may be
utilized based on a parking study performed and certified by a qualified and licensed traffic engineer and as
approved by the city. The traffic study shall take into account proposed and future allowable uses, residential
densities, hours of operation, accessibility and circulation requirements.
E. Driveway Access: No private accesses will be allowed onto Highway 89 or U.S. 6.
F. Frontage: No minimum frontage on a public street is required as long as adequate and permanent access, parking
and circulation is provided from a public street.
G. Exemptions: Hard surfaced areas used as operational yard areas for trucks, trailers and other incidental vehicles,
other than passenger automobiles and light trucks, and which are not parking lots for employees, clients and
customers, shall be exempt from parking lot interior landscaping requirements. Setback landscaping requirements
shall apply.
H. Approval: Where the proposed land use is one which requires the approval of other local, state, federal or other
regulatory agencies, evidence of such approval or compliance shall be submitted as part of the application process
and documentation. (Ord. 2011-07, 4-19-2011, eff. 6-5-2011)
18.78C.120.040: PROJECT PLAN APPROVALS:
Project plan approval will be required to be in compliance with section 18.64.060, "Project Plan Approvals", of this title.
(Ord. 2011-07, 4-19-2011, eff. 6-5-2011)
18.78C.120.050: OUTSIDE STORAGE AND MANUFACTURING REQUIREMENTS:
The outside storage of any equipment, vehicles or product is not permitted unless adequately screened from public
view and adjacent parcels by an approved fencing materials and landscaping and as approved by the Mapleton City
planning commission. The outside manufacturing of products is not permitted unless adequately screened from public
view and adjacent parcels by an approved fencing materials and landscaping and as approved by the Mapleton City
planning commission. (Ord. 2011-07, 4-19-2011, eff. 6-5-2011)
Chapter 18.78D
PD-4 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT-4 MAPLETON HEIGHTS
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 451/571
18.78D.010: PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES:
A. The purposes of the PD-4 Zone include the following:
1. To provide flexibility in the City's zoning scheme in order to allow for a unique, innovative and well planned
development;
2. To allow appropriate high density residential development near or adjacent to Highway 89; and
3. To implement the Mapleton Heights Annexation and Development Agreement. (Ord. 2015-03, 8-5-2015, eff. 9-7-
2015)
18.78D.020: DENSITY:
The overall residential density in the PD-4 Zone shall not exceed two hundred eighty five (285) dwelling units not
counting accessory apartments permitted by this chapter. (Ord. 2015-03, 8-5-2015, eff. 9-7-2015)
18.78D.030: ADEQUATE PUBLIC FACILITIES:
In addition to the specific development standards contained in this chapter, areas zoned PD-4 shall comply with
section 17.04.130, "Availability Of Adequate Public Facilities", of this Code. (Ord. 2015-03, 8-5-2015, eff. 9-7-2015)
18.78D.040: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses shall be permitted in the PD-4 Zone:
Customary residential household pets as defined in section 18.08.010 of this title.
Home occupations, subject to the provisions of section 18.84.380 of this title.
Keeping of animals on lots without animal rights subject to the provisions of section 18.84.240 of this title.
Public facilities.
Residential facilities for elderly persons subject to the provisions of section 18.84.370 of this title.
Residential facilities for persons with a disability subject to the provisions of section 18.84.370 of this title.
Single-family residential dwelling unit.
Temporary fruit and vegetable stands, for the sale of produce raised on the premises, that shall not exceed one
hundred (100) square feet; are maintained in an orderly manner.
The following standards only apply to lots greater than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet: The raising, care and
keeping of limited numbers of livestock and fowl excluding swine for family food production or recreation. Also barns,
corrals, pens and coops and other structures for the care and keeping of domestic livestock and fowl, subject to the
following:
A. The number of animals kept shall not exceed one animal unit for each twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of a
lot. No livestock or fowl shall be kept on any lot containing less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
B. No structure for the housing of livestock or fowl or corrals for the close confinement of livestock shall be located
closer than one hundred feet (100') to an existing dwelling on an adjacent lot or fifty feet (50') to such a dwelling
on the same lot. (Ord. 2015-03, 8-5-2015, eff. 9-7-2015)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 452/571
18.78D.050: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses and structures are permitted in the PD-4 Zone, provided they are incidental to the main residential
dwelling unit, and do not substantially alter the character of the permitted principal use or structure. Such permitted
accessory uses and structures include, but are not limited to, the following:
Accessory apartments are subject to the provisions of section 18.84.410 of this title.
Accessory buildings such as barns, garages, carports, greenhouses, gardening sheds, recreation rooms, and similar
structures which are customarily used in conjunction with and are incidental to a principal use or structure and in
accordance with section 18.26.020 of this title and the following:
A. Accessory structures on lots with less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet shall be limited to a footprint
size that is no greater than the main structure, with a height no taller than the main structure.
B. For lots greater than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, the maximum size on any accessory building, barn,
garage or otherwise, shall be limited to no more than one hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the footprint of
the main dwelling.
Swimming pools and incidental cabanas subject to any and all requirements of the International Building Code (IBC).
(Ord. 2015-03, 8-5-2015, eff. 9-7-2015)
18.78D.060: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following is a list of conditional uses. Such uses may be approved by issuance of a conditional use permit from
the Planning Commission. Uses not specified herein as "permitted" or "conditional" shall be considered prohibited.
Places of worship.
Private schools.
Utility facilities. (Ord. 2015-03, 8-5-2015, eff. 9-7-2015)
18.78D.070: LOT REQUIREMENTS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the detached residential lots are separated into three (3) different districts, according
to the Mapleton Heights conceptual plan, each with unique requirements. These areas are defined by geographical
area as shown in the Mapleton Heights Annexation and Development Agreement.
A. Ranch Estate lot requirements:
1. Minimum Area: Forty three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet.
2. Minimum Frontage: One hundred feet (100'). Cul-de-sac lots and lots on bulbs shall have the minimum frontage
measured at the front yard setback line.
3. Minimum Depth: One hundred feet (100').
B. Hillside Estate lot requirements:
1. Minimum Area: Nine thousand (9,000) square feet.
2. Minimum Frontage: Seventy feet (70'). Cul-de-sac lots and lots on bulbs shall have the minimum frontage
measured at the front yard setback line.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 453/571
3. Minimum Depth: One hundred feet (100').
C. Estate lot requirements:
1. Minimum Area: Six thousand (6,000) square feet.
2. Minimum Frontage: Fifty five feet (55'). Cul-de-sac lots and lots on bulbs shall have the minimum frontage
measured at the front yard setback line.
3. Minimum Depth: Seventy five feet (75'). (Ord. 2015-03, 8-5-2015, eff. 9-7-2015)
18.78D.080: SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
A. Ranch Estate lot setbacks:
1. All structures shall maintain a front yard setback of no less than twenty five feet (25') measured from the
property line to the foundation of the main structure. If the garage doors face the street, the garage, whether
attached or detached, shall be setback at least thirty feet (30') from the front property line and at least twenty feet
(20') from the back of sidewalk. For corner lots, both street frontages must comply with the front yard setback.
2. The main structure shall maintain a rear yard setback of no less than twenty five feet (25') measured from the
rear property line to the foundation of the main building. Detached accessory buildings may be constructed in
accordance with section 18.26.020 of this title.
3. The main structure shall maintain a side yard setback of no less than ten feet (10') measured from the property
line to the foundation of the structure. Detached accessory buildings may be constructed in accordance with
section 18.26.020 of this title.
B. Hillside Estate lot setbacks:
1. All structures shall maintain a front yard setback of no less than twenty feet (20') measured from the property
line to the foundation of the main structure. If the garage doors face the street, the garage, whether attached or
detached, shall be setback at least twenty five feet (25') from the front property line and at least twenty feet (20')
from the back of sidewalk. For corner lots, both street frontages must comply with the front yard setback.
2. The main structure shall maintain a rear yard setback of no less than twenty feet (20') measured from the rear
property line to the foundation of the main building. Detached accessory buildings may be constructed in
accordance with section 18.26.020 of this title.
3. The main structure shall maintain a side yard setback of no less than ten feet (10') measured from the property
line to the foundation of the structure. Detached accessory buildings may be constructed in accordance with
section 18.26.020 of this title.
C. Estate lot setbacks:
1. All structures shall maintain a front yard setback of no less than fifteen feet (15') measured from the property line
to the foundation of the main structure. If the garage doors face the street, the garage, whether attached or
detached, shall be setback at least twenty feet (20') from the front property line and at least twenty feet (20') from
the back of sidewalk. For corner lots, both street frontages must comply with the front yard setback.
2. The main structure shall maintain a rear yard setback of no less than twenty feet (20') measured from the rear
property line to the foundation of the main building. Detached accessory buildings may be constructed in
accordance with section 18.26.020 of this title.
3. The main structure shall maintain a side yard setback of no less than five feet (5') measured from the property
line to the foundation of the structure. Detached accessory buildings may be constructed in accordance with
section 18.26.020 of this title.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 454/571
D. The following structures or features may be erected on or projected into any required yard:
1. Fences and walls in conformance with this Code and approval by the Planning and Zoning Director. Other City
codes or ordinances also apply.
2. Landscape elements including trees, shrubs, agricultural crops, and other plants.
3. Necessary appurtenances for utility service.
4. The structures listed below may project into a minimum front or rear yard not more than four feet (4'), and into a
minimum side yard not more than two feet (2'):
a. Cornices, eaves, belt courses, sills, buttresses, or other similar architectural features.
b. Fireplace structures and bays, provided that they are not wider than eight feet (8') measured generally parallel
to the wall of which they are a part.
c. Stairways, balconies, door stoops, fire escapes, awnings, and planter boxes or masonry planters not
exceeding twenty four inches (24") in height.
d. Porte-cochere over a driveway in a side yard, providing such structure is not more than one story in height
and twenty four feet (24') in length, and is entirely open on at least three (3) sides except for necessary
supporting columns and customary architectural features. (Ord. 2015-03, 8-5-2015, eff. 9-7-2015)
18.78D.090: ADDITIONAL SETBACK REQUIREMENTS OR LIABILITY DISCLAIMERS:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to preclude Mapleton City from setting additional setback requirements, or
requiring inclusion of liability disclaimers associated with physical hazards of a geologic nature. Such additional
requirements are to be part of any final plat or development agreement. (Ord. 2015-03, 8-5-2015, eff. 9-7-2015)
18.78D.100: BUILDING HEIGHT:
No lot or parcel of land in the PD-4 Zone shall have a building or structure which exceeds a height of two (2) stories
with a maximum of forty feet (40') as defined in section 18.08.010 of this title. (Ord. 2015-03, 8-5-2015, eff. 9-7-2015)
18.78D.110: LANDSCAPING AND STREET TREE REQUIREMENTS:
All landscaping shall conform to the requirements found in chapter 18.90 of this title. (Ord. 2015-03, 8-5-2015, eff. 9-7-
2015)
18.78D.120: DESIGN STANDARDS:
Design elements including, but not limited to, street width, curb radii, drainage facilities, sidewalks, curb and gutter,
fencing, and block standards shall conform to the Mapleton Heights concept plan and Mapleton City standards. (Ord.
2015-03, 8-5-2015, eff. 9-7-2015)
18.78D.130: OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS:
Per the Mapleton Heights Annexation and Development Agreement, the developer shall dedicate a trail head park to
the City consistent with the project concept plan. Any and all other parks, retention basins, play fields, inter-block
walkways, and protected natural areas shall be maintained by the homeowners' association or the property owner of
the property on which the open space is located. (Ord. 2015-03, 8-5-2015, eff. 9-7-2015)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 455/571
18.78D.140: ENFORCEMENT:
If the City deems that open space and parks maintained by homeowners' associations are not being kept to Mapleton
City standards, the City shall have the right to cause such improvements and maintenance to be done and any such
expenses by the City shall be assessed to any of the homeowners' associations of the PD-4 Zone. In the event of the
dissolution or inactivity of any homeowners' associations in the PD-4 Zone, Mapleton City shall have the right to
assume title of the open space and parks, and the City shall then charge the individual property owners within the
applicable areas for the improvements, maintenance, and administrative fees required for the above mentioned open
space and parks. (Ord. 2015-03, 8-5-2015, eff. 9-7-2015)
Chapter 18.80
OS-P OPEN SPACE AND PARKS ZONE
18.80.010: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose and intent of the OS-P open space and parks zone is to establish areas anywhere in Mapleton City
where only open space and generally undeveloped lands are to be encouraged. Development of a comprehensive
network of permanent, multifunctional, and publicly owned open spaces shall be encouraged. All parks owned by the
city may be given the OS-P zone designation. Land that has been legally deeded to the city or land that has had a
conservation easement recorded on it as part of a transferable development right sending site, may be rezoned to the
OS-P zone. (Ord. 2003-16, 6-4-2003, eff. 6-11-2003)
18.80.015: DEFINITIONS:
OPEN SPACE: Any area or parcel of property dedicated to the city, within a recorded conservation easement, either
public or private, or United States forest service land, that would be kept in its natural state for perpetuity, due to its
inability to be used for typical recreational or residential uses.
PARKS: Any area or parcel of property dedicated to the city or within a conservation easement that is to be used for,
or is currently developed for, recreational uses, such as, but not limited to, playgrounds, athletic fields, picnicking, or
group gatherings. These areas would be landscaped and maintained in the same manner as other parks within the
city. All park areas may be deeded to or dedicated to the city with the exception of a private cemetery or private park,
as approved by Mapleton City and maintained by a private homeowners' association. (Ord. 2003-16, 6-4-2003, eff. 6-
11-2003)
18.80.020: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted in the OS-P zone:
City initiated parks, open spaces, trails, museums, cemeteries or other city related activities.
City owned accessory structures for storage of equipment.
City owned buildings and structures for recreation.
City owned or city initiated water detention and/or debris basins.
City owned water well, water storage tank and all related equipment.
Conservation areas including, but not limited to, wilderness areas, watershed areas, wildlife refuges and wetlands.
Forests and urban forests. (Ord. 2003-16, 6-4-2003, eff. 6-11-2003)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 456/571
18.80.030: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following uses are conditional in the OS-P zone:
Horse stable or horse arena and related structures and equipment.
Private cemetery.
Private golf courses (except clubhouse, concessions and other commercial uses that will require a commercial zone,
and project plan approval).
Private water detention and/or debris basin.
Private water well or at grade storage tank and related equipment. (Ord. 2003-16, 6-4-2003, eff. 6-11-2003)
18.80.040: AREA REQUIREMENTS:
Minimum area requirements are to be determined by the Planning Commission and City Council. City owned property
for the use of a TDR-S (transferable development rights - sending) shall have a base density of one acre and a
minimum five (5) acre site. (Ord. 2007-27, 11-7-2007, eff. 12-7-2007)
18.80.045: BUILDING HEIGHT, SIZE AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
All buildings within one hundred feet (100') of a property line must meet the required front and side yard setbacks that
are required in the adjacent zone district. Otherwise, the setbacks shall be determined by the Planning Commission.
Unless otherwise approved by conditional use permit, building height shall be limited to forty feet (40') as defined in
section 18.08.010 of this title. There shall be no minimum building size. (Ord. 2013-05, 6-18-2013, eff. 7-12-2013)
18.80.050: LANDSCAPING:
All areas not covered by buildings, pavement for roads and parking lots, or walkways, shall be landscaped as required
by chapter 18.90 of this title, except that a separate landscaping plan may be accepted by the Planning Commission.
Areas that are meant to be preserved, such as hillside areas, wildlife preserves, or forests, shall be excluded from any
landscaped standards. Land given to the City for the purpose of a future park, or land purchased by the City for the
purpose of a future park, may remain undeveloped and unlandscaped until such time the funds can be appropriated to
finish the park. (Ord. 2003-16, 6-4-2003, eff. 6-11-2003)
18.80.060: MAINTENANCE OF FACILITIES:
A. Parcels of property dedicated to the City for the use of a park shall be maintained by City employees, individuals
contracted by the City, or volunteers, such as, but not limited to, scout projects, recreational groups, etc., under the
direction of City staff.
B. Open space areas should not need maintenance other than for safety reasons, such as fire roads, trails, access to
water wells and water tanks, debris basins, utilities, etc. The maintenance would be performed by City employees
or forest service employees. (Ord. 2003-16, 6-4-2003, eff. 6-11-2003)
18.80.070: SIGNS:
Signs for private parks and parks not owned by Mapleton City, shall conform to chapter 18.86 of this title. Only
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 457/571
monument signs, guide signs, directional signs and wall signs shall be permitted. Private signs not owned by Mapleton
City shall require a sign permit. (Ord. 2003-16, 6-4-2003, eff. 6-11-2003)
18.80.080: PARKING:
The parking lot of any City park as defined and allowed herein shall be sufficient to accommodate the anticipated
parking needs of the general public. Hillside areas owned by Mapleton City, or properties with recorded conservation
easements associated with a transferable development right sending site shall be excluded from any parking
requirements unless otherwise required by the Planning Commission or City Council. The number of parking spaces
shall be determined in section 18.84.270 of this title. Parking related to private buildings shall conform to section
18.84.270 of this title. (Ord. 2003-16, 6-4-2003, eff. 6-11-2003)
18.80.090: PROJECT PLAN APPROVALS:
Any private buildings or structures within the OS-P Zone shall be required to obtain project plan approvals for such.
A. Concurrent with any request to rezone property to the OS-P Zone; or if the property is currently zoned OS-P, prior
to any approval for a building permit, a preliminary project plan shall be submitted to and approved by the Mapleton
City Planning Commission. Said preliminary project plan shall be drawn to scale and shall contain the following
information:
1. Location of all existing and proposed buildings and structures on the site, including an indication of the proposed
uses;
2. The location of all parking spaces as required by the Planning Commission, driveways, and points of vehicular
ingress and egress;
3. A conceptual signing plan showing the location and size of typical signs;
4. A conceptual landscaping plan subject to the requirements in chapter 18.90 of this title showing planting
materials to be used together with the location of fences, walls, hedges, and decorative materials;
5. Preliminary elevations of the buildings showing the general appearance and types of exterior materials to be
used;
6. No buildings or structures shall be located above or east of the Wasatch fault as shown on the official Utah
County geological hazards map. Gazebos and open air pavilions (open on at least 3 sides), with a size less than
five hundred (500) square feet shall be excluded.
Accessory structures less than five hundred (500) square feet in size shall be approved by the planning director
as long as the structure does not encroach on any of the required parking or required landscape areas.
Furthermore, building additions less than five hundred (500) square feet shall also be approved by the planning
director so long as they meet the aforementioned criteria, and as long as the addition does not physically alter
the character of the building. Accessory buildings and additions shall be architecturally compatible with the main
structure, including exterior building materials and colors.
B. Prior to the construction of any building or structure in the OS-P zone, a final project plan shall be submitted and
approved by the city council, after a recommendation from the planning commission. Said project plan shall be
drawn to scale and shall contain all required information designated on the application checklist. The planning
commission may require a traffic study be submitted prior to a final project plan recommendation.
C. Any failure to submit a final project plan within one year of the approval of the preliminary project plan shall
terminate all proceedings and render the preliminary plan null and void, and the planning commission may also
take further action to rezone the property as per section 18.12.010 of this title. (Ord. 2003-16, 6-4-2003, eff. 6-11-
2003)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 458/571
Chapter 18.82
PRC PLANNED RESIDENTIAL COMMUNITY ZONE
18.82.010: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of the planned residential community zone is to encourage imaginative and efficient utilization of land,
develop a sense of community, and to ensure compatibility with the surrounding neighborhoods and environment. This
is accomplished by providing greater flexibility in the location of buildings on the land, the consolidation of open
spaces, and the clustering of some or all dwelling units. These provisions are intended to create more attractive and
desirable environments within the residential areas of Mapleton City.
A "planned residential community (PRC)" is a residential development planned as a whole single development. It
incorporates a definite development theme which could include the elements of usable open spaces, diversity of lot
design, amenities, a well planned circulation system, and attractive entrances as part of the design.
The PRC shall only be used in the areas of the city that have a current zone designation of A-2, RA-1 and RA-2. No
other zone designation shall be permitted to rezone to the PRC zone, unless the general plan designation of the
property is either very low or low density residential. (Ord. 2004-25, 8-11-2004, eff. 9-9-2004)
18.82.020: PLANNED RESIDENTIAL COMMUNITY ZONE MAPS:
A planned residential community zone shall include the following plan maps:
A. A boundary map shall be prepared for every planned residential community zone. The boundary map, based on
parcel boundaries or other surveyed boundaries, shall be used to delineate areas of the zoning district that lie
within the city's boundaries on the official zone map. The zone map shall identify such areas as "PRC" and shall
include the name of the planned residential community. Each zone shall also have a corresponding number, such
as PRC-1 and so on.
B. A conceptual development plan based on an adopted or proposed planned residential community shall accompany
each application for rezoning to a PRC zone. (Ord. 2004-25, 8-11-2004, eff. 9-9-2004)
18.82.030: PLANNED RESIDENTIAL COMMUNITY ZONE TEXT:
Each planned residential community zone ordinance shall include the following provisions and standards:
A. Name And Purpose: The name and purpose of the zone. This section shall describe the zone in sufficient detail as
to clarify the purpose and intent of the PRC zone regulations.
B. Review And Approval Process: A review and approval process consisting of three (3) elements as follows:
1. Approval of a planned residential community, including maps, text, and conceptual development plan for the site
in question;
2. Approval of a PRC zone text and map amendment to implement the plan and the rezone of the property;
3. Approval of a detailed development plan, subdivision, performance development, or condominium plat, if
applicable.
C. Text And Map Amendments: Applications for the PRC zone text and map amendments shall be processed following
the procedures set forth in section 18.12.010 of this title.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 459/571
D. Application Process: An application for project development plan and subdivision shall be processed following the
procedures set forth in aforementioned sections of this code.
E. Permitted Land Uses: This section shall identify permitted, conditional, and accessory land uses.
F. Land Use Standards: This section shall specify any required land use conditions (i.e., land use mix, density, open
space, buffering, etc.), and the review procedure required to review and approve each land use (design review,
project plan review, conditional use, etc.). The criteria set forth in this code shall be used in creating land use
standards.
G. Lot Standards: This section shall specify requirements for new lots such as lot area, dimensions, and density, as
applicable.
H. Building Setbacks: This section shall provide setback standards for front, side and rear yards, as applicable.
I. Design Standards: The design standards set forth in section 17.12.090 of this code shall apply to all planned
residential community zones. In addition, each such zone shall include design standards to address building
heights, building orientation, common and private open space, natural resource protection, architectural design,
and any other provisions unique to the district.
J. Building Height: This section shall establish building height standards as per section 18.82.080 of this chapter.
K. Density: An element of the PRC zone text shall indicate the total density of the project. It should also indicate that
no new subdivision lots shall be permitted beyond that which was originally approved, for the purpose of increasing
the density. (Ord. 2004-25, 8-11-2004, eff. 9-9-2004)
18.82.040: EXCEPTIONS TO DEVELOPMENT AND DESIGN STANDARDS AFTER ADOPTION OF
PLAN AND ZONE:
When a planned residential community is adopted and the subject property has been placed in a PRC zone, the
development plan and development standards associated with the zone shall be strictly construed. No variations shall
be made from the development plan and standards adopted in the zone unless expressly approved by the city council
with recommendation from the planning commission for the purpose of achieving better design. In taking such action
the planning commission and city council shall:
A. Make a finding that the amendment will result in better design; and
B. Be bound by the standards set forth in the text of the applicable PRC zone which governs the development plan.
(Ord. 2004-25, 8-11-2004, eff. 9-9-2004)
18.82.050: PERMITTED USES:
The applicant or developer of each PRC zone may create a zone text for the development that is more restrictive than
this code. The governing text of each development that is more restrictive shall apply. The following are the generally
permitted uses in the PRC zone:
Accessory buildings, in conjunction with and incidental to the main use of the property, such as a shed or detached
garage or agricultural building subject to the standards of section 18.26.020 of this title.
Animal rights. Subject to the original zone designation of the property, or the zone designation allowed in the general
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 460/571
plan designation of the land:
A. The applicant or developer of the project within a PRC, at their discretion, may or may not allow animal rights
within the project, unless the proposed project is within the RA-2 zone designation, where there shall be no
animal rights within the development. This will be reflected in the zone text for each PRC zone. Animal rights in
each PRC zone may be more restrictive than this code, but in no case shall they be less restrictive.
B. In no case shall animal rights be allowed on a lot or parcel of less than one acre in size, and in no case shall
animal rights be allowed on a lot that is adjacent to a parcel without animal rights.
C. When possible, common areas for the purpose of housing animals should be considered. These would include
horse stables and riding facilities and would be held in common by the homeowners within the PRC
development.
Clubhouse, swimming pool and other recreational amenities for the development.
Detached single-family residential dwelling unit.
Private and public parks.
Swimming pools and related equipment.
Utility facilities. (Ord. 2004-25, 8-11-2004, eff. 9-9-2004; amd. Ord. 2014-02, 1-7-2014, eff. 2-2-2014)
18.82.060: CONDITIONAL USES:
Home occupations (subject to section 18.84.380 of this title).
Owner occupied accessory apartments; allowed for homes on lots with fourteen thousand five hundred (14,500)
square feet or greater, and subject to approvals as outlined in section 18.84.410 of this title.
Places of worship.
Private secondary irrigation system for the project (subject to secondary irrigation ordinance and requirements).
Public educational institutions. (Ord. 2004-25, 8-11-2004, eff. 9-9-2004)
18.82.070: DENSITY AND THE USE OF TRANSFERABLE DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS (TDRs):
A. The density of the proposed development shall be the same density as allowed in the General Plan designation.
Residential densities shall be determined pursuant to title 17, chapter 17.02 of this Code. A concept plan that
meets all of the requirements set forth in the zone for a subdivision shall be presented to the planning staff to
determine the density of the proposed development. All lot and road standards shall apply.
B. A density bonus shall only be permitted exclusively with the use of TDRs. TDRs may be used to increase the
overall density. The maximum density shall be no more than double of the established density in the original
General Plan designation. (Ord. 2006-36, 11-21-2006)
18.82.080: BUILDING HEIGHT:
No lot or parcel of land in the PRC Zone shall have a building or structure used for dwelling or public assembly which
exceeds a height of two (2) stories with a maximum of forty feet (40') as defined in section 18.08.010 of this title unless
otherwise stated in a development agreement. (Ord. 2013-05, 6-18-2013, eff. 7-12-2013)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 461/571
18.82.090: PROJECT ACREAGE REQUIREMENT:
The minimum size requirement for any project applying for the PRC Zone shall be no less than fifteen (15) acres.
Parcels with less than fifteen (15) acres may be combined with other adjacent parcels to meet the minimum acreage
requirements. The City Council may waive this requirement upon recommendation from the Planning Commission if
the parcel proposed to be rezoned is surrounded by existing development directly adjacent to the proposed project on
at least three (3) sides. However, in no case shall the minimum project site be less than ten (10) acres. (Ord. 2004-25,
8-11-2004, eff. 9-9-2004)
18.82.100: LOT REQUIREMENTS FOR DWELLING UNITS:
There shall be no lot size requirements in the PRC Zone, except that lots shall be of a sufficient size to accommodate
the anticipated home sizes within the development, and to meet the required setbacks. (Ord. 2004-25, 8-11-2004, eff.
9-9-2004)
18.82.110: SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
Each PRC Zone text shall outline the setback requirements for the development, however, the PRC text shall not be
less restrictive than the following setback standards for the PRC Zone:
A. Subdivision Lots:
1. Front yard setback shall be no less than thirty feet (30') measured from the edge of the street right of way to the
foundation of the home.
2. Corner lot side yards shall be measured the same as the front yard.
3. Rear yard setback shall be no less than twenty five feet (25') measured from the rear property line to the
foundation of the home.
4. Side yard setbacks shall be no less than ten feet (10') measured from the property line to the foundation of the
home.
B. Pad Sites: Pad sites surrounded by open space areas provided for the purpose of a dwelling unit shall have the
following setback requirements:
1. Front yard setback shall be no less than thirty feet (30') measured from the edge of the street right of way to the
foundation of the home.
2. Corner lots shall have a setback of twenty feet (20') measured from the edge of the street right of way to the
foundation of the home.
3. Side yard to property line: Ten feet (10').
4. Rear yard to property line or zone boundary: Twenty five feet (25') measured from the edge of the foundation to
the property line or zone boundary line.
5. There shall be a minimum setback between dwellings of twenty feet (20') in the rear yard and fifteen feet (15') for
the side yard. In no case shall any dwelling unit be closer than fifteen feet (15') to another dwelling. (Ord. 2004-
25, 8-11-2004, eff. 9-9-2004)
18.82.120: PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
All dwelling units, whether or not on a lot or pad site, shall have an attached or detached two (2) car garage that is fully
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 462/571
enclosed. All dwelling units shall have a paved hard surface driveway no less than twenty feet (20') in length and
sixteen feet (16') in width, from a public street to the required garage. (Ord. 2004-25, 8-11-2004, eff. 9-9-2004)
18.82.125: GATED COMMUNITIES AND PRIVATE STREETS:
Gated communities and private streets are not permitted. (Ord. 2004-25, 8-11-2004, eff. 9-9-2004)
18.82.130: OPEN SPACE, STREET TREES AND LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS:
All landscaping shall conform to the requirements found in chapter 18.90 of this title. Any private open space areas
shall be maintained by a homeowners' association and fees shall be collected from all related parties, property
owners, or residents therein, to assure the maintenance of the open space areas. Open space areas may include the
land around the residential areas.
A. Street Trees Required For Subdivision Lots: Street trees shall be required in the park strip area between a sidewalk
and the curb and gutter of every street. Said trees shall be of a minimum size of no less than one inch (1") caliper,
and one tree shall be placed every twenty (20) to thirty feet (30') depending on the canopy spread of the tree. Tree
species shall be same as required in the adopted Mapleton City tree list as per chapter 18.56 of this code.
B. Landscaping Requirements: For both pad sites and lots, seventy five percent (75%) of front yard must be lawn or
other appropriate landscaping. That area not kept in landscaping must be hard surfaced areas, such as driveways,
pathways, or other recognized landscape materials as mentioned in chapter 18.90 of this title.
1. Additional Requirements For Pad Sites: Automatic surface sprinkling system for front yard shall be required.
This will include lawn area, planting strip in front of the house and between sidewalk and curb. Each station shall
provide sufficient water to meet needs of plants being watered. (Ord. 2004-25, 8-11-2004, eff. 9-9-2004)
18.82.140: GUARANTEES AND COVENANTS:
Adequate guarantees shall be provided for permanent retention and maintenance of all open space areas created
within a PRC. No plats will be recorded and no bonds will be released until all required guarantees have been
submitted to and approved by the planning commission and city council. Said open space guarantees may include the
following:
A. The city may require the developer to furnish and record protective covenants which will guarantee the retention of
the open land area, or the city may require the creation of a corporation granting beneficial rights to the open space
to all owners or occupants of land within the development.
B. The developer shall be required to develop and provide for the maintenance of all open space, unless part of or all
of it is contiguous to and is made part of an existing park, and the city accepts dedication and approves the
annexation of the property to said park.
C. In the case of private reservation, the open space to be reserved shall be protected against building development
by conveying to the city as part of the condition of project approval, an open space easement over such open
areas, restricting the area against any future building or use.
D. The care and maintenance of the area within such open space reservation shall be ensured by the developer by
establishing a private association or corporation responsible for such maintenance which shall levy the cost thereof
as an assessment on the property owners within the performance development. Ownership and tax liability of
private open space reservations shall be established in a manner acceptable to the city and made a part of the
conditions of the final plan approval.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 463/571
E. Maintenance of open space reservations shall be managed by person, partnership, or corporate entity in which
there is adequate expertise and experience in property management to assure that said maintenance is
accomplished efficiently and at a high standard of quality.
F. Minor changes in the location, siting, and height of buildings and structures may be authorized by the planning
commission and city council without additional public hearings if required by engineering or other circumstances
not foreseen at the time the final plan was approved. No change authorized by this subsection may cause any of
the following:
1. A change in the use or character of the development;
2. An increase in overall coverage of structures;
3. An increase in the intensity of use;
4. An increase in the problems of traffic circulation and public utilities;
5. A reduction in approved open space;
6. A reduction of off street parking and loading space;
7. A reduction in required pavement widths.
8. All other changes in use, or rearrangement of lots, blocks, and building tracts, or any changes in the provision of
common open spaces and changes other than listed above, must be made by the city council after report of the
planning administrator and recommendation by the planning commission.
G. In order to ensure that the PRC development will be constructed to completion in an acceptable manner, the
applicant (owner) shall post a performance bond in compliance with city bonding policy.
H. The establishment of a private association or corporation responsible for all maintenance of facilities owned by the
development, which shall levy the cost thereof as an assessment to each unit owner within the development.
I. The establishment of a management committee, with provisions setting forth the number of persons constituting the
committee, the method of selection, and the powers and duties of said committee; and including the person,
partnership, or corporation with property management expertise and experience who shall be designated to
manage the maintenance of the common areas and facilities in an efficient and quality manner.
J. The method of calling a meeting of the members of the corporation or association with the members thereof that will
constitute a quorum authorized to transact business.
K. The method for maintenance, repair, and replacement of common areas and facilities, and distribution of costs
thereof.
L. The method for maintenance of all private driveways, alleys, and private utilities and acknowledgment that such
maintenance is the responsibility of the homeowners' corporation or association.
M. The manner of collection from unit owners for their share of common expenses, and the method of assessment.
N. Provisions as to percentage of votes by unit owners which shall be necessary to determine whether to rebuild,
repair, restore, or sell property in the event of damage or destruction of all or part of the project.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 464/571
O. The method and procedure by which the declaration may be amended: the declaration required herein, any
amendment, and any instrument affecting the property or any unit therein shall be approved by the planning
commission and city council, and recorded with the county recorder. Neither the declaration nor any amendment
thereto shall be valid until approved and recorded. Said declaration and amendments thereto shall be maintained
as part of the project plan for the performance development.
P. In case of failure or neglect to comply with any and all of the conditions and regulations herein established, and as
specifically made applicable to a performance development, the planning administrator shall not issue a certificate
of zoning compliance therefor. Such failure or neglect shall be cause for termination of the approval of the project.
Such failure or neglect to comply with the requirements and to maintain the buildings and premises in accordance
with the conditions or approval thereafter shall also be deemed to be a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2004-25, 8-
11-2004, eff. 9-9-2004)
18.82.150: DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT REQUIRED:
Prior to the rezone hearing before the city council for the PRC zone, the applicant shall provide a detailed
development agreement that details the entire project, the total amount of units or lots, the amounts of open spaces
and landscaped areas, and any other amenities that the applicant is willing to proffer as part of the development. Said
development agreement will also incorporate any recommended required changes made by the planning commission.
Accompanied with the final development agreement shall be the correct legal description of the property, a planning
commission approved copy of the preliminary plan or plat, as well as any proposed architectural elevations of homes
or buildings. At the request of the city council, other language may be required in the development agreement to
assure the city that the plans will match the final product built. Said agreement shall be recorded with the Utah County
recorder's office, and will be attached to the title of the property to inform future or prospective property buyers of the
requirements of developing the property under the PRC zone designation. Any renegotiation of the development
agreement may only occur when the applicant or owner of the property petitions the city to amend the PRC plan for
the property as per the requirements of this title. (Ord. 2004-25, 8-11-2004, eff. 9-9-2004)
18.82.160: PHASING:
If the project is done in phases, no remnant parcels shall be created. Any land not proposed for development shall be
designated and platted as open space. Furthermore, each phase adjacent to any dedicated open space areas,
including parks, walking paths or otherwise, as shown on the approved concept plan shall be included with the
proposed phase. Upon approval by the city council, a portion of any proposed open space may be dedicated with
each phase or plat. (Ord. 2004-25, 8-11-2004, eff. 9-9-2004)
Chapter 18.82A
HILLCREST SUBDIVISION, PLANNED RESIDENTIAL COMMUNITY
(PRC-1) ZONE
18.82A.005: NAME AND PURPOSE:
The name of this zone shall be the Hillcrest Subdivision PRC-1 Zone. The purpose of the zone is to create standards
that allow the union of flexibility and uniformity, beauty and functionality, and privacy and community throughout the
Hillcrest Subdivision. (Ord. 2007-24, 11-7-2007)
18.82A.010: PERMITTED USES:
One single-family residence per lot.
Parks and/or open space (Lot 17 only).
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 465/571
Temporary structures necessary for sales and/or construction activities, subject to subsection 18.84.200B of this title.
(Ord. 2007-24, 11-7-2007)
18.82A.020: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses are permitted in the Hillcrest Subdivision PRC-1 Zone, provided that the use is incidental to the main
dwelling unit and does not distract from or conflict with the character and purpose of the principal permitted use. All
accessory uses are subject to acquisition of any approvals, permits, or licenses required to construct, operate, or
maintain said use. Permitted accessory uses include:
Animal rights. Customary residential household pets as defined in section 18.08.010 of this title. Livestock, poultry, or
large animals, including horses and other beasts of burden are strictly prohibited.
Fences and walls.
Home occupations subject to section 18.84.380 of this title.
One recreational area constructed on a commonly held parcel (Lot 17), consisting of open/green space, playground
equipment, and a pavilion or similar open gathering structure.
Owner occupied accessory apartments subject to section 18.84.410 of this title.
Pools, tennis courts, or other recreational facilities.
Private nurseries, greenhouses, or gardens. (Ord. 2007-24, 11-7-2007)
18.82A.030: CONDITIONAL USES:
The principal use of the Hillcrest Subdivision PRC-1 Zone is a single-family residential community. No conditional uses
outside of the principal or accessory uses are permitted. (Ord. 2007-24, 11-7-2007)
18.82A.040: LAND USE STANDARDS:
There are no land use standards except as outlined in sections 18.82A.010 and 18.82A.020 of this chapter. (Ord.
2007-24, 11-7-2007)
18.82A.050: LOT STANDARDS:
The minimum lot size within the Hillcrest Subdivision PRC-1 Zone is seventeen thousand four hundred (17,400)
square feet (0.4 acre). The zone shall consist of no more than seventeen (17) lots. No new subdivision lots shall be
permitted beyond those originally approved for the purpose of increasing this density. (Ord. 2007-24, 11-7-2007)
18.82A.060: BUILDING SETBACKS:
The minimum setbacks for improvements constructed on lots in the Hillcrest Subdivision PRC-1 zone are as follows:
A. Main Building:
1. Front yard setback: No less than thirty feet (30') measured from the property line.
2. Corner lot side yards: Measured the same as the front yard.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 466/571
3. Rear yard setback: No less than twenty five feet (25') measured from the rear property line to the foundation of
the home.
4. Side yard setback: No less than ten feet (10') measured from the property line to the foundation of the home.
B. Accessory Building: No accessory building shall be any closer to the front property line than the main building.
1. Setbacks for accessory buildings less than or equal to twelve feet (12') in height shall be as follows:
a. Rear yard setback: Three feet (3') from the property line to structure, but no less than fifteen feet (15') from
any existing accessory structure on an adjacent lot, and no less than forty feet (40') from an existing residence
on an adjacent lot.
b. Side yard setback: Three feet (3') from the property line to structure, but no less than fifteen feet (15') from any
existing accessory structure on an adjacent lot, and no less than forty feet (40') from an existing residence on
an adjacent lot.
2. Setbacks for accessory buildings greater than twelve feet (12') in height shall be as follows:
a. Rear yard setback: Ten feet (10') from the property line to structure, but no less than fifteen feet (15') from any
existing accessory structure on an adjacent lot, and no less than forty feet (40') from an existing residence on
an adjacent lot.
b. Side yard setback: Ten feet (10') from the property line to structure, but no less than fifteen feet (15') from any
existing accessory structure on an adjacent lot, and no less than forty feet (40') from an existing residence on
an adjacent lot. (Ord. 2007-24, 11-7-2007)
18.82A.070: BUILDING HEIGHT:
A. Main building: No more than thirty feet (30') and a maximum of two (2) stories, measured from the finished grade of
the lot to the midpoint of the roof pitch. Measurement shall be taken on three (3) sides of the home. Finished grade
shall be established thirty feet (30') away from the front of the home, or from top of the curb (if present) or the
middle point of the street directly in front of the home. If the home is located farther than thirty feet (30') from a city
street, then the measurement shall be taken of the established grade ten feet (10') from the home.
B. Accessory building: No more than thirty feet (30') from finished grade to the highest roof pitch. Measurement shall
be taken on three (3) sides of the structure, and finished grade shall be established ten feet (10') from the structure
based on the average elevation of each side. (Ord. 2007-24, 11-7-2007)
18.82A.080: PARKING AND DRIVEWAY REQUIREMENTS:
A one-family dwelling shall provide at least four (4) off street parking spaces. At least two (2) of the spaces shall be
located in an attached or detached garage that is fully enclosed. All dwelling units shall have a concrete driveway no
less than thirty feet (30') in length and sixteen feet (16') in width, measured from the property line to the required
garage. (Ord. 2007-24, 11-7-2007)
18.82A.090: LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS:
Street trees shall be required in the park strip area between a sidewalk and the curb and gutter of every street. Said
trees shall be of a minimum size of no less than two inch (2") caliper, and one tree shall be placed every twenty (20) to
thirty feet (30') depending on the canopy spread of the tree. Tree species shall be as required in the adopted Mapleton
City tree list as per chapter 18.56 of this title. Seventy five percent (75%) of front yards must be lawn or other
appropriate landscaping. That area not kept in landscaping must be hard surfaced areas, such as driveways,
pathways, or other recognized landscape materials as mentioned in chapter 17.15 of this code. (Ord. 2007-24, 11-7-
2007)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 467/571
18.82A.100: LOT 17:
Lot 17 will be set aside as a park area that will be fully landscaped, including a pavilion, walking path, and a tot lot.
The park improvements shall be completed one year from the date of the recording of the plat. The Hillcrest
Homeowners' Association will be responsible for the maintenance and upkeep of lot 17. If the association defaults (as
defined in section 18.82A.120 of this chapter) ownership of lot 17 shall pass to Mapleton City. (Ord. 2007-24, 11-7-
2007)
18.82A.110: HIGH WATER TABLE:
Lots 1, 2, and 16 in the Hillcrest subdivision PRC-1 zone have been designated as being located in areas with a high
water table. No homes with basement foundations shall be built on these lots. (Ord. 2007-24, 11-7-2007)
18.82A.120: TRANSFER OF COMMON AREAS TO MAPLETON CITY:
In the event of a default by the homeowners' association, all of the homeowners' association's right, title and interest in
and to the common areas, shall pass to Mapleton City. Upon default by the homeowners' association and transfer of
ownership of common areas to the city the residents within the development shall pay all costs of maintenance of
common areas to the city. In the event of default Mapleton City may assess a monthly maintenance fee to all
residences in order to maintain the common areas as they were previously maintained. For purposes of this section,
the occurrence of any of the following shall constitute a default by the homeowners' association:
A. The dissolution or liquidation of the homeowners' association;
B. The homeowners' association shall become insolvent, or shall suffer or consent to or apply for the appointment of a
receiver, trustee, custodian or liquidator of itself or any of its property, or shall generally fail to pay its debts as they
become due, or shall make a general assignment for the benefit of creditors; the homeowners' association shall file
a voluntary petition in bankruptcy, or seeking reorganization, in order to effect a plan or other arrangement with
creditors or any other relief under the "bankruptcy code" (meaning the bankruptcy reform act of 1978 [11 USC
section 101-1330] as hereafter amended or recodified), or under any state or federal law granting relief to debtors,
whether now or hereafter in effect; or any involuntary petition or proceeding pursuant to the bankruptcy code or any
other applicable state or federal law relating to bankruptcy, reorganization or other relief for debtors is filed or
commenced against the homeowners' association or the homeowners' association shall file an answer admitting
the jurisdiction of the court and the material allegations of any involuntary petition; or the homeowners' association
shall be adjudicated a bankrupt, or an order for relief shall be entered against the homeowners' association by any
court of competent jurisdiction under the bankruptcy code or any other applicable state or federal law relating to
bankruptcy, reorganization or other relief for debtors. (Ord. 2007-24, 11-7-2007)
Chapter 18.82C
PHEASANT VIEW SUBDIVISION, PLANNED RESIDENTIAL
COMMUNITY (PRC-3) ZONE
18.82C.005: THEME:
The Pheasant View Planned Residential Community carries with it the theme of luxurious country living, but with the
park and picnic area in close proximity will give the families a sense of closeness. This twenty (20) acre parcel of
country elegance will carry with it a feeling of greatness that will influence all of the residents of Mapleton City. (Ord.
2008-24, 12-17-2008, eff. 2-4-2009)
18.82C.010: NAME AND PURPOSE:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 468/571
The name of this zone shall be the Pheasant View PRC-3 Zone. The purpose of this zone is to protect the integrity
and keep the theme consistent throughout the entire planned residential community. Compliance with the set forth
zone will ensure a more attractive and desirable environment within this residential community in Mapleton City. (Ord.
2008-24, 12-17-2008, eff. 2-4-2009)
18.82C.020: PERMITTED USES:
One single-family residence per lot.
Parks and/or open space (Lot 27 only).
Public utilities.
Temporary structures necessary for sales and/or construction activities, subject to subsection 18.84.200B of this title.
(Ord. 2008-24, 12-17-2008, eff. 2-4-2009)
18.82C.030: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses are permitted in the Pheasant View Subdivision PRC-3 Zone, provided that the use is incidental to the
main dwelling unit and does not distract from or conflict with the character and purpose of the principal permitted uses.
All accessory uses are subject to acquisition of any approvals, permits, or licenses required to construct, operate, or
maintain said use. Permitted accessory uses include:
Accessory buildings such as garages, carports, bathhouses, greenhouses, gardening sheds, recreation rooms, and
similar structures which are customarily used in conjunction with, and incidental to, a principal use or structure.
Animal rights. Customary residential household pets as defined in section 18.08.010 of this title. Lots 17 and 18 shall
allow for the raising, care and keeping of a limited number of livestock, feed and produce, barns, corrals, pens, coops
and other structures associated with the uses. The number of animals kept shall not exceed one animal unit for each
twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of lot area for lots one acre or larger.
Fences and walls.
Home occupations subject to section 18.84.380 of this title.
One park and picnic area constructed on a commonly held parcel (Lot 27), consisting of open/green space,
playground equipment, and a pavilion or similar open gathering structure.
Owner occupied accessory apartments subject to section 18.84.410 of this title.
Pools, tennis courts, or other recreational facilities. (Ord. 2008-24, 12-17-2008, eff. 2-4-2009)
18.82C.040: CONDITIONAL USES:
No conditional uses are permitted. (Ord. 2008-24, 12-17-2008, eff. 2-4-2009)
18.82C.050: BUILDING SETBACKS:
The minimum setbacks for improvements constructed on lots 1 through 26 in the Pheasant View subdivision PRC-3
zone are as follows:
A. Main Building:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 469/571
1. Front yard setback: No less than thirty feet (30') measured from the property line.
2. Corner lot side yards: Measured the same as the front yard.
3. Rear yard setback: No less than thirty feet (30') measured from the rear property line to the foundation of the
home.
4. Side yard setback: No less than ten feet (10') measured from the property line to the foundation of the home.
B. Accessory Building: No accessory building shall be any closer to the front property line than the main building.
1. Setbacks for accessory buildings less than or equal to twelve feet (12') in height shall be as follows:
a. Rear yard and side yard setback: Be set back a minimum of three feet (3') from the property line.
2. Setbacks for accessory buildings greater than twelve feet (12') in height shall be as follows:
a. Rear yard and side yard setback: Be set back a minimum of ten feet (10') from the property line. (Ord. 2008-
24, 12-17-2008, eff. 2-4-2009)
18.82C.060: PERMISSIBLE LOT COVERAGE:
A. In a PRC-3 zone, all buildings including accessory buildings and structures, shall not cover more than thirty percent
(30%) of the area of the lot or parcel of land as measured by the roof print of the buildings and structures. (Ord.
2008-24, 12-17-2008, eff. 2-4-2009)
18.82C.070: BUILDING HEIGHT:
A. Main building: No more than thirty feet (30') and a maximum of two (2) stories, measured from the finished grade of
the lot to the midpoint of the roof pitch. Measurement shall be taken on three (3) sides of the home. Finished grade
shall be established thirty feet (30') away from the front of the home, or from top of the curb (if present) or the
middle point of the street directly in front of the home. If the home is located farther than thirty feet (30') from a city
street, then the measurement shall be taken of the established grade ten feet (10') from the home.
B. Accessory building: No more than thirty feet (30') from finished grade to the highest roof pitch. Measurement shall
be taken on three (3) sides of the structure, and finished grade shall be established ten feet (10') from the structure
based on the average elevation of each side. (Ord. 2008-24, 12-17-2008, eff. 2-4-2009)
18.82C.080: GARAGE AND PARKING STANDARDS:
Shall be calculated as follows:
Square Foot Area
Of Residence
Number Of
Garage Spaces
Total Off Street Spaces
(Including Garage)
Under 4,500 2 4
4,500 - 8,000 3 4
All dwelling units shall have a paved hard surface driveway no less than thirty feet (30') in length and sixteen feet (16')
in width, measured from the property line to the required garage. (Ord. 2008-24, 12-17-2008, eff. 2-4-2009)
18.82C.090: DENSITY:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 470/571
The total density allowed in the Pheasant View PRC-3 zone is twenty six (26) building lots. No new subdivision lots
shall be permitted beyond those originally approved for the purpose of increasing density. (Ord. 2008-24, 12-17-2008,
eff. 2-4-2009)
18.82C.100: LOT 27:
Lot 27 will be set aside as a park and picnic area that will be fully landscaped, including a pavilion, walking path, and a
tot lot. The park improvements shall be completed two (2) years from the date of the recording of the plat. The
Pheasant View Homeowners' Association will be responsible for the maintenance and upkeep of lot 27. If the
association defaults (as defined in section 18.82C.120 of this chapter) ownership of lot 27 shall pass to Mapleton City.
(Ord. 2008-24, 12-17-2008, eff. 2-4-2009)
18.82C.110: LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS:
Street trees shall be required in the park strip area between a sidewalk and the curb and gutter of every street. Said
trees shall be of a minimum size of no less than two inch (2") caliper, and one tree shall be placed every twenty (20) to
thirty feet (30') depending on the canopy spread of the tree. Tree species shall be as required in the adopted Mapleton
City tree list as per chapter 18.56 of this title. Seventy five percent (75%) of front yards must be lawn or other
appropriate landscaping. That area not kept in landscaping must be hard surfaced areas, such as driveways,
pathways, or other recognized landscape materials as mentioned in chapter 18.90 of this title. (Ord. 2008-24, 12-17-
2008, eff. 2-4-2009)
18.82C.120: TRANSFER OF COMMON AREAS TO MAPLETON CITY:
In the event of a default by the homeowners' association, all of the homeowners' association's right, title and interest in
and to the common areas, shall pass to Mapleton City. Upon default by the homeowners' association and transfer of
ownership of common areas to the city the residents within the development shall pay all costs of maintenance of
common areas to the city. In the event of default Mapleton City may assess a monthly maintenance fee to all
residences in order to maintain the common areas as they were previously maintained. For purposes of this section,
the occurrence of any of the following shall constitute a default by the homeowners' association:
A. The dissolution or liquidation of the homeowners' association;
B. The homeowners' association shall become insolvent, or shall suffer or consent to or apply for the appointment of a
receiver, trustee, custodian or liquidator of itself or any of its property, or shall generally fail to pay its debts as they
become due, or shall make a general assignment for the benefit of creditors; the homeowners' association shall file
a voluntary petition in bankruptcy, or seeking reorganization, in order to effect a plan or other arrangement with
creditors or any other relief under the "bankruptcy code" (meaning the bankruptcy reform act of 1978 [11 USC
section 101-1330] as hereafter amended or recodified), or under any state or federal law granting relief to debtors,
whether now or hereafter in effect; or any involuntary petition or proceeding pursuant to the bankruptcy code or any
other applicable state or federal law relating to bankruptcy, reorganization or other relief for debtors is filed or
commenced against the homeowners' association or the homeowners' association shall file an answer admitting
the jurisdiction of the court and the material allegations of any involuntary petition; or the homeowners' association
shall be adjudicated a bankrupt, or an order for relief shall be entered against the homeowners' association by any
court of competent jurisdiction under the bankruptcy code or any other applicable state or federal law relating to
bankruptcy, reorganization or other relief for debtors. (Ord. 2008-24, 12-17-2008, eff. 2-4-2009)
Chapter 18.82D
PRESERVE AT MAPLETON SUBDIVISION, PLANNED
RESIDENTIAL COMMUNITY (PRC-4) ZONE
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 471/571
18.82D.005: THEME:
The Preserve at Mapleton planned residential community carries with it the theme of luxurious country living.
Residents of the Preserve at Mapleton will enjoy walking trails, water features, welcome houses, horse riding trails,
access to the Bonneville Shoreline Trail and Maple Mountain, large ranch and estate lots, and acres of landscaped
open space. This two hundred forty (240) acre drop of country elegance will carry with it a feeling of greatness that will
influence all of the great city of Mapleton City. (Ord. 2007-18, 8-7-2007, eff. 12-11-2007)
18.82D.010: NAME AND PURPOSE:
The name of this zone shall be the Preserve at Mapleton PRC-4 zone. The purpose of this zone is to protect the
integrity of the Preserve at Mapleton and keep the theme consistent throughout the entire planned residential
community. Compliance with the set forth zone will ensure a more attractive and desirable environment within this
residential community in Mapleton City. (Ord. 2007-18, 8-7-2007, eff. 12-11-2007)
18.82D.020: PERMITTED USES:
One single-family dwelling unit per legally created lot and subject to section 18.82D.090 of this chapter.
Public utility facilities.
Temporary office building used as an office in connection with the sale of property within a subdivision under
construction, provided that the temporary office is located on the same tract of land as the subdivision. A permit
therefor shall be valid for not more than one year, at the expiration of which time the use shall be discontinued. This
use is subject to subsection 18.84.200B of this title (temporary building construction).
Water reservoirs and water facilities. (Ord. 2007-18, 8-7-2007, eff. 12-11-2007)
18.82D.030: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses are permitted in the Preserve at Mapleton residential community zone, provided that they are
incidental to the main residential dwelling unit, they do not alter the character of the permitted principal use, and are
subject to any required approvals or requirements. Such permitted accessory uses and structures include the
following:
Animal rights; estate lots (lots 1 through 7 and 17 through 48): The raising, care and keeping of livestock and fowl will
be limited to one animal unit and their seasonal offspring for each twenty thousand (20,000) square feet; and barns,
corrals, pens, coops and other structures associated with animals as approved by section 18.82D.090 of this chapter.
Animal rights; ranch lots (lots 56 through 92): The raising, care and keeping of livestock, fowl, feed and produce,
barns, corrals, pens, coops and other structures associated with animals approved by section 18.82D.090 of this
chapter. One animal unit and their seasonal offspring for each thirty thousand (30,000) square feet shall be allowed.
Customary residential household pets as defined in section 18.08.010 of this title.
Fences, walls subject to section 18.82D.090 of this chapter.
Home occupations are subject to section 18.84.380 of this title.
Noncommercial plant nurseries and private greenhouses subject to section 18.82D.090 of this chapter.
Owner occupied accessory apartments, subject to approvals outlined in section 18.82D.090 of this chapter and
section 18.84.410 of this title.
Pools, tennis courts and other recreational site amenities shall be permitted subject to section 18.82D.090 of this
chapter.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 472/571
Up to one common clubhouse/community facility may be constructed on a private, commonly held parcel. Such facility
shall be limited to the same restrictions and standards as a ranch lot (Lots 56 through 92) described herein and in
accordance with section 18.82D.090 of this chapter.
Uses permitted for the clubhouse/common facility may include the following:
Accessory structures.
Dressing and locker rooms.
Exercise and entertainment facilities.
Food and retail sales limited to the support of the facility and its users.
Meeting and gathering areas.
Outdoor amenities such as tennis, pool, play areas, gardens and other landscape features.
Service structures and yards for maintenance of the common facilities of the PRC-4 Zone.
Any structures allowed as accessory uses shall be approved by section 18.82D.090 of this chapter whether a building
permit is required or not. (Ord. 2007-18, 8-7-2007, eff. 12-11-2007)
18.82D.040: LAND USE STANDARDS:
There shall be no land use standards except as set forth in section 18.82D.090 of this chapter.
The minimum lot size for the ranch lots (Lots 56 through 92) shall be 2.4 acres (104,544 square feet).
The minimum lot size for the estate lots (Lots 1 through 55) shall be 0.7 acres (30,492 square feet). (Ord. 2007-18, 8-
7-2007, eff. 12-11-2007)
18.82D.050: BUILDING SETBACKS FOR RANCH LOTS (56 THROUGH 92):
A. Main Buildings: Building setbacks are governed by established building envelopes that far exceed requirements for
PRC Zones. These envelopes are set forth by the homeowners' association and are approved under section
18.82D.090 of this chapter. In the case of conflict with setback requirements for a PRC Zone, the greater setback
will govern.
B. Accessory Buildings: Accessory building setbacks are governed by established accessory building envelopes that
far exceed requirements for PRC Zones. These envelopes are set forth by the homeowners' association and are
approved under section 18.82D.090 of this chapter. In the case of conflict with setback requirements for a PRC
Zone, the greater setback will govern. (Ord. 2007-18, 8-7-2007, eff. 12-11-2007)
18.82D.060: BUILDING SETBACKS FOR LOTS 1 THROUGH 55:
A. Main Buildings: Main buildings shall have the following setback requirements. In the case of conflict with setback
requirements for a PRC Zone, the greater setback will govern. All setbacks are measured from property line.
These setback requirements may be reduced under section 18.82D.090 of this chapter, provided no setbacks are
reduced to less than requirements for a PRC Zone.
Front yard setback: Thirty feet (30').
Side yard setback: Ten feet (10') on one side and twenty feet (20') on the other. A twenty foot (20') side yard is
required at an existing adjacent ten foot (10') side yard resulting in a minimum of thirty feet (30') from adjacent
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 473/571
structure, unless the lots on either side of the subject lot have begun construction and used their ten foot (10')
setback on the subject lot's sides. In this case the subject lot shall choose which side they shall use their ten foot
(10') setback and which side they shall use their twenty foot (20') setback. In this case a lot must still meet the
requirement of a ten foot (10') setback on one side and a twenty foot (20') setback on the other side totaling a
minimum of twenty feet (20') between structures on one side and thirty feet (30') on the other side. However, lots
50 through 53 may have a ten foot (10') side yard setback on both sides.
Corner side yard setback: Thirty feet (30').
Rear yard setback: Forty feet (40'). However, lots 8 through 16 and 49 through 55 have a twenty five foot (25') rear
yard setback.
B. Accessory Buildings: See section 18.82D.070 of this chapter for setback increases for accessory buildings over
twelve feet (12') in height.
Accessory buildings shall be located thirty feet (30') behind the nearest front portion of a main building.
Accessory building side yard setback: Three feet (3') but no less than thirteen feet (13') from an existing accessory
building on the adjacent property and forty feet (40') from an existing residence on the adjacent property.
Accessory building rear yard setback: Three feet (3') but no less than thirteen feet (13') from an existing accessory
building on the adjacent property and forty feet (40') from an existing residence on the adjacent property. (Ord.
2007-18, 8-7-2007, eff. 12-11-2007)
18.82D.070: BUILDING HEIGHT STANDARDS:
A. Main Buildings: Building height of residences shall not exceed two (2) stories above the basement level with a
maximum of thirty five feet (35') measured from finished grade of the lot to the midpoint of the main roof pitch,
excluding dormers, chimneys, mechanical and other equipment. Measurement shall be taken on any three (3)
sides of the structure (not necessarily from a walk-out basement). Finished grade shall be established ten feet (10')
away from the structure based on average elevation of each measured side. Dormers shall not be allowed above
thirty five feet (35') measured from the finished grade to the bottom of the windowsill.
B. Accessory Buildings: Accessory buildings shall be limited to a maximum of thirty five feet (35') with no increases in
height for setbacks, provided structures over twelve feet (12') have a ten foot (10') minimum setback. Building
height for an accessory building shall be measured from finished grade of the lot to the highest point of the roof.
Measurement shall be taken on any three (3) sides of the structure (not necessarily from a walk-out basement).
Finished grade shall be established ten feet (10') away from the structure based on average elevation of each
measured side. (Ord. 2007-18, 8-7-2007, eff. 12-11-2007)
18.82D.080: GARAGE AND PARKING STANDARDS:
Shall be calculated as follows:
Square Foot Area Of
Residence (Based On
Applicable CC&Rs)
Number Of
Garage Spaces
Total Off Street Spaces
(Including Garage)
Under 4,500 2 4
4,500 - 7,999 3 4
8,000 - 14,990 4 6
Over 15,999 5 8
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 474/571
(Ord. 2007-18, 8-7-2007, eff. 12-11-2007)
18.82D.090: DESIGN REVIEW COMMITTEE APPROVAL AND STAMP:
A design review committee (DRC) has been established for the applicable CC&Rs to verify and enforce design. No
building permit or fence application will be accepted by the city without the applicable DRC approval and stamp. All
building guidelines will meet applicable Mapleton City and building code standards as well as the standards in the
CC&Rs and design guidelines. (Ord. 2007-18, 8-7-2007, eff. 12-11-2007)
18.82D.100: COMMON AREAS AND BUILDINGS:
Up to two (2) welcome houses may be constructed on common right of way areas. One located at the intersection of
1600 S and Preserve Drive and one located at the intersection of Maple Canyon Drive and Preserve Drive. Such
structures shall be limited to four hundred (400) square feet of area (excluding basements) and one story/sixteen feet
(16') in height measured from finished grade of the lot to the highest point of the roof. The welcome house structures
shall not be located closer than six feet (6') from a roadway curb and eighteen feet (18') from the boundary of the
PRC-4 zone.
Bridge structures and water features may be constructed in a common right of way area or other easement. Such
structures shall allow for minimum road widths and construction requirements and shall not exceed eight feet (8') in
height.
Up to one common clubhouse/community facility may be constructed on a private, commonly held parcel. Such facility
shall be limited to the same restrictions and standards as a ranch lot (lots 56 through 92) described herein and in
accordance with section 18.82D.090 of this chapter.
Uses permitted for the clubhouse/common facility may include the following:
Accessory structures.
Dressing and locker rooms.
Exercise and entertainment facilities.
Food and retail sales limited to the support of the facility and its users.
Meeting and gathering areas.
Outdoor amenities such as tennis, pool, play areas, gardens and other landscape features.
Service structures and yards for maintenance of the common facilities of the PRC-4 zone.
Open space and trails shall be used for the enjoyment of the community. The trails shall be used for walking, jogging,
bicycling, horseback riding and other nonmotorized activities. With the exception of service vehicles owned and
operated by the homeowners' association, no motorized vehicles shall be allowed in the common areas. All trails and
open space will be maintained and improved by the homeowners' association. (Ord. 2007-18, 8-7-2007, eff. 12-11-
2007)
18.82D.110: DENSITY:
The total density allowed in the Preserve at Mapleton PRC-4 zone is ninety two (92) individual building lots and
common area buildings. No new subdivision lots shall be permitted beyond those originally approved for the purpose
of increasing this density. (Ord. 2007-18, 8-7-2007, eff. 12-11-2007)
18.82D.120: EMERGENCY ACCESS:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 475/571
In the event of a natural disaster or other emergency, the residents of the Preserve at Mapleton must provide
reasonable emergency access to areas of concern or danger for the proper authorities. An example of this would be
the need to have access to the debris basin, or an injury on one of the common trails. (Ord. 2007-18, 8-7-2007, eff.
12-11-2007)
18.82D.130: TRANSFER OF COMMON AREAS TO MAPLETON CITY IN THE EVENT OF
DEFAULT BY THE HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION:
In the event of a default by the homeowners' association, all of the homeowners' association's right, title and interest in
and to the common areas, including, but not limited to, the debris basin, shall pass to Mapleton City. Upon default by
the homeowners' association and transfer of ownership of common areas to the city, the residents within the
development shall pay all costs of maintenance of common areas to the city. In the event of default, Mapleton City
may assess a monthly maintenance fee to all residents in order to maintain the common areas as they were
previously maintained. For purposes of this section, the occurrence of any of the following shall constitute a default by
the homeowners' association:
A. The dissolution or liquidation of the homeowners' association;
B. The homeowners' association shall become insolvent, or shall suffer or consent to or apply for the appointment of a
receiver, trustee, custodian or liquidator of itself or any of its property, or shall generally fail to pay its debts as they
become due, or shall make a general assignment for the benefit of creditors; the homeowners' association shall file
a voluntary petition in bankruptcy, or seeking reorganization, in order to effect a plan or other arrangement with
creditors or any other relief under the bankruptcy code (meaning the bankruptcy reform act of 1978 [11 USC
section 101-1330] as hereafter amended or recodified), or under any state or federal law granting relief to debtors,
whether now or hereafter in effect; or any involuntary petition or proceeding pursuant to the bankruptcy code or any
other applicable state or federal law relating to bankruptcy, reorganization or other relief for debtors is filed or
commenced against the homeowners' association or the homeowners' association shall file an answer admitting
the jurisdiction of the court and the material allegations of any involuntary petition; or the homeowners' association
shall be adjudicated as bankrupt, or an order for relief shall be entered against the homeowners' association by
any court of competent jurisdiction under the bankruptcy code or any other applicable state or federal law relating
to bankruptcy, reorganization or other relief for debtors. (Ord. 2007-18, 8-7-2007, eff. 12-11-2007)
Chapter 18.82E
WHISPER ROCK SUBDIVISION, PLANNED RESIDENTIAL
COMMUNITY (PRC-5) ZONE
(Rep. by Ord. 2013-05, 6-18-2013, eff. 7-12-2013)
Chapter 18.82F
MAPLETON 340 LAKES PHASE 1, PLANNED RESIDENTIAL
COMMUNITY (PRC-5) ZONE
18.82F.005: NAME AND PURPOSE:
The purpose of the Planned Residential Community Zone is to encourage imaginative and efficient utilization of land,
develop a sense of community, and to ensure compatibility with the surrounding neighborhoods and environment. This
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 476/571
is accomplished by providing greater flexibility in the location of buildings on the land, the consolidation of open
spaces, and the clustering of some or all dwelling units. These provisions are intended to create more attractive and
desirable environments within the residential areas of Mapleton City.
The name of this zone shall be the Mapleton 340 Lakes PRC-5 Zone. The proposed development is consistent with
the purpose of the PRC Zone by creating a unique residential community with high quality lots abutting a ten-acre
manmade water ski lake. (Ord. 2017-03, 7-5-2017, eff. 8-8-2017)
18.82F.010: PERMITTED USES:
A privately owned and maintained recreation lake and associated amenities with the following conditions:
A. Only one (1) motorized watercraft shall be allowed to operate on the lake at any one time.
B. No motorized watercraft operated on the lake shall emit a noise level in excess of seventy five (75) dB(A) as
measured from any shoreline of lake.
C. No motorized watercraft shall operate on the lake between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. daily.
D. No motorized watercraft operated on the lake shall be equipped with a two-stroke engine.
E. A fence shall be installed along the western property line of the lake.
F. The lake shall be designed to limit the potential for insect infestation and shall incorporate at least the following
features:
1. A concrete curb shall be installed along the shoreline of the lake to discourage the growth of vegetation.
2.The slope of the lake bed shall be a minimum of 10:1 from the concrete curb.
3. A pump shall be installed to provide irrigation to the site and to provide for water circulation within and from the
lake.
4. The lake bed shall incorporate industry standard materials or products so as to prevent water seepage from
the lake and growth of vegetation in the lake.
G. The owner(s) of the open space parcel containing the lake and other common areas shall maintain a liability
insurance policy with the minimum coverage of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), and agrees, at its sole
expense, to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the City, its public officials, officers, employees and assigns,
from any liability, appeal, claim, suit or other legal proceeding associated with the lake and its use.
H. Conditions A through H of this use shall be incorporated in the covenants conditions and restrictions (CC&Rs)
that shall be recorded on each lot within the development. The CC&Rs shall also include provisions for how the
conditions will be enforced.
One single-family residence per lot.
Temporary structures necessary for sales and/or construction activities, subject to subsection 18.84.200B of this title.
(Ord. 2017-03, 7-5-2017, eff. 8-8-2017)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 477/571
18.82F.020: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses are permitted, provided that the use is incidental to the main dwelling unit and does not distract from
or conflict with the character and purpose of the principal permitted use. All accessory uses are subject to acquisition
of any approvals, permits, or licenses required to construct, operate, or maintain said use. Permitted accessory uses
include:
Animal rights. Customary residential household pets as defined in section 18.08.010 of this title. Livestock, poultry, or
large animals, including horses and other beasts of burden are strictly prohibited.
Docks.
Fences and walls.
Home occupations subject to section 18.84.380 of this title.
Owner occupied accessory apartments subject to section 18.84.410 of this title.
Pools, tennis courts, or other recreational facilities.
Recreation facilities associated with open space parcel. (Ord. 2017-03, 7-5-2017, eff. 8-8-2017)
18.82F.030: CONDITIONAL USES:
No conditional uses outside of the principal or accessory uses are permitted. (Ord. 2017-03, 7-5-2017, eff. 8-8-2017)
18.82F.040: SPECIAL EVENTS:
Requests for special events associated with the lake shall follow the standards and process for special events as
adopted by the Mapleton City Council. (Ord. 2017-03, 7-5-2017, eff. 8-8-2017)
18.82F.050: LOT SIZE AND DENSITY STANDARDS:
There shall be no minimum lot size in this zone. The maximum number of lots permitted on the nineteen (19) acres
included in phase 1 is fourteen (14). The density is based on the number of lots that could have been built based on
the allowed densities identified in the General Plan for the property after subtracting the rights-of-way. If future phases
are proposed on property outside of phase 1, this section shall be amended accordingly. (Ord. 2017-03, 7-5-2017, eff.
8-8-2017)
18.82F.060: LOT WIDTH:
Each lot or parcel of land shall have an average width of at least one hundred feet (100'). (Ord. 2017-03, 7-5-2017, eff.
8-8-2017)
18.82F.070: BUILDING SETBACKS:
The minimum setbacks for improvements constructed on lots in the Mapleton 340 Subdivision PRC-5 Zone are as
follows:
A. Front Yard/Garage Requirements: No home shall have a front yard setback of less than twenty five feet (25')
measured from the front property line to the foundation of the home. For homes that have garage doors that face
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 478/571
the street, the garage shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet (20') from the back of sidewalk.
B. Rear Yard Requirements: No home shall have a rear yard of less than twenty feet (20') measured from the rear
property line to the foundation of the home.
C. Side Yard: Each lot or parcel of land shall have a side yard of not less than ten feet (10').
D. Side Yard; Corner Lots: When a side yard on a corner lot faces a street, the same setbacks as described in
subsection A, "Front Yard/Garage Requirements", of this section shall apply.
E. Accessory Buildings: See section 18.26.020 of this title.
F. Projections Into Yards: The following structures may be erected on or projected into any required yard:
1. Fences and walls in conformance with this Code and approval by the Planning and Zoning Director. Other City
codes or ordinances also apply.
2. Landscape elements including trees, shrubs, agricultural crops, and other plants.
3. Necessary appurtenances for utility service.
4. The structures listed below may project into a minimum front or rear yard not more than four feet (4'), and into a
minimum side yard not more than two feet (2'):
a. Cornices, eaves, belt courses, sills, buttresses, or other similar architectural features.
b. Fireplace structures and bays, provided that they are not wider than eight feet (8') measured generally parallel
to the wall of which they are a part.
c. Stairways, balconies, door stoops, fire escapes, awnings, and planter boxes or masonry planters not
exceeding twenty four inches (24") in height.
d. Porte-cochere over a driveway in a side yard, providing such structure is not more than one story in height
and twenty four feet (24') in length, and is entirely open on at least three (3) sides except for necessary
supporting columns and customary architectural features. (Ord. 2017-03, 7-5-2017, eff. 8-8-2017)
18.82F.080: BUILDING HEIGHT:
No lot or parcel of land shall have a building or structure used for dwelling or public assembly which exceeds a height
of two (2) stories with a maximum of forty feet (40') as defined in section 18.08.010 of this title. (Ord. 2017-03, 7-5-
2017, eff. 8-8-2017)
18.82F.090: PARKING AND DRIVEWAY REQUIREMENTS:
A. Each home located on a lot or parcel shall have on the same lot or parcel two (2) off street enclosed parking
spaces.
B. Each home shall also have a driveway that leads from a public street to the required enclosed parking spaces. Said
driveway shall have a width of at least twelve feet (12') and be constructed with a hard surface material. (Ord.
2017-03, 7-5-2017, eff. 8-8-2017)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 479/571
Chapter 18.82G
MAPLE VALE SUBDIVISION, PLANNED RESIDENTIAL
COMMUNITY (PRC-6) ZONE
18.82G.005: NAME AND PURPOSE:
The name of this zone shall be the Maple Vale Subdivision PRC-6 Zone. The purpose of this development is to create
an attractive, meaningful, and desirable environment within this residential community that maintains the atmosphere
and honors the heritage of the area, and that is consistent with the purpose and vision of the PRC Zone and brings
multiple property owners together to create one cohesive plan. The development will have a mix of larger rural lots
with smaller estate lots, narrow tree lined streets, split rail fencing and other rural characteristics. (Ord. 2018-04, 5-2-
2018, eff. 5-30-2018)
18.82G.010: PERMITTED USES:
One single-family residence per lot.
Parks and/or open space.
Temporary structures necessary for sales and/or construction activities, subject to subsection 18.84.200B of this title.
(Ord. 2018-04, 5-2-2018, eff. 5-30-2018)
18.82G.020: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses are permitted, provided that the use is incidental to the main dwelling unit and does not distract from
or conflict with the character and purpose of the principal permitted use. All accessory uses are subject to acquisition
of any approvals, permits, or licenses required to construct, operate, or maintain said use. Permitted accessory uses
include:
Customary residential household pets as defined in section 18.08.010 of this title.
Fences and walls.
Home occupations subject to section 18.84.380 of this title.
One recreational area constructed on a commonly held parcel, consisting of open/green space, playground
equipment, a volleyball court, and horse-shoe pits.
Owner occupied accessory apartments subject to section 18.84.410 of this title.
Pools, tennis courts, or other recreational facilities.
Private nurseries, greenhouses, or gardens.
The raising, care and keeping of limited numbers of livestock and fowl, excluding swine, for family food production or
recreation. Also barns, corrals, pens and coops and other structures for the care and keeping of domestic livestock
and fowl, subject to the following:
A. The number of animals kept shall not exceed one animal unit for each twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of
lot area.
B. No structure for the housing of livestock or fowl or corrals for the close confinement of livestock shall be located
closer than one hundred feet (100') to an existing dwelling on an adjacent lot or fifty feet (50') to such a dwelling
on the same lot. (Ord. 2018-04, 5-2-2018, eff. 5-30-2018)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 480/571
18.82G.030: CONDITIONAL USES:
The principal use of the Maple Vale Subdivision PRC-6 Zone is a single-family residential community. No conditional
uses outside of the principal or accessory uses are permitted. (Ord. 2018-04, 5-2-2018, eff. 5-30-2018)
18.82G.040: LAND USE STANDARDS:
There are no land use standards except as outlined in sections 18.82G.010 and 18.82G.020 of this chapter. (Ord.
2018-04, 5-2-2018, eff. 5-30-2018)
18.82G.050: LOT STANDARDS:
The minimum lot size within the Maple Vale Subdivision PRC-6 Zone is twenty one thousand seven hundred (21,700)
square feet (0.5 acre). The zone shall consist of no more than eighteen (18) lots. No new subdivision lots shall be
permitted beyond those originally approved for the purpose of increasing this density. (Ord. 2018-04, 5-2-2018, eff. 5-
30-2018)
18.82G.060: BUILDING SETBACKS:
The minimum setbacks for improvements constructed on lots in the Maple Vale Subdivision PRC-6 Zone are as
follows:
A. Main Building:
1. Front yard setback: No less than thirty feet (30') measured from the property line.
2. Corner lot side yards: Measured the same as the front yard.
3. Rear yard setback: No less than twenty five feet (25') measured from the rear property line to the foundation of
the home.
4. Side yard setback: No less than ten feet (10') measured from the property line to the foundation of the home.
B. Accessory Building: No accessory building shall be any closer to the front property line than the main building.
1. Setbacks for accessory buildings less than or equal to twelve feet (12') in height shall be as follows:
a. Rear yard setback: Three feet (3') from the property line to structure, but no less than fifteen feet (15') from
any existing accessory structure on an adjacent lot, and no less than forty feet (40') from an existing residence
on an adjacent lot.
b. Side yard setback: Three feet (3') from the property line to structure, but no less than fifteen feet (15') from any
existing accessory structure on an adjacent lot, and no less than forty feet (40') from an existing residence on
an adjacent lot.
2. Setbacks for accessory buildings greater than twelve feet (12') in height shall be as follows:
a. Rear yard setback: Ten feet (10') from the property line to structure, but no less than fifteen feet (15') from any
existing accessory structure on an adjacent lot, and no less than forty feet (40') from an existing residence on
an adjacent lot.
b. Side yard setback: Ten feet (10') from the property line to structure, but no less than fifteen feet (15') from any
existing accessory structure on an adjacent lot, and no less than forty feet (40') from an existing residence on
an adjacent lot. (Ord. 2018-04, 5-2-2018, eff. 5-30-2018)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 481/571
18.82G.070: BUILDING HEIGHT:
No lot or parcel of land in this zone shall have a building or structure used for dwelling or public assembly which
exceeds a height of two (2) stories with a maximum of forty feet (40') as defined in section 18.08.010 of this title. (Ord.
2018-04, 5-2-2018, eff. 5-30-2018)
18.82G.080: PARKING AND DRIVEWAY REQUIREMENTS:
A one-family dwelling shall provide at least four (4) off street parking spaces. At least two (2) of the spaces shall be
located in an attached or detached garage that is fully enclosed. All dwelling units shall have a driveway made of hard
surface material no less than thirty feet (30') in length and twelve feet (12') in width, measured from the property line to
the required garage. (Ord. 2018-04, 5-2-2018, eff. 5-30-2018)
18.82G.090: OPEN SPACE:
A conservation easement shall be recorded on 0.4 acres of the lot that contains the existing house located at 2001
South Main Street. No buildings or structures shall be erected within this open space easement. The open space shall
be maintained by the owner of that lot. (Ord. 2018-04, 5-2-2018, eff. 5-30-2018)
18.82G.100: STREET TREES:
Street trees shall be planted in all parkway planters in accordance with section 18.90.120 of this title. All street trees
shall be October Glory Maples (Acer rubrum "October Glory"). (Ord. 2018-04, 5-2-2018, eff. 5-30-2018)
18.82G.110: FENCING ABUTTING A STREET:
All fencing that abuts a property line parallel to a street shall be limited to four feet (4') in height and shall have a
common split rail design and a common color. Lots one (1), two (2), three (3), four (4) and twelve (12) are required to
install this fencing as part of a building permit for a new home in order to help emphasize and establish the rural
character of the neighborhood. (Ord. 2018-04, 5-2-2018, eff. 5-30-2018)
18.82G.120: STREET AND CURB DESIGN:
The interior streets shall be designed to have a narrow, rural appearance. This shall be accomplished by utilizing the
City's thirty two foot (32') right-of-way cross section and utilizing a low back curb. (Ord. 2018-04, 5-2-2018, eff. 5-30-
2018)
Chapter 18.84
SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS
18.84.010: EFFECT OF SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS:
The regulations set forth in this chapter qualify or supplement, as the case may be, the zone regulations appearing
elsewhere in this title. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
18.84.020: YARD SPACE FOR ONE BUILDING ONLY:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 482/571
No required yard or other open space around an existing building, or which is hereafter provided around any building,
which is needed to comply with the provisions of this title shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for
any other building; nor shall any yard or other required open space on an adjoining lot be considered as providing the
yard or open space on the lot whereon a building is to be erected or established. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
18.84.030: EACH LOT TO INCLUDE ONLY ONE DWELLING:
Only one building which contains a dwelling shall be located and maintained on a "lot" as defined in this title. (Ord.
2002-05, 3-20-2002)
18.84.040: SALE OR LEASE OF REQUIRED SPACE:
No space needed to meet the width, yard, area, coverage, parking or other requirements of this title for a lot or
building may be sold or leased apart from such lot or building unless other space so complying is provided. (Ord.
2002-05, 3-20-2002)
18.84.050: CREATION OF ILLEGAL PARCELS PROHIBITED:
No parcel of land shall be severed from another parcel of land which would leave either parcel with less than the
minimum frontage and area requirements for the zone in which it is located. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
18.84.060: YARDS TO BE UNOBSTRUCTED:
Except for landscaping, every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky and unobstructed except for permitted
accessory buildings as outlined in the regulations for each applicable zone. (Ord. 2013-05, 6-18-2013, eff. 7-12-2013)
18.84.070: STORAGE OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES PROHIBITED:
The storage of commercial vehicles over ten thousand (10,000) gross vehicle weight (except farm trucks) and the
storage of construction equipment such as bulldozers, graders, cement mixers, compressors, dump trucks, etc., shall
not be permitted on any lot in any residential zone, except that construction equipment may be stored on a lot during
construction of a building thereon, but not to exceed one year. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
18.84.080: STORAGE OF TRASH, ABANDONED, WRECKED, OR JUNKED VEHICLES;
IMPEDING STREET; MISCELLANEOUS MATERIALS:
A. As used in this section "inoperable vehicle" means:
1. A vehicle that is not currently registered and insured in accordance with state law;
2. A vehicle of any kind or a readily identifiable part of a vehicle of any kind that is in a condition that appears
wrecked, junked, partially dismantled, inoperative, or abandoned; and
3. For the purpose of this section inoperable vehicle does not include agricultural equipment.
B. Except as provided under subsection C of this section, a person may not park, store, leave or permit the parking,
storing, or leaving of an inoperable vehicle, whether attended or not, upon any private or public property within the
city limits of Mapleton City in excess of seventy two (72) hours.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 483/571
C. The provisions of subsection B of this section do not apply if:
1. The vehicle or part is not visible from the street or sidewalk;
2. The vehicle or part is stored within a building or behind an opaque screening or hedge; and
3. Not more than the visual equivalent of two (2) vehicles or parts are stored on the property.
D. A violation of the provisions of subsection B of this section is a nuisance, detrimental to the health, safety, and
welfare of Mapleton City residents.
E. 1. A person may not store trash, used materials, junk, household furniture, appliances, scrap material, equipment or
equipment parts in an open area visible from the street or visible to neighbors in an abutting lot.
2. The accumulation of more than one item under subsection E1 of this section constitutes a junkyard and must be
removed from the property or stored within an enclosed building.
F. A person may not store commercial goods or materials on private property unless it is permitted by the underlying
zone.
G. A trash storage container with a one hundred (100) gallon capacity and larger shall be maintained in a permanent
location approved by the planning commission in conjunction with approval of a project plan under the following
requirements:
1. A trash storage container shall:
a. Be screened with durable materials architecturally compatible with the principal structure or perimeter
fence/wall treatment located on the lot served; and
b. Not be visible from the street or to neighbors in an abutting lot.
2. A trash storage container located on a lot used for nonresidential purposes, and which abuts a residential zone,
shall meet the setback, screening, and landscaping requirements of the underlying zone.
H. The requirement of subsection G of this section shall be applied according to the following considerations listed in
order of importance:
1. Ease of access by trash removal vehicles;
2. Setback and screening of trash storage containers to:
a. Minimize any potential odor nuisance; and
b. Obscure the view from any abutting lot or street; and
3. Ease of access by users of trash storage containers.
I. The provisions of subsections G and H of this section do not apply to one hundred (100) gallon or less trash storage
containers provided by Mapleton City for residential use.
J. 1. A person may not block or impede a public street, sidewalk or park strip, except for legally parking a vehicle or
temporarily placing a trash container on the shoulder of the public street for trash pick up as directed by the city.
2. The prohibitions under subsection J1 of this section include the placement of storage containers, basketball
stands, ramps, or any other object, onto a public street, sidewalk, or park strip.
3. Except as provided under subsection J4 of this section, a person may not place a mailbox or a related structure
on a sidewalk or public street.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 484/571
4. A mailbox and its related structure may be placed on a sidewalk if:
a. No park strip exists; and
b. The sidewalk is widened around the mailbox and its related structure, if necessary, to maintain a clear width of
walking surfaces, the greater of:
(1) At least thirty six inches (36"); or
(2) In compliance with the Americans with disabilities act (ADA) at the time of the installation of the mailbox or
its related structure; and
c. The mailbox or its related structure do not present a hazard for pedestrians using the sidewalk.
K. 1. A person may not maintain or store on any property within Mapleton City:
a. Injurious or noxious weeds;
b. Garbage;
c. Refuse; or
d. Unsightly or deleterious objects or structures.
L. A person who violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a class B misdemeanor. (Ord. 2008-19, 11-19-
2008, eff. 2-4-2009)
18.84.090: ADDITIONAL HEIGHT ALLOWED FOR PUBLIC BUILDINGS:
Public buildings and churches may be erected to any height provided the building is set back from required building
setback lines a distance of at least one foot (1') for each additional foot of building height above the maximum height
otherwise permitted in the zone in which the building is located. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
18.84.100: HEIGHT OF MAIN BUILDINGS AND FENCES:
A. No dwelling shall be erected which has a ceiling height of less than seven feet six inches (7'6") or one story above
grade, whichever is greater.
B. No fence or wall shall be constructed higher than forty two inches (42") above the street in any required front or
side yard setback that fronts on a street, with a maximum height of six feet (6'). (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
18.84.110: DRAINAGE:
Water from rooftops or lots shall not be allowed to drain onto adjacent lots. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
18.84.120: CLEAR VIEW OF INTERSECTING STREETS:
In all zones which require a front yard, no obstruction which will obscure the view of approaching traffic shall be placed
on any corner lot within a triangular area formed by a line connecting at points sixty feet (60') back on the centerline of
the intersecting streets. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
18.84.130: FENCING STANDARDS:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 485/571
The term "fence" shall include any tangible barrier, latticework, screen, wall, hedge, or continuous growth of shrubs or
trees with the purpose of, or having the effect of, preventing passage or view across the fence line. Notwithstanding
the provisions of this section, a fence, wall, screen, hedge or other material serving as a fence, may not create a sight
distance hazard to vehicular or pedestrian traffic as determined by the city engineer.
A. Front Yard/Side Yard: A fence made of materials which are sight obscuring may be built to a maximum of three feet
(3') in any required front/side yard perimeter. A fence made of materials which are not sight obscuring (at least 50
percent open) may be built to a maximum of four feet (4') in any required front/side yard. If an existing home is
located on the property, the front/side yard perimeter is measured from the front property line to the front edge of
the existing home. The fencing may slope upward to connect with a higher rear yard fence. The length of a sloped
fence section shall not exceed a maximum of ten feet (10').
B. Rear Yard: A fence in a rear yard may be built to a maximum of six feet (6'). If an existing home is located on the
property, the rear yard perimeter is measured from the front edge of the existing home to the rear property line.
C. Corner Lots: A fence not more than six feet (6') high may be constructed in the rear yard as defined in subsection
B, "Rear Yard", of this section adjacent to a public street on a corner lot, if it does not obstruct clear view of
intersecting streets as defined in subsection D, "Clear Sight Triangle", of this section.
D. Clear Sight Triangle: At intersections of alleys and driveways (this includes private driveways and adjacent private
driveways), the triangle shall be defined by drawing a line between two (2) points that are a minimum of fifteen feet
(15') from the intersection along the property lines. At intersections of public streets, the triangle shall be defined by
drawing a line between the two (2) points that are a minimum of thirty feet (30') from the intersection along the
property lines.
E. Larger Clear Sight Triangle: Larger clear vision triangles may be required where local streets enter arterial streets,
major collector streets, or parkways, except that "clear vision triangles" need not be maintained at signed or
signalized intersections in the community center. "Clear vision triangles" may also be waived at signed or
signalized intersections in neighborhood centers.
F. Grade Differences: Where there is a difference in the grade of the properties on either side of a fence, wall or other
similar structure, the height of the fence shall be measured from the natural grade of the property upon which it is
located.
G. Retaining Walls: Where a retaining wall protects a cut below or a fill above the natural grade and is located on the
line separating lots or properties, such retaining wall may be topped by a fence, wall or hedge of the same height
that would otherwise be permitted at the location if no retaining wall existed.
H. Double Frontage Lots: A fence or wall may be erected in the rear yard of a double frontage lot.
I. Fire Hydrants And Mailboxes: Fire hydrants and mailboxes shall be accessible from the public streets and may not
be enclosed behind fences. Location of the fire hydrant shall be in accordance with the uniform fire code.
J. Exceptions: The provisions of this section shall not apply to certain other fences including tennis court backstops or
patio enclosures as approved by the planning commission, if it is determined that the fences do not create a
hazard or violation of other sections of the city ordinances. (Ord. 2009-08, 7-15-2009, eff. 9-18-2009)
18.84.140: LOTS TO ABUT UPON A PUBLIC STREET:
At least one side of each zoning lot shall abut upon and have direct access to a designated city street. The minimum
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 486/571
lot width and the length of the side abutting on the street shall conform to the minimum standards of the zone in which
it is located. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
18.84.150: EXCEPTION TO FRONT AND SIDE SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
The setback from the street for any dwelling located between two (2) existing dwellings in any residential zone may be
the same as the average for said two (2) existing dwellings, provided the existing dwellings are on the same side of
the street, and are located within one hundred fifty feet (150') of each other. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
18.84.160: RESERVED:
18.84.170: CONCESSIONS IN PUBLIC PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS:
Concessions, including, but not limited to, amusement devices, recreational buildings and refreshment stands, shall be
permitted on a public park or playground when approved by the city council. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
18.84.180: LOCATION OF PROPANE TANKS:
All propane tanks shall be located in accordance with the current edition of the NFPA (National Fire Protection
Association) standards. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
18.84.190: PROHIBITIONS:
Uses of land which are not expressly permitted within a zone are expressly prohibited therein except that properties
and land owned by the state shall be subject only to the provisions of the current Utah Code Annotated, and except
that the provisions of this title shall not apply to properties owned by the United States government. Any person, firm
or corporation who may obtain state or federal properties by purchase, lease or other arrangement shall utilize such
properties in accordance with the provisions of this title. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
18.84.200: MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOMES PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, keep, or maintain any manufactured dwelling or mobile home within the
city and use the same for human habitation except in compliance with one or more of the following conditions:
A. When located in a licensed mobile home park.
B. When placed upon a lot and used as a temporary dwelling during the construction of a permanent residence on
said lot, subject to compliance with all of the following conditions:
1. A building permit for the construction of the permanent residence shall have been issued prior to the placement
of the mobile or manufactured home.
2. The mobile or manufactured home shall be connected to an approved water and sewage disposal system.
3. A bond or other financial assurance shall have been posted with the city guaranteeing removal of the mobile or
manufactured home upon completion of construction. The amount of such bond shall be set by resolution of the
city council.
4. The right to occupy said mobile or manufactured home shall cease at the end of one year from the date of
issuance of the building permit or at such time as the final inspection is granted on the permanent dwelling,
whichever occurs first.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 487/571
C. When placed on a lot and used as a temporary office during the construction or expansion of commercial or
industrial use on the same lot, subject to the prior approval of the city council and compliance with all of the
following conditions:
1. A building permit for the expansion or construction of the proposed structure shall have been issued prior to
placement of the mobile or manufactured home.
2. The mobile or manufactured home shall be connected to an approved water and sewage disposal system or the
occupants shall have reasonable access to such facilities.
3. A bond or other financial assurance shall have been posted with the city guaranteeing removal of the mobile or
manufactured home upon completion of construction. The amount of such bond shall be as set by resolution of
the city council.
4. The right to occupy said mobile or manufactured home shall cease at the end of one year from the date of
issuance of the building permit or at such time as the final inspection is granted on the permanent structure
whichever occurs first. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
18.84.210: LOCATION OF GASOLINE/DIESEL PUMPS AND FUEL STORAGE TANKS:
All gasoline/diesel pumps and fuel storage tanks, shall comply with all requirements of this code, the current version of
the international fire code, the current version of the National Fire Protection Association codes, and any applicable
regulations of the state of Utah and federal regulations. In case of conflicting provisions in any of the above listed
regulations, the most strict regulations shall apply. The following standards also apply:
A. All gasoline/diesel pumps and fuel storage tanks shall be located no further than five hundred feet (500'), but no
closer than seventy five feet (75') to a fire hydrant. The hydrant must be accessible from the abutting public street.
B. Fueling yards must be accessible to the fire department by crash gate, key, or entry code.
C. Aboveground fuel storage tanks must have a twenty five foot (25') clear radius from combustible materials, storage
areas, parking/backing areas, and buildings on the same lot, and shall have a fifty foot (50') setback from any
property line.
D. Aboveground fuel storage tanks shall have a maximum height of twenty feet (20').
E. All underground fuel storage tanks and associated pump islands must have a minimum setback of twenty feet (20')
from a property line and adjacent buildings.
F. The maximum number of aboveground or underground fuel storage tanks on a lot shall be two (2) separate tanks
with a maximum capacity of ten thousand (10,000) gallons each.
G. A sight obscuring fence of six feet (6') in height shall be required surrounding the fuel storage tanks and associated
vehicle fueling areas, except in the case of a commercial service station when the sight obscuring fence around the
fueling area shall not be required. All required fencing shall be masonry, vinyl, chainlink with closely prewoven vinyl
privacy slats, or other closely equivalent materials approved by the planning commission. The fence may be
topped by a set of 3-strand barbed wire up to twelve inches (12") in height. The fenced area must have either a
hard surface or compacted gravel surface.
H. A primary and secondary containment is required for all fuel storage tanks and each must hold one hundred
percent (100%) of the capacity of the fuel storage tanks. The primary containment shall be a double wall tank. The
secondary containment shall be an impermeable diked area. The diked area shall include a sump with an oil-water
separator to collect rainwater, and the sump shall be surrounded by an impermeable underground barrier. The
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 488/571
sump shall include means to remove the water periodically by pumping when filled. The sump shall not be
connected to any sewer, storm drain, or other outlet. The pumped water shall be tested for contaminants and
disposed of as directed by the fire inspector.
I. Dispensing shall be from a listed pump, drawing from the top of the tank. Gravity discharge tanks are prohibited. The
dispensing location may not be less than twenty feet (20') from any building, property line, or fixed sources of
ignition. Tank openings, pipes, and valves shall be arranged to prevent siphoning.
J. An overfill prevention system shall be provided for each tank. During tank filling operations, the system shall:
1. Provide an independent audible or visual alarm signal for notifying the person filling the tank that the fluid level
has reached ninety percent (90%) capacity.
2. Automatically shut off the flow of fuel to the tank when the quantity of liquid in the tank reaches ninety five
percent (95%) capacity. For a rigid hose fuel delivery system, an approved means shall be provided to empty the
fill hose into the tank after the automatic shutoff device is activated.
K. When a fuel storage tank and pumps are out of service for ninety (90) days or more:
1. Flammable or combustible liquids shall be removed from the tank.
2. All piping, including fill line, gauge opening, vapor return and pump connections shall be capped or plugged and
secured from tampering.
3. Vent lines shall remain open and operable.
L. If an aboveground tank and pumps are out of service for one year or more, the tank and pumps shall be removed.
M. When removing a tank and pumps:
1. Flammable and combustible liquids shall be removed from the tank and all piping.
2. Piping at the tank openings shall be disconnected when no longer used.
3. All underground piping shall be removed.
4. Tank openings shall be capped or plugged, leaving a 0.125 inch to one-fourth inch (1/4") diameter opening for
pressure equalization.
5. Tanks must be purged and inverted prior to removal.
6. All exterior above grade fill and vent piping shall be permanently removed. Exception: Piping associated with
bulk plants, terminal facilities and refineries. Disposal methods for tanks shall be disposed of in accordance with
federal, state and local regulations. (Ord. 2013-01, 1-15-2013, eff. 2-7-2013)
18.84.211: STORAGE OF MOBILE AND MANUFACTURED HOMES PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to place, keep, maintain or store any mobile home or manufactured home within the city except in a
properly licensed mobile home sales establishment. Provided that this section shall not be interpreted so as to prohibit
the placement and storage of recreation vehicles (i.e., campers, travel trailers, fifth wheel, boats, etc.) adjacent to a
dwelling by the owner or occupant thereof. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
18.84.220: RESERVED:
18.84.230: AREA OF ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 489/571
No accessory buildings or group of accessory buildings in a residential zone shall cover more than thirty percent
(30%) of the rear yard. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
18.84.240: KEEPING OF ANIMALS ON LOTS WITHOUT ANIMAL RIGHTS:
A. Chickens: Subject to the requirements of this section and any other applicable provision of this code, hen chickens
(and no roosters or other types of fowl) regardless of age, in the amount set forth below, may be kept on a lot or
parcel of land for the sole purpose of producing eggs.
1. The number of hen chickens which may be kept shall be limited based on the size of the lot or parcel as follows:
a. Lots with at least twenty thousand (20,000) square feet: Up to sixteen (16) chickens for the first twenty
thousand (20,000) square feet and up to eight (8) additional chickens for each ten thousand (10,000) square
feet of lot area.
b. Lots with between fourteen thousand five hundred (14,500) and nineteen thousand nine hundred ninety nine
(19,999) square feet: Up to twelve (12).
c. Lots with between ten thousand (10,000) and fourteen thousand four hundred ninety nine (14,499) square
feet: Up to eight (8).
d. Lots with between six thousand (6,000) and nine thousand nine hundred ninety nine (9,999) square feet: Up to
four (4).
e. Lots with less than five thousand nine hundred ninety nine (5,999) square feet: None.
2. The principal use on the lot or parcel shall be a single-family dwelling.
3. Chickens shall be confined within a secure enclosure that includes a coop.
a. The coop shall be covered, weatherproof, and well ventilated.
b. The enclosure, including the coop, shall be predator resistant.
c. The coop shall have a minimum floor area of at least two and one-half (21/2) square feet per chicken.
d. If chickens are not allowed to roam within an enclosure or a properly fenced rear yard outside the coop, the
coop shall have a minimum floor area of six (6) square feet per chicken.
e. The coop shall be structurally sound and located in a rear yard at least thirty feet (30') from any neighboring
residential structures. The coop shall also meet the minimum setback for accessory structures within this
zoning district and shall not be located nearer any street than the primary residential structure. Because a
corner lot technically does not include a rear yard, the owner of a corner lot may choose one of the "side"
yards to function as a rear yard for the purposes of keeping chickens and locating the coop.
f. The coop and enclosure shall be maintained in a neat and sanitary condition and shall be cleaned as
necessary to prevent any odor detectable at a property line.
g. No chicken shall be permitted to roam outside the coop or enclosure except that a rear yard enclosed with a
six foot (6') fence with links or slats spaced at intervals small enough to keep chickens enclosed and predators
out.
4. Chicken feed shall be stored in rodent and predator proof containers.
5. Water shall be available to the chickens at all times.
6. Chickens shall not be slaughtered on site unless it can be done humanely and not within the public view. (Ord.
2016-06, 9-7-2016, eff. 10-3-2016)
18.84.250: MOBILE HOME PARKS:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 490/571
A. Purpose: The owners of a tract of land of not more than five (5) acres, which land lies in the R-3 zone, in which
mobile home parks are a conditional use, may construct a mobile home park thereon upon compliance with the
regulations as set forth in this section, and title 17 of this code on subdivisions.
The intent of this provision is:
1. To help provide a home for every family, especially lower and middle income families;
2. To permit variety and flexibility in land development for residential purposes by allowing the use of mobile homes
in certain zones within the city;
3. To do so in a manner that will promote the objectives and purposes of this zoning title and the general plan and
to protect the integrity and characteristics of the zones contiguous to those in which mobile home parks are
located.
B. Mobile Homes: Each mobile home that is set up within the mobile home park shall have been manufactured under
HUD standards and certified by HUD. Each mobile home shall be anchored by six (6) tie downs (screw anchor with
cable tie down or equivalent) around the outside perimeter of the unit.
C. Streets:
1. All mobile home parks shall be provided with safe and convenient vehicular access from abutting public streets.
Mobile home spaces shall not have direct access to public streets.
2. All streets in a mobile home park shall have a paved width of not less than fifty feet (50'), including curb, gutter,
and sidewalk. All streets shall be constructed in accordance with the standard specifications of the city for
construction of city streets, including, but not limited to, type and thickness of base, compactions, thickness and
type of pavement. No street shall be constructed until the design therefor has been approved by the city
engineer or the superintendent of the street department. Before giving such approval, the engineer or
superintendent may require submission of the results of California bearing ratio tests of the subgrade at such
locations as the engineer or superintendent may specify.
3. All streets shall be designed and constructed to provide adequate surface drainage. The maximum grade on any
street shall not exceed eight percent (8%).
4. Dead end streets shall be allowed only under the following conditions:
a. The dead end street shall not exceed two hundred fifty feet (250') in length measured to the center of the culde-
sac. Each such dead end street shall have a cul-de-sac that conforms to the Mapleton City standard
drawings.
b. A temporary dead end street may be constructed with a length not greater than one mobile home space if it is
intended to continue the dead end street into a future phase of the mobile home park to connect to a future
public street.
5. All street intersections within mobile home parks shall be as nearly as practicable at right angles. There shall be
no offset intersections or intersections with more than four (4) legs.
D. Curb, Gutter And Sidewalks:
1. All streets in a mobile home park shall have concrete curb, gutter and sidewalk on each side. The curb and
gutter shall be two feet (2') in width and a roll top, drive over design. The sidewalk shall be four feet (4') in width.
The curb, gutter and sidewalk shall have a thickness of six inches (6") throughout the mobile home park. All
concrete shall conform to standard city specifications for curb, gutter and sidewalk.
2. Each mobile home space shall be connected to the sidewalk along the street or to a paved parking space by a
paved walkway with a width of not less than four feet (4').
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 491/571
E. Common Area: Each mobile home park shall include a common area no less than one-tenth (1/10) of the size of the
project and be landscaped with grass, trees, and shrubs. The planning commission may require playground
equipment to be installed in the common area.
F. Landscaping:
1. Each mobile home lot shall be required to be landscaped with grass as a minimum around each unit.
2. A ten foot (10') open area around the park perimeter shall be provided, as determined by the design review
committee.
G. Parking:
1. Each mobile home space shall include a paved parking space with a minimum size of eighteen feet by eighteen
feet (18' x 18'). The parking space shall be paved with concrete and shall be provided with a paved access to the
street.
2. Each mobile home park shall also include visitor parking in addition to that required by subsection G1 of this
section. There shall be a minimum of one space of visitor parking for each four (4) mobile home spaces (or
portion thereof) in the mobile home park. All visitor parking shall be located within a reasonable distance of a
group of mobile home spaces as approved by the planning commission. Each visitor parking space shall be a
minimum of ten by twenty feet (10 x 20').
H. Utilities:
1. Each mobile home space shall be provided with a connection to the municipal sanitary sewer system. All such
connections shall be constructed and made in accordance with standard city specifications and in compliance
with all health regulations.
2. All sewer lines within a mobile home park shall be constructed within a street and shall be constructed to
standard city specifications for sewer lines in residential subdivision. Sewer lines shall be of such size as the city
engineer shall determine to be necessary to accommodate anticipated flows.
3. All off site sewer lines and related facilities which may be required as a condition of approval of a mobile home
park shall be constructed in accordance with standard city specifications.
4. Fire hydrants shall be constructed within or adjacent to a mobile home park as required by the fire chief to
comply with the fire code; provided however, the minimum spacing between hydrants, when measured along the
street, shall be four hundred feet (400').
5. The mobile home park may provide a water meter for each mobile home space or a master meter for all water
supplied to the mobile home park. Rates and charges for connection to the culinary water system and use
thereof shall be as determined by the current rate resolution adopted by the city council.
I. Other Utilities: Each mobile home space shall be provided with underground electric, natural gas, and telephone
service. All other utility and communication systems which may be installed shall also be underground.
J. Street Lighting:
1. Street lighting within a mobile home park shall be designed and installed as approved by the planning
commission.
2. Street lighting at potential hazardous locations, such as intersections, steps, or ramps shall be designed and
installed as approved by the planning commission.
K. Storage Area: A mobile home park shall include an area within the mobile home park for the storage of boats,
campers, trailers and similar items. The storage area shall include one space for each five (5) mobile home spaces
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 492/571
(or portion thereof) in the mobile home park, which shall be in addition to all parking required by subsection G of
this section. The storage area shall be enclosed in a fence which complies with section 18.84.100 of this chapter.
L. Survey Monuments: Permanent survey monuments shall be installed within each mobile home park to the same
extent as required in residential subdivision.
M. Lot Requirements:
1. Each mobile home space shall be minimum of four thousand (4,000) square feet in area.
2. Each mobile home space shall abut on a street within the mobile home park for a distance of not less than fifty
feet (50') frontage.
3. Not more than one mobile home or dwelling unit shall be placed upon each mobile home space.
4. Each mobile home space shall have a front yard of not less than ten feet (10') measured from the back of the
sidewalk. The towing hitch of the mobile home shall not project into the required front yard.
5. Each mobile home space shall have a rear yard of not less than five feet (5').
6. Each mobile home space shall have a side yard on each side of not less than five feet (5'). Provided, however
that on a corner space the side yard adjacent to the street shall be not less than ten feet (10'); except that when
the side yard is adjacent to a public street not within the mobile home park, the side yard shall be thirty feet (30').
7. Accessory buildings shall be located at least twenty feet (20') from the back of the sidewalk. An accessory
building may be located on the side or rear line of a space provided it is located more than forty feet (40') from
the street, is located more than ten feet (10') from any mobile home or dwelling unit on the space or any adjacent
space, has no openings on the side or sides contiguous to the space boundaries, and discharges no roof
drainage onto the adjoining space. All other accessory buildings shall be located at least five feet (5') from the
space boundary.
8. Each mobile home park lot shall provide a flat concrete surface equal to the blocking area required for setup of
the mobile homes.
N. Solid Waste Collection And Disposal: Solid waste collection and disposal shall be provided by the City.
O. Site Plan: Each mobile home park shall be constructed only in strict compliance with a site plan approved by the
Planning Commission. Such site plan shall show compliance with the foregoing requirements set forth in this
chapter, compliance with all other provisions of City ordinances, and the following additional items: all recreational
areas and other amenities, all other common areas, drainage and flood control structures and facilities, fences,
walls, hedges and any other matters deemed by the Planning Commission to be necessary for proper review of the
proposed mobile home park.
P. Standards And Requirements: The number of mobile homes shall be limited to 4.5 units per acre.
Q. Guarantees And Safeguards:
1. Continuing Obligation: In order to ensure that the mobile home park will be properly maintained, the developer
shall prepare and submit a document setting forth management policies, covenants, conditions and restrictions
relating to the proper maintenance of the mobile home park and when approved by the City Council shall be
recorded in the Office of the County Recorder. Among other things the document shall provide that failure on the
part of the developer or his assigns, renters or lessors to maintain the mobile home park in accordance with the
approved management policies, covenants, conditions and restrictions shall constitute a public nuisance
endangering the health, safety, and general welfare of the public and a detriment to the surrounding community
and that in addition to any other remedy provided by law for the abatement, removal and enjoyment of such
public nuisance, the City may remove or abate the nuisance and charge the cost thereof to the owners as
provided by chapter 11 of title 10, Utah Code Annotated, as amended.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 493/571
2. Development In Parks: The parks and play areas shall be protected against building development by conveying
to the City an open space easement over such open areas, restricting the area against any future building or
use, except as consistent with that of providing landscaped open space for the aesthetic and recreational
satisfaction of the residents. Buildings or use for noncommercial, recreational or cultural purposes, compatible
with the open space objectives, may be permitted only with the express approval of the City Council, following
approval of building site and operational plans by the Planning Commission.
3. License Required: Prerequisite to the operations of any mobile home park in the City shall be the obtaining of an
annual license. The yearly fees shall be set by resolution of the Mapleton City Council. It shall be unlawful to
operate a mobile home park without first obtaining a license and the license shall be refused or revoked upon
failure of the owner and/or operator to maintain the park in accordance with the standards and requirements as
set forth in this title. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
18.84.260: TRAVEL TRAILER COURT REGULATIONS:
(Rep. by Ord. 2007-11, 5-15-2007)
18.84.270: OFF STREET PARKING AND UNLOADING FACILITIES:
Off street parking and unloading facilities within the PO-1, NC-1, CC-1 and GC-1 Zones are subject to section
18.92.030 of this title. All other zones are subject to this section. (Ord. 2017-01, 4-19-2017, eff. 5-12-2017)
A. Facilities Required: Any building or structure erected or located after the effective date of the ordinance codified in
this title shall be accompanied by off street parking and loading facilities in accordance with the provisions of this
title. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
B. Change Of Use: Whenever the existing use of a structure or the existing use of land is changed to another use or
another occupancy, parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required by this title, except that the planning
commission may reduce this requirement in cases of hardship and practical difficulty covering the land on which
the building is located. (Ord. 2013-04, 2-19-2013, eff. 4-1-2013)
C. Parking Spaces Required: The number of off street parking spaces required for each use shall be no less than the
number set forth in this section.
D. Required Parking; Residential Uses:
Mobile homes 2 spaces for each trailer space
One-, two-, three- and four-family
dwellings, and multiple-family dwellings
2 spaces for each dwelling unit plus 0.25 spaces per unit visitor
parking
Rest home 1 for each 5 patient beds and also 1 for each 2 employees
Rooming house 1 for each sleeping room or 1 parking space for each 100 sq. ft. of
floor area used for sleeping purposes, whichever is greater
E. Required Parking, Commercial And Other Uses:
Art gallery 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 494/571
Auction house 2 spaces per 100 sq. ft. of gross floor area
Bowling alleys 5 for each alley. Additional parking spaces for remainder of building calculated
according to use
Cafes, cafeterias,
restaurants, bars,
nightclubs and other
similar places dispersing
food or refreshments
1 for each 5 fixed seats or for every 70 sq. ft. of seating area where there are no
fixed seats
Churches 1 for each 5 fixed seats in the chapel or auditorium, or where there are no fixed
seats, 1 for each 35 sq. ft. of floor space
Commercial horse
stables
1 space per 2 stalls
Community center 1 space per 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area
Contractor yard 1 space per vehicle plus 1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area
Convalescent center
(nursing home)
1 parking space per 3 beds
Corporate
headquarters/research
and development
1 space per 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area plus 1 space per company car
Daycare center 1 space per 6 people based on the maximum allowable occupancy
Entertainment:
Amusement centers
with restaurants
1 space per 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area plus 1 per 4 seats
Indoor and/or outdoor
amusement center
1 space per 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area
Government buildings 1 space per 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area
Grocery stores,
drugstores, clothing
stores, and other retail
establishments, and
office buildings
3 for each 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area within the buildings
Health clubs/spas 1 space per 4 persons based on the maximum allowable occupancy
Hospitals 1 space per 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area
Hospitals and
sanatoriums
11/2 spaces for each patient bed
Kennel 1 space per 600 sq. ft. of gross floor area
Library 1 space per 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area
Medical and dental clinics
and offices
1 space per 150 sq. ft. of gross floor area
Mortuary 1 space per 50 sq. ft. or assembly area
Motels 1 for each living or sleeping unit, plus 1 for each 2 employees on the largest shift
Movie theater 1 space per 4 seats
Office only (no customers
or services)
1 space per 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 495/571
Personal services, barber
and beauty shops, dry
cleaners, travel agents
1 space per 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area or 2 per chair, whichever is greater
Professional offices
(excluding
medical/dental/veterinary)
1 space per 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area, plus 3 stacking spaces per drive-up
window (for banks and like businesses)
Repair services 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area
Schools:
Beauty schools 5 spaces plus 2 per operator station plus 1 space per 200 sq. ft. of office space
Dance 1 space per 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area
Elementary/junior high
3 per room used for administration or classroom
High school or trade
school
3 spaces per room used for administration or classroom plus 1 per 4 students
Self-service storage Parking shall be provided by parking/driving lanes adjacent to the buildings. These
lanes shall be at least 16 ft. wide when cubicles open onto 1 side of the lane only
and at least 30 ft. wide when cubicles open onto both sides of the lane. 2 covered
parking spaces shall be provided adjacent to the manager's quarters. 1 parking
space for every 200 storage cubicles or fraction thereof shall be located adjacent to
the project office. A minimum of 2 such spaces shall be provided. Required parking
spaces may not be rented as, or used for vehicular storage. However, additional
parking area may be provided for recreational vehicle storage, provided that it is
adequately screened as approved by the city directs
Telemarketing office 1 space per 150 sq. ft. of gross floor area, or 1 space per employee on the highest
shift, whichever is greater
Truck/transit terminal 1 space per 500 sq. ft. of gross floor area
Veterinarian offices 1 space per 500 sq. ft. of gross floor area
F. Required Parking; Industrial Uses: One for each two (2) employees in the maximum working shift and one for each
vehicle used in connection with the use.
G. Required Parking; Uses Not Mentioned: The required off street parking for any building, structure or use of land of
a type which is not listed in this section shall be determined by the planning commission. The planning commission
shall be guided as much as possible by comparison with similar uses which are listed. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
H. Location And Control Of Parking Facilities: The off street parking facilities required by this title shall be located on
the same lot or parcel of land as the use they are intended to serve, except that in cases of practical difficulty, the
planning commission may approve a substitute location which meets the following conditions: (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-
2002; amd. Ord. 2013-04, 2-19-2013, eff. 4-1-2013)
1. All or part of substitute location must be on an adjacent lot, or within two hundred feet (200') from the main use
measured along or across a public street. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
2. The substitute lot must be in the same possession as the use it is intended to serve. Such possession may be
by deed or long term lease (at least 20 years), the terms of which meet the approval of the planning commission.
The present and future owners of the substitute lot shall be bound by covenants filed in the office of the county
recorder, requiring such owner to maintain the required number of parking spaces for the duration of the use
served. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002; amd. Ord. 2013-04, 2-19-2013, eff. 4-1-2013)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 496/571
I. Computation Of Required Parking Spaces: For the purpose of computing off street parking spaces which are
required by this title, the following rules shall apply:
1. "Floor area" means gross floor area, unless otherwise specified for a particular use.
2. In stadiums, sports arenas, churches and other places of assembly in which benches or pews are used in place
of seats, each eighteen inches (18") of length of such benches or pews shall be counted as one seat.
J. Combined Parking Areas: The required off street parking and loading facilities may be provided collectively for two
(2) or more buildings or uses, provided that the total number of parking spaces shall be not less than the sum of
the requirements for each of the individual uses, and provided that all other requirements of this title are met.
K. Mixed Uses: In the event that two (2) or more uses occupy the same building lot, or parcel of land, the total
requirements for off street parking and off street loading space shall be the sum of the requirements of the various
uses computed separately.
L. Access To Parking Facilities:
1. Access driveways shall be provided for ingress to and egress from all parking and loading facilities. Each
parking and loading space shall be easily accessible to the intended user.
2. Forward travel to and from parking facilities from a dedicated street or alley shall be required for all uses except
for private parking. The parking area shall be adequate to facilitate the turning of vehicles to permit forward travel
upon entering a street.
3. All uses which adjoin a major or secondary highway shall, wherever possible, have access by way of a service
road or alley.
4. The access to all off street parking facilities shall be designed in a manner which will not interfere with the
movement of traffic.
5. Access driveways across sidewalks or pedestrianways shall be designed in such a manner as to promote
pedestrian safety.
M. Circulation Within A Parking Area: The circulation within a parking area shall comply with the following
requirements:
1. Circulation within a parking area with more than one aisle must be such that a car need not enter the street to
reach another aisle within the same parking area.
2. Directional signs shall be required to differentiate between entrance and exit access points to the street.
N. Location Of Parking Facilities Restricted: The location of parking and loading facilities shall comply with the
following:
1. In residential zones and in the NC-1 neighborhood commercial zone, required parking space shall not be
designated in the required front yard or side yard which faces on a street except as may be shown on approved
plans.
2. In commercial zones required yard areas may be used for parking except for areas required to be landscaped.
O. Lighting Of Parking Areas: Any lighting used to illuminate off street parking facilities or vehicle sales areas shall be
so arranged as to reflect the light away from the adjoining premises in any residential zone.
P. Continuing Obligation: The required off street parking and loading facilities shall be a continuing obligation of the
property owner so long as the use requiring vehicle parking or vehicle loading facilities continues. It shall be
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 497/571
unlawful for an owner of any building or use to discontinue or dispense with the required vehicle parking or loading
facilities without providing other vehicle parking or loading area which meets the requirements of this title.
Q. Plot Plan Approval Required: At the time a building permit is requested for any building or structure, or at the time a
new use of land which would require off street parking is established, a plot plan shall be submitted showing the
proposed development of the property including the layout and development of the parking and loading facilities.
All parking and loading spaces shall be designated as well as the access aisles and other improvements. The
planning and zoning director may disapprove such plans if he finds they are inconsistent with the requirements of
this title.
R. Required Off Street Loading Space:
1. One off street loading space shall be provided and maintained on the same lot with every building or separate
occupancy thereof having a gross floor area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more which requires the
receipt or distribution of goods, material, merchandise or supplies by vehicle. One additional loading space shall
be provided for each additional twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of gross floor area of such building or for
each vehicle which must be loaded or unloaded at the same time, whichever requirement is greater.
2. Each required off street loading space shall be not less than ten feet (10') in width, twenty five feet (25') in
length, and fourteen feet (14') in height. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
18.84.280: MOTOR VEHICLE ACCESS:
Access to all lots and parcels of land having frontage on a public street shall be controlled as follows:
A. Access shall be by not more than two (2) driveways from any one street.
B. Driveways shall not be closer to each other than twelve feet (12').
C. Each driveway shall be approved by the city and shown on every site plan.
D. On corner lots no driveway shall be closer than fifteen feet (15') to the point of intersection of the front property line
with the side property line which abuts upon a street. No driveway shall be located across any curbed section of
frontage lying between said point of intersection and point of tangency.
E. In all cases where there is an existing curb and gutter and sidewalk on the street, all curb cuts and driveways shall
hereafter be made in accordance with the regulations.
F. Where there is no existing curb and gutter or sidewalk, a curb or fence may be required by the city. (Ord. 2002-05,
3-20-2002)
18.84.290: LANDSCAPING:
A. Purpose: The purpose of the landscaping requirements in this title shall be to enhance, conserve, and stabilize
property values by encouraging pleasant and attractive surroundings in all zones of the city and thus create the
necessary atmosphere for the orderly development of a uniformly pleasant community. Landscaping also
contributes to the relief of heat, noise, and glare through the proper placement of green plants and trees.
B. Scope Of Requirements: Landscaping shall comply with the requirements set forth in this title for the specific use or
location.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 498/571
C. Maintenance: Required landscaped areas shall be maintained in a neat, clean, orderly and healthful condition. This
is meant to include proper pruning, mowing of lawns, weeding, removal of litter, fertilizing, replacement of plants
when necessary and the regular watering of all plantings. Required landscaped areas shall be provided with a
suitable permanent method for watering or sprinkling of plants. This watering system shall consist of piped water
lines terminating in an appropriate number of sprinklers or hose bibs to ensure sufficient amount of water for plants
within the landscaped area.
D. Screening Requirements: Where landscaped screening is required, said screening shall consist of evergreen
shrubs, closely spaced and maintained at substantially the specified height of the required screening. When not
otherwise specified, screening shall consist of mature shrubs and shall be maintained at a height of from four (4) to
six feet (6').
E. Plot Plan Required: Where landscaping is required in this title, a plot plan showing the proposed landscape
development, watering system and use of the property shall be submitted to the planning and zoning director. The
same plot plan used to show parking layout or other requirements for the issuance of a building permit may be
used providing all proposed landscaping is adequately detailed on the plot plan. The planning and zoning director
may disapprove such plans if he determines that they are not consistent with the purposes of this title.
F. Nonconforming Status: Any use of property, which, on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, is
nonconforming only as to the regulations relating to landscaping may be continued in the same manner as if the
landscaping was conforming. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
18.84.300: RELOCATED BUILDINGS:
A. No permit shall be issued for the moving of any residential, commercial or industrial building, from one site within
the city to another site within the city, or from a site outside of the city to a site within the city, without first filing an
application with the planning and zoning director.
B. Application: The following information shall be filed with the planning and zoning director at the time the application
is made:
1. Location and address of the old and new site;
2. Plot plan of the new location, also showing adjacent lots on all sides of the property and indicating all structures
and improvements on the lots;
3. Plans and specifications for the proposed improvements at the new location, including plans for landscape
treatment when required by the planning and zoning director;
4. Certification by the planning and zoning director that the structure is sound enough to be moved, and that the
location and use of the building will conform to the building code and zoning ordinance of the city. (Ord. 2002-05,
3-20-2002)
C. Planning Commission To Approve: The application shall then be submitted to the planning commission for
approval. Exempt from this provision is any newly constructed building that has met all provisions of title 15,
chapter 15.04 of this code including plan approval, plot plan approval, inspection procedure and all other provisions
of the building code.
D. Planning Commission Findings: Before the planning commission may approve the application for the moving of a
building it must find:
1. That the building will have no appreciable detrimental effect on the living environment and property values in the
area into which the structure is to be moved;
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 499/571
2. That the building is in conformity with the type and quality of buildings existing in the area into which it is
proposed to be moved;
3. That the building and the lot on which the building is to be located conforms to the requirements of this title and
the building code;
4. That its location on the lot does not in any substantial way adversely affect buildings or uses in abutting
properties;
5. That all dedications and improvements as required by the city for streets and facilities and buildings shall be
provided in conformity with the standards of the city. (Ord. 2013-04, 2-19-2013, eff. 4-1-2013)
E. Standards Required Before Occupancy: The building and grounds shall be brought up to the standards required of
a new building before it is occupied. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
F. Bond Required: Before a permit to move a building may be granted, the applicant shall post a bond or other
assurance as determined by the planning commission to cover costs of bringing the buildings and grounds up to
standard. In the event of failure to comply with the conditions required by the planning commission, the city may
declare the bond or other assurance forfeited. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002; amd. Ord. 2013-04, 2-19-2013, eff. 4-1-
2013)
G. Old Site To Be Restored: If the site to be vacated is within the city, the bond shall also cover the costs involved in
cleaning up the vacated site and restoring it to a safe and sightly condition. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
18.84.310: WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES:
A. Purpose And Intent: The unique character, landscapes and scenic vistas of the city are among its most valuable
assets. Preserving and promoting those assets are essential to the long range social and economic well being of
the city and its inhabitants. Protecting these assets requires sensitive placement and design of wireless
communication facilities so that these facilities remain in scale and harmony with the existing character of the
community. The purpose and intent of this section is:
1. To accommodate new technology and develop regulations on the use and development of city property for new
cell tower facilities.
2. To regulate personal wireless services antennas, with or without support structures, and related electronic
equipment and equipment structures.
3. To provide for the orderly establishment of personal wireless services facilities in the city.
4. To minimize the number of antenna support structures by encouraging the collocation of multiple antennas on a
single new or existing structure.
5. To establish siting, appearance, and safety standards that will help mitigate the potential impacts related to the
construction, use and maintenance of personal wireless communication facilities.
6. To comply with the telecommunication act of 1996 by establishing regulations that: a) do not prohibit or have the
effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services, b) do not unreasonably discriminate among
providers of functionally equivalent services, and c) are not based on the environmental effects of radio
frequency emissions to the extent that such facilities comply with the federal communications commission's
regulations concerning such emissions.
B. Findings:
1. Personal wireless services facilities (PWSF) are an integral part of the rapidly growing and evolving
telecommunications industry, and present unique zoning challenges and concerns to the city.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 500/571
2. The city needs to balance the interests and desires of the telecommunications industry and its customers to
provide competitive and effective telecommunications systems in the city, against the sometimes differing
interests and desires of others concerning health, safety, welfare, and aesthetics, and orderly planning of the
community.
3. The city has experienced an increased demand for personal wireless services facilities to be located in the city,
and expects the increased demand to continue in the future.
4. It is in the best interests of the city to have quality personal wireless services available, which necessarily entails
the erection of personal wireless services facilities in the city.
5. The unnecessary proliferation of personal wireless services facilities throughout the city creates a negative
visual impact on the community.
6. The visual effects of personal wireless services facilities can be mitigated by fair standards regulating their siting,
construction, maintenance and use.
7. A private property owner who leases space for a personal wireless services facility is the only one who receives
compensation for the facility, even though numerous other property owners in the area are adversely affected by
the location of the facility.
8. Chapter 69-3, Utah Code Annotated, grants cities the authority to create or acquire sites to accommodate the
erection of telecommunications towers in order to promote the location of telecommunications towers in a
manageable area and to protect the aesthetics and environment of the area. The law also allows the city to
require the owner of any tower to accommodate the multiple use of the tower by other companies where feasible
and to pay the city the fair market rental value for the use of any city owned site.
9. Telecommunications towers located on government property with the lease payments being paid to the city,
instead of individual property owners evenly distributes the income from the lease payments to all citizens of the
city through increased government services thus indirectly compensating all of the citizens of the city for the
impact all citizens experience. The public policy objectives to reduce the proliferation of telecommunications
towers and to mitigate their impact can be best facilitated by locating telecommunications and antenna support
structures on property owned, leased or used by the city as a highest priority whenever feasible.
C. Exemptions: Except as specifically exempted herein, the requirements of this section apply to both commercial and
private telecommunications facilities. All telecommunications facilities shall comply with the following regulations
and all other ordinances of the city and any pertinent regulations of the federal communications commission and
the federal aviation administration. The following are exempt from the provisions of this section:
1. Temporary emergency wireless telecommunications facilities for emergency communications by public officials.
2. Amateur (ham) radio facilities licensed by the federal communications commission (FCC) (see section 18.84.330
of this chapter for ham radio regulations).
3. Parabolic antennas less than seven feet (7') in diameter, that are an accessory use of the property.
4. Maintenance, repair or reconstruction of a wireless telecommunications facility and related equipment, provided
that there is no change in the height or any other dimension of the facility.
5. Temporary wireless telecommunications facility, in operation for a maximum period of one hundred eighty (180)
days.
6. An antenna that is an accessory use to a residential dwelling unit.
D. Priority Locations: Personal wireless services antennas shall be located as unobtrusively as is reasonably possible.
To accomplish this goal, the provider shall attempt to locate antennas on sites in the following order of priority:
1. Existing facilities;
2. Property owned by a governmental entity (city, school district, etc.);
3. Property zoned commercial or industrial.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 501/571
E. Permitted Uses: Permitted telecommunication facilities must comply with the general plan, required setback and
height restrictions, applicable landscaping requirements, and are subject to a site plan review by the community
development department. All permitted telecommunication facilities must be located within an existing building,
must utilize stealth design technology or other visual screening techniques that conceal the appearance of the
equipment, or must be collocated with existing facilities that make use of stealth design or screening techniques.
The following telecommunication facilities are classified as permitted uses:
1. Wall Mounted Antenna: Wall mounted antennas which comply with the following standards:
a. The proposed antenna is located on a parcel owned by a governmental entity or located within the
neighborhood commercial (NC-1), general commercial (GC-1), central commercial (CC-1), industrial and
manufacturing (I&M-1), or mining and heavy manufacturing (M&HM-1) zoning districts.
b. Wall mounted antennas shall not extend above the wall line of the building or extend more than four feet (4')
horizontally from the face of the building.
c. Antennas, equipment facilities, and the antenna support structure shall be constructed with stealth design to
match the color of the building or structure and be architecturally compatible with building or background
against which they are most commonly seen.
2. Roof Mounted Antenna: Roof mounted antennas which comply with the following standards:
a. The proposed antenna is located on a parcel owned by a governmental entity or located within the
neighborhood commercial (NC-1), general commercial (GC-1), central commercial (CC-1), industrial and
manufacturing (I&M-1), or mining and heavy manufacturing (M&HM-1) zoning districts.
b. Roof mounted telecommunications facilities and antennas are allowed only on a flat roof and shall be
screened, constructed and painted to match the structure to which they are attached. The planning
commission may grant approval to place roof mounted stealth antennas on a pitched roof if the antennas do
not extend above the peak of the roof.
c. Roof mounted antennas shall be mounted at least five feet (5') behind any parapet wall. The maximum height
of an antenna is limited by the screening effect of the architectural features of the building such that no portion
of the antenna shall be visible when standing at any property line adjacent to the street. An antenna may not
exceed a height of ten feet (10') above the top of the parapet wall. An antenna may not extend more than
fifteen feet (15') above the roofline of the building unless the adverse impacts of the additional height are fully
mitigated.
3. Collocation: Collocation of antennas on an existing monopole is a permitted use provided that the antennas do
not extend more than thirty six inches (36") from the monopole and the equipment is located within the existing
building or enclosure.
4. Stealth Design: Telecommunication facilities that incorporate stealth design technology and are located on a
parcel owned by a governmental entity or located within the neighborhood commercial (NC-1), general
commercial (GC-1), central commercial (CC-1), industrial and manufacturing (I&M-1), or mining and heavy
manufacturing (M&HM-1) zoning districts. Monopoles using stealth technology do not qualify as a permitted use.
5. Conversion: The conversion of existing flagpoles, light standards, athletic field lights, or other similar structures
provided the existing height is not increased by more than ten feet (10').
6. Utility Pole Antennas: Utility pole antennas may only be located on existing utility poles. The utility pole must be
in compliance with city standards, specification and details for utility poles in order for it to be used for
telecommunications antennas. Consistent with the use of public rights of way by other utility and cable providers,
each telecommunications provider is required to enter into an agreement with the city prior to installing
telecommunication facilities in the right of way.
F. Conditional Uses: Any proposed monopole on property owned by a governmental entity, excluding property in the
CE-1 zone, or located within the neighborhood commercial (NC-1), general commercial (GC-1), central commercial
(CC-1), industrial and manufacturing (I&M-1), or mining and heavy manufacturing (M&HM-1) zoning districts. For
these uses, the following conditions shall apply:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 502/571
1. The applicant shall submit technical evidence demonstrating why the proposed facility cannot be achieved
through a permitted use at a priority location;
2. A monopole shall not be located within one thousand (1,000) linear feet from another monopole;
3. The facility shall incorporate stealth technology and be designed to minimize the visual impacts on adjacent
properties;
4. Unless otherwise authorized by the approving authority for good cause shown, every new tower shall be
designed and constructed to be of sufficient size and capacity to accommodate at least two (2) additional
wireless telecommunications providers on the structure in the future.
G. Screening: All equipment facilities shall be located in an existing wireless telecommunications equipment shelter,
the building to which it is attached, or designed to incorporate stealth design technology or other screening to
conceal the appearance of the equipment facility. All power lines leading to the telecommunications facility shall be
underground. When the equipment facility cannot otherwise be screened through the use of stealth design, existing
vegetation or buildings the facility shall be screened by vegetation or fencing that is at least seventy five percent
(75%) opaque when seen from the any public or semipublic area.
H. Prohibited Uses: The following telecommunication facilities are not allowed in any zoning district:
1. Lattice towers,
2. Whip antennas on wall mounted support structures, and
3. Any telecommunications facility not specifically listed herein as a permitted or conditional use.
I. Application: Applicants seeking approval for a wireless telecommunication facility must submit an application on a
form furnished by the city. In addition to the completed application form, a complete application shall contain the
following information:
1. Documentation of the applicant's right, title, or interest in the property where the facility is to be sited, including
name and address of the property owner and the applicant.
2. A copy of the FCC license for the facility or a signed statement from the owner or operator of the facility attesting
that the facility complies with current FCC regulations.
3. Location map and elevation drawings of the proposed facility and any other proposed structures, showing color,
and identifying structural materials.
4. For the proposed expansion of an existing facility, a signed agreement from the owner of the existing facility.
5. A site plan indicating the location, type, and height of the proposed facility, antenna capacity, on site and
abutting off site land uses, means of access, setbacks from property lines, and a boundary survey for the project
performed by a licensed land surveyor.
6. Elevation drawings of the proposed facility, and any other proposed structures.
7. A landscaping plan indicating the proposed placement of the facility on the site; location of existing structures,
trees, and other significant site features; the type and location of plants proposed to screen the facility; the
method of fencing, the color of the structure, and the proposed lighting method.
J. Approval: Wireless telecommunications facilities that are permitted by this section may be approved by the
community development director or designee. Technical exceptions and any application the community
development director deems to be in need of planning commission review may be issued by the planning
commission.
K. Building Permits: Prior to the construction of any wireless telecommunication facility, the applicant shall obtain the
proper building permits, road cut permits, and other permits as required by this code. (Ord. 2014-01, 1-7-2014, eff.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 503/571
2-2-2014)
18.84.320: SITE PLAN REVIEW PROCESS AND BONDING:
Wherever the terms of this title require submission and approval of a site plan, such review shall be conducted in
accordance with the following provisions:
A. Planning Commission To Approve: The planning commission shall have the function, duty and power to approve or
disapprove a project plan and to attach such modifications or conditions as may be deemed appropriate to improve
the layout, to ensure that the project will not pose any detrimental effect to persons or property, or to protect the
health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city.
B. Application Required: Application for site plan approval shall be accompanied by maps and drawings showing the
following as applicable:
1. The location of all existing and proposed buildings and structures on the site, with full dimensions showing the
distance between buildings and distances from buildings to adjacent property lines.
2. The location of all parking spaces, driveways, and points of vehicular ingress and egress.
3. A landscaping plan showing the location, types, and initial sizes of all planting materials to be used together with
the location of fences, walls, hedges, and decorative materials.
4. Preliminary elevations of main buildings showing the general appearance and types of external materials to be
used.
5. The locations of solid waste receptacles and trash pick up areas.
6. Copies of the natural conditions analysis map and all required technical reports in all zones as may be
necessary. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
C. Appeals Permitted: Any person aggrieved by a determination of the planning commission may request a hearing
before the city council who shall have the authority to reverse, affirm or modify any decision of said commission.
Any such appeal shall be filed within ten (10) business days of the determination of the planning commission. (Ord.
2002-05, 3-20-2002; amd. Ord. 2013-04, 2-19-2013, eff. 4-1-2013)
D. Issuance Of A Permit: A building permit shall not be issued for any building or structure or external alterations
thereto until the provisions of this section have been complied with. Any construction not in conformance with an
approved site plan shall be considered a violation of this title.
E. Bond: All commercial or industrial projects shall be required to bond for all required landscaping and improvements
equal to the city engineer's estimate of cost in a bonding manner approved by Mapleton City. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-
2002)
18.84.330: AMATEUR COMMUNICATIONS/HAM RADIOS:
A. This section shall apply to amateur radio antennas and support structures. The equipment and facilities mentioned
herein shall be allowed in all zones within the city, and it is the city's intent to provide reasonable accommodation
for such communications.
B. This section separates regulations governing amateur communications from commercial wireless communications
facilities and related equipment, and establishes provisions relating to visual mitigation, r-f noise, engineering,
residential impact, health, safety and facility siting. All facilities shall comply with the following regulations and all
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 504/571
other ordinances of the city and any pertinent regulations of the federal communications commission (FCC) and
the federal aviation administration (FAA).
C. Amateur radio antennas are regulated by the federal communications commission (FCC).
D. A building permit is required for all amateur radio facilities. A copy of the users amateur radio license shall be
submitted with the building permit application. For antennas and support structures that do not exceed the
maximum height requirement of the applicable zone, no additional review is required.
E. Planning commission review is required for antennas and support structures that exceed the maximum height
requirement of the applicable zone. The Planning Commission, in considering the application, must apply the
minimal practicable regulation necessary to achieve its goal of protecting the welfare of the community while
ensuring the regulation will not impinge on the needs of the amateur operator to engage in amateur
communications. The Planning Commission shall not deny an application for an amateur radio antenna and
support structure unless it can be shown that a hazard or a nuisance is created that cannot be mitigated with
reasonable conditions.
F. All antennas and support structures shall comply with the required setbacks of the applicable zone in which the
property is located.
G. No more than one amateur radio antenna and support structure per lot may be installed, and shall be located in the
rear or side yard, of a home or main structure. (Ord. 2014-01, 1-7-2014, eff. 2-2-2014)
18.84.340: MAJOR STRUCTURES TO BE APPROVED; SITE INVESTIGATION REQUIRED:
Prior to the issuance of a building permit and/or the construction of any multiple-family dwelling, any church, school or
similar high occupancy structure, or any critical facility, a detailed site investigation, prepared by a qualified
geotechnical consultant shall be submitted by the applicant approved by the Planning Commission. No such structure
or facility shall be permitted on the affected portion of any site for which the investigation shows evidence of ground
surface rupture, deformation or slope movement. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
18.84.350: BUILDINGS TO BE ON ZONING LOT:
No permit authorizing the construction or moving of a building on a lot shall be issued unless the parcel of land upon
which said building is to be constructed qualifies as a "zoning lot" as defined by section 18.08.010 of this title. (Ord.
2002-05, 3-20-2002)
18.84.360: GRANTING OF SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS, VARIANCES, NONCONFORMING USES,
AND INTERPRETATION OF THE ZONING ORDINANCES:
The Planning Commission shall hear and decide requests for special exceptions, variances, nonconforming uses and
interpretation of the zoning ordinances as specifically set forth in this section as follows:
A. Zone Boundary Lines Dividing A Lot In Single Ownership: Where a zone boundary line divides a lot in single
ownership at the time of the passage of the ordinance codified in this title, the Planning Commission may grant a
use which is permitted on either portion of such lot to extend to the entire lot, but not more than one hundred feet
(100') beyond the boundary line of such zone in which such use is permitted. Before such a permit therefor may be
granted, however, it must be shown that the Comprehensive Plan of zoning will be maintained.
B. Move Buildings: The Planning Commission may grant a permit to move buildings subject to standards and
requirements set forth in section 18.84.300 of this chapter.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 505/571
C. Expansion Of A Nonconforming Building Or Use: The Planning Commission may permit the expansion of a
nonconforming building or use thereof subject to standards and requirements set forth in chapter 18.20 of this title.
D. Public Utility Buildings: The Planning Commission may permit a public utility building or other structure where it can
be shown that such structure is necessary for the convenience or welfare of the public.
E. Special Exceptions: The Planning Commission may grant other special exceptions when specifically authorized to
do so under the terms of this title or as it may be amended.
F. Conditions Of Granting A Variance: The Planning Commission may only grant a variance to waive or modify the
requirements of a land use ordinance as applied to a parcel of property if:
1. Literal enforcement of the ordinance would cause an unreasonable hardship, as defined in Utah Code section
10-9a-702, for the applicant that is not necessary to carry out the general purpose of the land use ordinances;
2. There are special circumstances, as defined in Utah Code section 10-9a-702, attached to the property that do
not generally apply to other properties in the same zone;
3. Granting the variance is essential to the enjoyment of a substantial property right possessed by other property in
the same zone;
4. The variance will not substantially affect the General Plan and will not be contrary to the public interest; and
5. The spirit of the land use ordinance is observed and substantial justice done. (Ord. 2013-04, 2-19-2013, eff. 4-1-
2013)
18.84.370: HEALTHCARE HOUSING PROJECTS (NURSING HOMES AND RESIDENTIAL CARE
FACILITIES):
A. Residential Facilities For Elderly Persons: A residential facility for elderly persons is a permitted use in any area
where residential dwellings are allowed, except an area zoned to permit exclusively single-family dwellings.
1. To operate a residential facility for elderly persons under this section, a permit must first be obtained by the
owner, or operator of the facility. To obtain a permit the applicant must establish to the satisfaction of the
planning commission that:
a. The facility meets all applicable building, safety, zoning, and health ordinances applicable to similar dwellings;
b. Adequate off street parking space is provided;
c. The facility is capable of use as a residential facility for elderly persons without structural or landscaping
alterations that would change the structure's residential character;
d. No residential facility for elderly persons may be established within three-fourths (3/4) mile of another
residential facility for elderly persons or residential facility for handicapped persons, as defined by Utah Code
Annotated;
e. No person being treated for alcoholism or drug abuse will be placed in a residential facility for elderly persons;
and
f. Placement in a residential facility for elderly persons will be on a strictly voluntary basis and not a part of or in
lieu of, confinement, rehabilitation, or treatment in a correctional facility.
2. Upon review of an application for a permit to establish a residential facility for elderly persons in any area where
residential dwellings are allowed, except an area zoned to permit exclusively single-family dwellings, if the city
determines that the residential facility for elderly persons complied with the preceding conditions, it shall grant
the requested permit to that facility.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 506/571
3. The use granted and permitted by this section is nontransferable and terminates if the structure is devoted to a
use other than a residential facility for elderly persons or if the structure fails to comply with the conditions
contained herein.
4. For purposes of this section no person who is being treated for alcoholism or drug abuse may be placed in a
residential facility for elderly persons; and, placement in a residential facility for elderly persons shall be on a
strictly voluntary basis and may not be a part of, or in lieu of, confinement, rehabilitation, or treatment in a
correctional institution.
a. Subject to the granting of a conditional use permit, a residential facility for elderly persons shall be allowed in
any municipal zoning district that is zoned to permit exclusively single-family dwelling use, if that facility:
(1) Conforms to all applicable health, safety, zoning, and building codes.
(2) Is capable of use as a residential facility for elderly persons without structural or landscaping alterations
that would change the structure's residential character; and
(3) Conforms to the municipality's criteria, adopted by ordinance, governing the location of residential facilities
for elderly persons in area zoned to permit exclusively single-family dwellings.
b. No residential facility for elderly persons may be established within three-fourths (3/4) mile of another existing
residential facility for elderly persons or residential facility for handicapped persons, as defined by Utah Code
Annotated.
c. The use granted and permitted by this section is nontransferable and terminates if the structure is devoted to a
use other than as a residential facility for elderly persons or if the structure fails to comply with applicable
health, safety, and building codes.
5. It shall be unlawful to discriminate against elderly persons and against residential facilities for elderly persons.
The decision of a municipality regarding the application for a permit by a residential facility for elderly persons
must be based on legitimate land use criteria and may not be based on the age of the facility's residents.
6. The requirements of this section that a residential facility for elderly persons obtain a conditional use permit or
other permit do not apply if the facility meets the requirements of existing zoning ordinances that allow a
specified number of unrelated persons to live together. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
B. Residential Facilities For Persons With A Disability:
1. Purpose And Policy:
a. The purpose of this subsection is to:
(1) Comply with Utah Code Annotated section 10-9a-520;
(2) Provide clear direction to citizens and applicants regarding the necessary requirements and procedure for
establishing residential facilities for persons with a disability; and
(3) Establish an application process for locating residential facilities for persons with a disability in a residential
community that both avoids discrimination against the disabled and protects the character and nature of the
city's residential communities.
b. Pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 10-9a-520(2)(a), this subsection is intended to comply with the Utah
fair housing act of title 57, chapter 21 and the federal fair housing amendments act of 1988, 42 USC, section
3601 et seq.
2. Definitions: For purposes of this regulation, the following definitions shall apply:
DISABILITY: A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of a person's major life
activities, including a person having a record of such an impairment or being regarded as having such an
impairment.
a. "Physical or mental impairment" includes:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 507/571
(1) Any physiological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurement, or anatomical loss affecting one or more of
the following body systems: neurological; musculoskeletal; special sense organs; respiratory, including speech
organs; cardiovascular; reproductive; digestive; genito-urinary; hemic and lymphatic; skin; and endocrine; or
(2) Any mental or psychological disorder, such as mental retardation, organic brain syndrome, emotional or
mental illness, and specific learning disabilities. The term physical or mental impairment includes, but is not
limited to, such diseases and conditions as orthopedic, visual, speech and hearing impairments, cerebral palsy,
autism, epilepsy, muscular dystrophy, multiple sclerosis, cancer, heart disease, diabetes, human
immunodeficiency virus infection, drug addiction (other than addiction caused by current, illegal use of a
controlled substance) and alcoholism.
b. "Major life activities" means functions such as caring for one's self, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing,
hearing, speaking, breathing, learning, and working.
Disability does not include current illegal use of, or addiction to, any federally controlled substance, as defined in
section 102 of the controlled substances act, 21 USC 802.
RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES FOR PERSONS WITH A DISABILITY: A twenty four (24) hour group living
environment with one or more individuals unrelated to the owner or provider that offers room or board and
specialized treatment, behavior modification, rehabilitation, discipline, emotional growth, and/or habilitation
services for persons with emotional, psychological, developmental, or behavioral dysfunctions, impairments, or
chemical dependencies, and that is licensed or certified by the department of human services under title 62A,
chapter 2, licensure of programs and facilities, or is licensed or certified by the department of health under title
26, chapter 21, health care facility licensing and inspection act. Residential treatment does not include a
boarding school or foster home.
3. State Regulation Of Residential Facilities:
a. Prior to commencing operation, all applicants and operators of residential facilities for persons with a disability
shall obtain a license from the department of health under title 26, chapter 21 ("health care facility licensing
and inspection act") and/or the department of human services under title 62A, chapter 2 ("licensure of
programs and facilities"), as is appropriate and required for the nature of the facility's operations and services.
b. All residential facilities for persons with a disability shall maintain a current license from the department of
health and/or the department of human services as a condition for their continued operation.
4. Municipal Approval Process For Residential Facilities:
a. Permitted Use: A residential facility for persons with a disability is a permitted use in any zone where similar
residential dwellings that are not residential facilities for persons with a disability are allowed.
b. Recommendation; Approval: Prior to commencing the maintenance or operations of a residential facility for
persons with a disability, the owner/operator of such a facility must first obtain a recommendation from the
planning commission and final approval from the city council. In order to obtain such approval, the
owner/operator of the facility must establish that:
(1) The facility complies with existing zoning regulation for the desired location, including:
(A) Compliance with building, safety, and health regulations applicable to similar structures permitted within
the zone, including obtaining permits relating thereto;
(B) Compliance with site development standards including parking, traffic, landscape, utility use, and other
standards applicable to similar structures permitted within the zone without structural or landscape
alterations that would fundamentally change the structure's residential character and/or nature; and
(C) Compliance with zoning requirements limiting the maximum number of unrelated occupants that are
applicable to similar structures permitted within the zone.
(2) The facility has obtained and maintains appropriate state agency licensure for the facility, as provided
herein;
(3) Placement of disabled individuals in the facility shall be on a strictly voluntary basis and a part of, or in lieu
of, confinement, rehabilitation, or treatment in a correctional facility; (Ord. 2012-01, 2-21-2012, eff. 3-18-
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 508/571
2012)
(4) No individual shall be admitted to the facility as a resident who is a convicted sex offender, has been
convicted of selling or manufacturing illegal drugs, is currently using drugs or alcohol, and/or who is a direct
threat to the health and safety of other individuals and/or of causing substantial physical damage to the
property of others. In determining whether proposed residents are likely to represent a direct threat as
outlined above, the planning commission and city council shall consider, on the basis of objective evidence:
(Ord. 2016-07, 11-2-2016, eff. 11-27-2016)
(A) The nature, duration, and severity of the risk;
(B) The probability that potential injury will actually occur; and
(C) Whether reasonable modifications of policies, practices, or procedures or the provision of auxiliary aids
or services will mitigate the risk; and
(5) The residential facility will not fundamentally alter the character and nature of the subject residential
neighborhood.
c. Granting Permit: If the city council determines that the residential facility for persons with a disability is in
compliance with these requirements, the city shall grant the requested permit to that facility.
d. Use Nontransferable: The use granted and permitted by this subsection is nontransferable and terminates
upon:
(1) Transfer of the ownership of the facility;
(2) Any use other than that approved by the city council in the process outlined above; and/or
(3) Failure of the structure, its management, and/or any of its residents to comply with any aspect or provision
of this subsection.
e. Denial Of Permit: If the city council determines that the residential facility for persons with a disability is not in
compliance with these requirements, the city shall deny the requested permit to that facility, and the city
council shall provide a written explanation outlining the bases for the denial. Any decision of the city council
may be appealed to the district courts within thirty (30) days of the council's written decision.
5. Reasonable Accommodation And Related Procedure:
a. Interpretation: None of the requirements in the municipal approval process outlined above shall be interpreted
to limit any reasonable accommodation necessary to allow the establishment or occupancy of a residential
facility for persons with a disability.
b. Written Request: Any person or entity who wishes to request a reasonable accommodation shall make a
written request for the same to the planning commission for recommendations and city council for final
approval. Within such a request:
(1) The applicant shall identify the ordinance or regulation the applicant seeks to have waived or modified;
(2) The applicant shall identify the nature of the disability requiring accommodation;
(3) The applicant shall describe the nature of the requested accommodation;
(4) The applicant shall describe why the accommodation is necessary to afford the disabled an equal
opportunity to use and enjoy residential housing;
(5) The applicant shall describe what impact, if any, the applicant perceives that the requested accommodation
shall have on the existing neighborhood and whether the requested accommodation is consistent with the
character and nature of the neighborhood; and
(6) The applicant shall identify any burden or expense the accommodation would impose on the city.
c. Reasonable And Necessary Accommodation: The planning commission and city council shall make a
reasonable accommodation to any aspect of the municipal approval process outlined above where it receives
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 509/571
a written request for accommodation and the city council determines that such an accommodation is
reasonable and necessary in order that a disabled individual may have an equal opportunity to use and enjoy
residential housing.
(1) In considering whether a proposed accommodation is reasonable and necessary, the planning commission
and city council shall:
(A) Consider the impact of the requested accommodation on the neighborhood in light of existing zoning
and use, including any impact on neighborhood parking, traffic, noise, utility use, safety, and other similar
concerns, and whether any such impact fundamentally alters the character and/or nature of the
neighborhood and/or existing zoning regulations;
(B) Consider whether, based on objective evidence and on an individualized basis, a particular
accommodation would pose a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals and/or would result in
substantial physical damage to the property of others. In determining the likelihood of direct threat or
substantial damage, the planning commission shall consider:
(i) The nature, duration, and severity of the risk;
(ii) The probability that the potential injury will actually occur; and
(iii) Whether reasonable modifications of policies, practices, or procedures or the provision of auxiliary aids
or services will mitigate the risk; and
(C) Consider whether granting the accommodation would impose any significant or undue expense and/or
administrative burden on the city.
(2) The city council shall draft a written opinion letter explaining its findings, indicating whether the requested
accommodation is granted and detailing any related conditions that may be imposed therewith.
d. Appeals Process: Any party that requests a reasonable accommodation that is denied by the City Council may
appeal to the District Courts within thirty (30) days of the Council's written decision. (Ord. 2012-01, 2-21-2012,
eff. 3-18-2012)
18.84.380: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this section shall be:
1. To allow the establishment and conduct of a modest level of business activity within or near dwellings within the
City provided that such activities will be conducted under conditions and at levels of operation that will not
adversely affect, undermine, injure or otherwise significantly depreciate the residential character of the area; and
2. To set forth the minimum conditions and criteria considered necessary to ensure that all business activity carried
out within residential areas will remain incidental and to effectively implement the purposes set forth above.
B. Application Of Section; Exceptions: The provisions of this section shall apply to all persons, firms, or corporations
which conduct or propose to conduct any business, service, professional activity, qualifying as a home occupation
from any dwelling located in any zoning district in the City allowing residential dwellings as a permitted use.
Provided that this section shall not apply to:
1. The infrequent and incidental sale of personal property (subject to subsection 18.22.040F of this title).
2. The activities associated with the production of agricultural commodities and the incidental sale of such
commodities produced on the premises.
3. Occasional business pursuits by individuals who are under eighteen (18) years of age.
C. Procedure For Approval Of A Home Occupation: Prior to the establishment of any home occupation an application
for a home occupation permit shall be submitted to and approved by the Planning Commission. Said application
shall be on forms furnished by the City and shall contain the following information:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 510/571
1. The name of the applicant.
2. The location of the proposed home occupation.
3. A detailed description of the proposed activity.
4. An outline of the conditions and criteria required to be met in order to qualify as a home occupation and a written
or graphic statement indicating how the proposed activity will comply with the required conditions and criteria.
5. A statement, signed by the applicant, that the home occupation will be established and conducted in accordance
with the conditions and criteria of the ordinance and any conditions of approval attached by the Planning
Commission.
6. Drawing of the home showing the area in which the home occupation will be performed.
7. A written notification to all property owners within a three hundred foot (300') radius of the property where the
home occupation will be located. Said notification shall explain in detail the proposed home occupation and the
activities that will be involved. In lieu of this requirement, the applicant may gather the signatures of all residents
within three hundred feet (300') of the property where the proposed home occupation will be located. The
signatures must be those of the head of household (18 years of age or older). The signatures must be located on
a sheet of paper that explains the home occupation as described above. The paper must also state that the
signature is for notification only, and that signing the notification does not waive any rights to oppose the
proposed home occupation at the Planning Commission meeting.
The Planning Commission may delegate to the Planning and Zoning Director the responsibility to review all
requests for a home occupation permit and to conduct such research and investigations as are required to
determine compliance with the terms of this section and to submit a report of findings and recommendations for
each application to the Planning Commission.
When, upon a review of the findings and report, the Planning Commission determines that the proposed use will
be established and operated in accordance with the criteria hereinafter set forth and will be consistent with the
intent provisions of the Code relating to home occupations, they shall pass a motion approving the establishment
of the proposed home occupation. The effect of such approval shall be: 1) to authorize the establishment of the
home occupation, subject to continued compliance with the representations set forth in the application and any
conditions which may be attached by the Planning Commission and 2) to authorize the issuance of a business
license.
D. Conditions And Criteria: All home occupations shall be subject to full compliance with the following conditions and
criteria:
1. Home occupations shall be listed as a permitted or conditional use in the zone.
2. Except as specifically provided for herein, the home occupation shall be conducted entirely within a completely
enclosed structure on the property. Detached structures where a home occupation is being conducted must be
located within fifteen feet (15') of the residential dwelling. The Planning Commission may permit a business in a
detached structure not located within fifteen feet (15') of the residential dwelling if the structure is located more
than fifty feet (50') from any residential structure not located on the same lot as the structure.
3. Except as specifically provided for herein, the home occupation shall occupy not more than the equivalent of
twenty five percent (25%) of the living area of the dwelling or five hundred (500) square feet, whichever is less.
This shall also apply to detached structures.
4. The activities of the home occupation shall be conducted by members of the residing family. Provided that not
more than one (1) person, not a member of the residing family, may be engaged in the home occupation.
5. Any sale of goods not produced as part of the home occupation shall constitute a clearly incidental part of the
operation of the home occupation. There shall be no display of goods produced by the home occupation
observable from outside the dwelling.
6. No commercial vehicles shall be stored at the premises except one (1) delivery truck which shall not exceed ten
thousand (10,000) GVW rated capacity.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 511/571
7. Not more than six (6) cars (including those owned by the resident family) may be parked at the residence at any
one time and such vehicles shall be parked within the driveway or in front of the residence. Clients of the home
occupation shall not park or store vehicles at the premises overnight.
8. The home occupation shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes
and shall not have the effect of changing the character of the building or the attendant yard area from that of a
dwelling.
9. Signs shall be limited to one (1) nonilluminated identification nameplate not larger in area than four (4) square
feet. Electric or electronic signs shall not be permitted. No on site advertising signs shall be permitted. The sign
must be attached to the building where the home occupation is to take place.
10. The home occupation shall be registered with the license agency of the City and shall maintain a current
business license in accordance with City regulations.
11. Entrance to the home occupation from outside shall be through the same entrance normally used by the
residing family except when a separate entrance may be required by regulation of the State Health Department
or other public agency. The garage door shall not be used to satisfy this requirement.
12. The activities of the home occupation shall not involve the use of hazardous materials or chemicals in amounts
that will increase the hazard of fire, explosion or safety to the structure the use is conducted in, adjacent
structures, or the occupants thereof.
13. The operation of the home occupation shall not produce any noise, smoke, glare, light, fumes, dust, electronic
interference or similar condition which is readily discernible outside the structure the use is conducted in.
14. The physical appearance, traffic, and other activities in connection with the home occupation will not be
contrary to the intent of the zone in which the home occupation is located and will not depreciate surrounding
property values or the quality of the area for residential purposes as determined by the City.
15. The home occupation shall be operated in compliance with any applicable City or State requirements.
16. The home occupation applicant must either be the bona fide owner of the home (as shown on the current Utah
County tax assessment rolls) or if the applicant is renting or leasing the home, the homeowner must provide
written permission allowing the applicant to conduct a business in the home. Said letter of permission must be
signed and notarized by the homeowner.
17. Athletic, swimming and water safety lessons may be conducted on an outdoor court, in an outdoor pool, or on a
similar outdoor facility that is purpose built for the activity. For example, tennis lessons conducted on a purposebuilt
tennis court or swimming lessons in an appropriately sized pool.
18. The Planning Commission has the authority to set hours of operation based on legitimate impacts that are
identified during the approval process or during a review of the permit for any reason.
E. Planning Commission May Attach Conditions: In order to more fully achieve the purposes of this section and to
protect the health, safety and quality of the residential environment in the area the Planning Commission may
attach conditions to the establishment and/or operation of a home occupation not inconsistent with the standards
hereinabove stated.
F. Continuing Obligation; Business License Required: All home occupations shall be operated in compliance with the
conditions and criteria hereinabove set forth and any conditions which may be attached by the Planning
Commission as part of the approval. Upon approval by the Planning Commission the applicant shall be eligible to
obtain a City business license. Issuance of the business license shall be conditioned upon continued performance
of the conditions of approval and said license may be revoked or refused renewal upon a determination made by
the Planning Commission, following notice and hearing on the matter, that the owner and/or operator has failed to
maintain or operate the home occupation in accordance with the conditions of approval.
G. Administrative Approval: Administrative approval for a home occupation may be granted by the Planning and
Zoning Director, if the home occupation can meet the following criteria:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 512/571
1. The applicant must be able to meet all of the listed requirements and criteria for the home occupation in
subsection D of this section. However, the stricter requirements in this section shall apply to administrative
approvals.
2. The home occupation is conducted entirely within the home or main residential structure.
3. The home occupation does not involve direct sales of goods, crafts or otherwise, and will not have clientele
visiting the home business.
4. The home occupation does not involve the making or manufacturing of goods, crafts, or otherwise.
5. The activities of the home occupation shall be conducted by members of the residing family only. No other
person(s) may be engaged in the home occupation.
6. The Planning and Zoning Director shall review all administrative approvals on an annual basis when the
business license is up for renewal. If it is the finding of the Planning Director that the business has expanded
beyond what the administrative approvals allow, then the business license and home occupation must be
approved by the Planning Commission.
7. The Planning and Zoning Department shall not be bound to grant administrative approvals for home
occupations. If for any reason the Planning and Zoning Director, at his/her discretion, decides not to grant
administrative approval, the applicant must then seek approval from the Planning Commission.
H. Background Checks: Background checks will be conducted on all applications for home occupations.
I. Appeals From Decisions Of The Planning Commission: Any decision made by the Planning Commission under
authority of this section may be appealed by application to the City Council.
The approval of the home occupation permit shall be valid for the remainder of the year in which it is first granted.
Thereafter the approval will be extended for successive one (1) year periods, commencing on January 1 of the
calendar year provided: 1) that the home occupation is found to be substantially the same as initially approved and
2) that the home occupation has remained active as evidenced by the acquisition of a valid business license for the
previous year. (Ord. 2017-02, 6-7-2017, eff. 7-6-2017)
18.84.390: MINIMUM LEVEL OF IMPROVEMENTS TO BE INSTALLED BEFORE BUILDING
PERMITS MAY BE ISSUED:
No building permit for the construction of a dwelling or other structure intended for human occupancy shall be issued
unless and until the lot is served by the following minimum level of improvements:
A. A culinary water main and pressurized irrigation, which conform to City standards and extends to and across the lot.
(See title 13, chapter 13.20 of this Code for requirements regarding the extension of water lines to unserviced lots.)
B. A water service line and a pressurized irrigation line including the service tap, pipe and meter housing and
assembly, constructed in accordance with City standards.
C. A hard surfaced access road (City street) having a right-of-way width which conforms to the minimum City standard
and extends to and across the lot (see title 13, chapter 13.20 of this Code for requirements regarding the extension
of City streets to unserved lots). In the case of a road which is part of an approved subdivision plat or road
extension, a building permit may be issued with only the subbase and gravel base installed, provided that the City
holds a performance guarantee for the completion of the road improvements. Paving will be required from the
existing edge of pavement to any required or existing curb and gutter.
D. A sewer main, which conforms to City standards and extends to and across the lot. (See title 13, chapter 13.20 of
this Code for requirements regarding the extension of sewer lines to unserviced lots.)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 513/571
E. A permanent sewer service line constructed according to City standards.
F. Curb, gutter and sidewalk as determined necessary by the City Engineer.
1. An applicant may petition the Planning Commission to waive the requirement for curb, gutter, and/or sidewalks.
However, the Planning Commission may only waive or modify the requirements if it is determined to more
effectively achieve the policies, goals, and objectives of Mapleton City. The modifications shall be consistent with
appropriate engineering measures to protect public safety.
G. A plat map has been recorded with the Utah County Recorder in accordance with section 17.04.120 of this Code.
(Ord. 2014-04, 3-19-2014, eff. 4-13-2014)
18.84.395: RANCH DEVELOPMENT:
Upon approval by the Planning Commission with the issuance of a conditional use permit, an exemption to section
18.84.390 of this chapter for a building permit may be issued for one single-family dwelling unit provided that it meets
the following criteria and requirements: (Ord. 2013-05, 6-18-2013, eff. 7-12-2013)
A. The property, or a minimum of two (2) acres of the property, must be located in the A-2 Zone. (Ord. 2018-07, 6-6-
2018, eff. 6-28-2018)
B. The property must be at least five (5) acres in size. (Ord. 2013-05, 6-18-2013, eff. 7-12-2013)
C. The property must not have frontage onto an existing City street or dedicated public right-of-way.
D. A City street cannot be extended to the property without the purchase of additional property needed to extend the
right-of-way.
E. An applicant that meets the above criteria shall provide to the City the following:
1. Proof of an easement needed to access the property.
2. Proof of an easement necessary for the extension of water lines and sewer lines necessary to serve the
property.
3. Proof that the roadway to the proposed home is wide enough for emergency vehicle access.
F. Additional requirements:
1. Unless otherwise approved by the City Council, all homes shall be serviced with City water and sewer to meet
City standards. The City Council may only grant an exception to this requirement if the applicant's property is
located more than three hundred feet (300') from existing water and sewer lines, and the applicant can
demonstrate that they have an approved culinary water well capable of providing an approved adequate water
supply needed to sustain the residents of the home, the landscaping around the home, and the flow necessary
to meet the fire flow protection as outlined in the International Fire Code. A fire suppression system may be
approved in lieu of required fire flow as long as it is designed to meet International Fire Code, and approved by
the City Fire Marshal. The home shall be required to hook up to the City water system once the service has been
extended to the property.
a. If the property is located farther than three hundred feet (300') from the nearest sewer line or sewer line stub,
then the City Council may allow the use of a temporary sewer holding tank. The tank must be built to meet the
wastewater needs of the home, and must be able to be pumped out by means of a private sewer disposal
company.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 514/571
(1) Properties that are allowed to hold the sewer instead of hooking up to the City sewer, shall be required to
hook up to the City sewer if the sewer line is extended at some future time within three hundred feet (300')
of the property. Sewer impact fees shall be paid when the home is required to hook up to the City sewer
system, however, monthly sewer fees shall be paid by the homeowner regardless if the home is hooked up
to the City sewer or not. Septic tanks shall not be permitted.
2. Driveways shall be road base the entire distance from the nearest hard surface roadway to the location of the
proposed home.
3. Guesthouses for agricultural workers, or owner occupied accessory apartments shall be attached to home, and
shall also be subject to the requirements in section 18.08.010 of this title.
4. Homes and all or any accessory structures shall be situated on the property so as to not impede any future
rights-of-way, roads or City streets as shown on the official Mapleton City transportation Master Plan map.
5. Other conditions may be required by the Planning Commission, including, but not limited to, height of building,
location of building on the property, setback, roadway design, street dedication through the property to conform
with the official transportation Master Plan map, and other criteria which may not be listed herein.
G. Any future development of the property, including any subdivision of the property will void this exception, and all
requirements and regulations outlined in title 17 of this Code, and this title shall apply to the existing home,
including the installation of street improvements, and extensions of all City services. (Ord. 2003-12, 5-7-2003, eff.
6-4-2003)
18.84.400: DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS:
A. General: Mapleton City may, but under no circumstances is it required, enter into a development agreement. The
development agreement shall constitute a binding contract between the applicant and the City (the "parties") and
shall contain those terms and conditions agreed to by the parties and those required by this section. The City
Planner, Planning and Zoning Director and the City Attorney, or their designees, are authorized to negotiate
development agreements on behalf of the City.
B. Criteria For Entering Into A Development Agreement: The City may enter into a development agreement pursuant
to this chapter only if:
1. The development agreement has been duly adopted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter;
2. The development agreement is associated with a proposed development meeting the following size thresholds:
a. For residential and nonresidential developments, a cumulative project size of not less than ten (10) acres.
b. The proposed development is a development that will have significant impact on the City.
c. The proposed development, to which the development agreement pertains, is in conformity with the then
adopted General Plan, Capital Improvements Program, requirements; and the proposed development which is
subject to the agreement, contains mere conformity, in accordance with the criteria established in this Code
and other development, and which improvements are of a substantial benefit to the City.
C. Effect Of Approval: For applications submitted and which are subject to a development agreement with the City, it is
hereby expressly declared that the intent of this provision is to create a vested right in the parties to the agreement,
according to the terms of the agreement. The applicant's attorney shall certify that all covenants associated with
any approved project comply with all Federal, State and local laws.
D. Covenants: Any covenant by the City contained in the development agreement to refrain from exercising any
legislative, quasi-legislative, quasi-judicial or other discretionary power, including rezoning or the adoption of any
rule or regulation that would affect the proposed subdivision, shall be limited to a period of five (5) years. The
covenant shall also contain a proviso that the City may, without incurring any liability, engage in action that
otherwise would constitute a breach of the covenant, if it makes a determination on the record that the action is
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 515/571
necessary to avoid a substantial risk of injury to public health, safety and general welfare. The covenant shall
contain the additional provision that the City may, without incurring any liability, engage in action that otherwise
would constitute a breach of covenant, if the action is required by Federal or State law.
E. Attorney Costs: Except as otherwise expressly provided in the development agreement, the applicant shall
reimburse the City for any legal costs the City incurs while negotiating and drafting the development agreement.
(Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
18.84.410: OWNER OCCUPIED ACCESSORY APARTMENTS:
A. Purpose And Objective: The purpose and objective of the owner occupied accessory apartment ordinance is to
accommodate supplementary living accommodations in some appropriate areas of the community. These
provisions are intended to meet community demands for affordable housing and residential accommodations for
transient residents and extended family residents with reasonable limitations on their use and impact on
neighboring properties and neighborhoods.
B. Exemptions: Except as provided under subsection I of this section regarding a separate dwelling unit, the provisions
of this section do not apply if only family members, as defined under section 18.08.010 of this title, are residing at
the residence.
C. Limitations On Owner Occupied Accessory Apartments:
1. Use And Location: An owner occupied accessory apartment is a permitted use in all residential zones, unless
specifically prohibited by the zone text, under the following conditions:
a. Only one accessory apartment is allowed for a:
(1) Lot or parcel of land; and
(2) Primary dwelling unit;
b. The primary dwelling unit shall be a single-family detached dwelling unit;
c. Either the primary dwelling unit or the accessory apartment shall be occupied by a full time resident property
owner as shown on the Utah County tax assessment rolls;
d. The minimum lot size where the primary dwelling unit is located shall not be less than fourteen thousand five
hundred (14,500) square feet.
2. Parking:
a. A single-family dwelling with an owner occupied accessory apartment shall provide at least two (2) off street
parking stalls designated for use by the accessory apartment in addition to the required off street parking
required for the single-family dwelling.
b. A designated parking stall may not be located within a garage, unless at least two (2) other parking stalls
within a garage are available for the primary dwelling unit.
c. Not more than one of the designated parking stalls may be located within:
(1) The front yard setback; or
(2) Side yard setback that is adjacent to a street.
d. A parking stall designated for use by the accessory apartment under subsection C2a of this section shall be
paved or hard surface.
3. Utility Charges:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 516/571
a. A single-family dwelling with an owner occupied accessory apartment shall be charged for the number of
actual water connections and sewer connections.
b. All city provided utilities, including sewer, water, and garbage collection shall be in the property owner's name
and the property owner shall be responsible for payment of all utilities.
c. In addition to the utilities charged under subsections C3a and C3b of this section, a single-family dwelling with
an owner occupied accessory apartment shall be charged the equivalent of one hundred fifty percent (150%)
of a monthly sewer connection fee, unless the single-family dwelling is not legally required to connect to the
sewer system.
4. Minimum Dwelling Unit Size:
a. The size of an accessory apartment shall be at least three hundred (300) square feet and shall not exceed the
size of the primary dwelling unit.
b. The primary dwelling unit shall maintain one thousand (1,000) square feet of finished living space separate
from the accessory apartment.
c. The provisions of subsections C4a and C4b of this section do not apply to a single-family dwelling unit that
existed prior to November 5, 2003, and converts the basement into an owner occupied accessory apartment.
(Ord. 2008-14, 8-6-2008, eff. 9-24-2008)
5. Apartment Entrances:
a. The design, construction, and appearance of the single-family residence shall be maintained.
b. In accordance with the provisions of subsection C5a of this section, an entrance or exit to or from the
apartment shall be:
(1) On the side or rear of the structure; or
(2) Not visible from the street.
c. All owner occupied accessory apartments attached to a single-family residence shall include an internal
connection between the single-family residence and the accessory apartment. The required internal
connection may not be through a garage. (Ord. 2011-11, 7-19-2011, eff. 8-14-2011)
6. Arrangements: A structure having an accessory dwelling unit under the provisions of this section shall provide
separate kitchen, sleeping, and sanitary facilities for the accessory dwelling, that is separate from those provided
as part of the primary dwelling unit.
7. Detached Buildings:
a. One owner occupied accessory apartment may be located within a detached garage or barn if:
(1) The lot is located on a parcel of one acre or more unless specifically prohibited by the zone text;
(2) The building serves as a function other than a separate dwelling unit; and
(3) The property owner resides in either the primary dwelling unit or the accessory apartment.
b. The detached garage or barn shall appear as if it was not a separate dwelling unit.
c. The size of the accessory apartment shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total size of the garage or
barn, and the apartment may not exceed one thousand (1,000) square feet.
d. The garage or barn shall be located on the same lot or parcel of property as the primary dwelling unit.
D. Owner Occupied Accessory Apartment Permit:
1. A person shall obtain a permit from the city if the person:
a. Is constructing or causing the construction of a residence that has an accessory apartment;
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 517/571
b. Is remodeling or causing the remodeling of a residence for an accessory apartment; or
c. Desires an accessory apartment.
2. Before the permit is issued, the applicant shall:
a. Submit a site plan drawn accurately to scale that shows property lines and dimensions, the location of existing
buildings or additions, dimensions from buildings or additions to property line, the location of parking stalls,
and utility meters.
b. Include detailed floor plans drawn to scale with labels on the primary dwelling unit and the accessory
apartment rooms indicating uses or proposed uses.
c. Pay fees, including a onetime owner occupied accessory apartment permit fee as established by Mapleton
City for an accessory apartment in accordance with Mapleton City's established fee schedule, available at the
Mapleton City offices.
3. a. After an owner occupied accessory apartment permit fee has been paid for an accessory apartment use at
one location, no owner occupied accessory apartment permit fee will be required for future accessory apartment
use of the same building.
b. If the proposed accessory apartment is located within a proposed new home, the owner occupied accessory
apartment permit fee shall be paid for the new home.
c. The planning and zoning director in consultation with the city administrator and city controller, may establish a
payment schedule by written agreement for the payment of the owner occupied accessory apartment permit
fee for existing accessory apartments under this section.
(1) The agreement shall:
(A) Allow an applicant up to three (3) years to pay the onetime owner occupied accessory apartment permit
fee, without interest charges, in equal payments made on a monthly or annual basis using a payment
method specified by the city; and
(B) Provide for penalties for late payments consistent with existing city policies.
d. The owner occupied accessory apartment permit fee for an accessory apartment planned for a new home
shall be paid at the time the impact fee is paid for the primary dwelling unit.
4. If the planning and zoning director denies an owner occupied accessory apartment permit, the decision is
appealable to the city council. Appeal must be made to the city council within forty five (45) days, or the decision
of the planning and zoning director is final.
E. Withdrawal Of Permit:
1. A permit for an accessory apartment may be withdrawn by the city planning and zoning director if:
a. The conditions upon which the permit has been issued no longer are maintained by the property owner; or
b. The property owner applies for a withdrawal which application shall include an affidavit that the property owner
is not and will not allow any occupant to use the accessory apartment as a dwelling unit except in accordance
with this section.
2. If made under this subsection E, a withdrawal allows the applicant to cancel additional city utility fees required
under subsection C3 of this section while the accessory apartment is not occupied.
3. If the property owner allows the accessory apartment to be occupied as a dwelling unit during the period of a
withdrawal under this section, all city utility fees from the date of the withdrawal are immediately due and payable
to the city along with ongoing city utility fees required under subsection C3 of this section.
4. A withdrawal may be canceled under this section if the applicant applies for a new permit, pays an application
and inspection fee in accordance with the city fee schedule, and obtains a permit under this section for an owner
occupied accessory apartment.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 518/571
5. If the planning and zoning director withdraws a permit or denies a new permit, the decision is appealable to the
city council. Appeal must be made to the city council within forty five (45) days, or the decision of the planning
and zoning director is final.
F. Building Codes: All construction and remodeling shall comply with building codes in effect at the time of construction
or remodeling, except that it is optional with the property owner whether to provide separate gas, water, and
electrical systems.
G. Prior Uses:
1. Owner occupied accessory apartments have not been, prior to November 5, 2003, a legal use of land within
Mapleton City.
2. No accessory apartments existing prior to November 5, 2003, shall be "grandfathered", or considered legal
solely because they were previously used as an accessory apartment.
3. It is the intent of the City Council that all owners of an accessory apartment promptly apply for and, upon
compliance with this section, be issued a permit.
H. Addressing: An owner occupied accessory apartment will not be given a new address by the City. Homes with
owner occupied accessory apartments can refer to mail to its accessory apartment by the same address as the
home and refer to the main address as "A" and the accessory apartment address as "B".
I. Separate Dwelling Units:
1. Except as provided under this section or as specifically provided by ordinance, no other type of apartment is
allowed.
2. Any portion of a home or dwelling unit that has been sectioned off so that any occupant in the dwelling does not
have access to any portion of the home, and contains separate living quarters and/or a kitchen, regardless of the
relationship of the occupants, is prohibited unless:
a. It meets all of the requirements of this section; and
b. An application has been made and a permit issued in accordance with the requirements of this section. (Ord.
2008-14, 8-6-2008, eff. 9-24-2008)
18.84.415: MULTIPLE KITCHENS PERMITTED:
A. The number of kitchens on a parcel or lot that includes a dwelling unit is regulated as provided under this section.
B. 1. An owner of a parcel or lot that includes a dwelling unit shall apply for a building permit with the Department of
Community Development for each kitchen within the dwelling unit.
2. An owner of a parcel or lot that includes accessory building(s)/structure(s) on the parcel or lot shall apply for a
building permit with the Department of Community Development for each kitchen that is located in the accessory
building(s)/structure(s). Only one accessory building/structure may allow for living quarters if:
a. The accessory building/structure is located on a parcel or lot of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or more
unless specifically prohibited by the zone text;
b. The size of the living quarter shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total size of the accessory
building/structure, and the living quarter may not exceed one thousand (1,000) square feet; and
c. Only family members, as defined under section 18.08.010 of this title, are residing in the primary dwelling unit
and accessory building/structure.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 519/571
C. If an owner of a parcel or lot is required to apply for a building permit under subsection B of this section:
1. For a new dwelling unit or accessory building/structure, only one building permit is required if each kitchen
proposed is shown on the building permit drawings; and
2. For an existing dwelling unit or accessory building/structure, a building permit is required for each new kitchen
proposed as shown on the building permit drawings.
D. The building permit(s) required under this section are for the purpose of enforcement of section 18.84.410, "Owner
Occupied Accessory Apartments", of this chapter. (Ord. 2010-08, 11-16-2010, eff. 12-28-2010)
18.84.420: ADEQUATE PUBLIC FACILITIES:
A. Intent: It is Mapleton City's intent to promote and encourage expansion and development of public service facilities
within Mapleton City that will support the existing residents and businesses safely, and the planned growth of the
community. It is also Mapleton City's intent to encourage future patterns of development and land use that:
1. Reduce infrastructure construction cost and operation; and
2. Make efficient use of existing or planned facilities.
B. Definitions; Change In Use: For the purpose of this section, the words "development" and "project" shall mean any
construction, expansion, change in use of buildings, or change in use of land in conjunction with the subdivision of
land that has the effect of:
1. Increasing the need or demand for a public facility or service; or
2. Utilizing existing public facility or service capacity; or
3. Causing an existing public facility or service level of service standard to decline.
C. Timing And Sequence Of Development: Mapleton City will require development to be timed and sequenced in a
manner consistent with the capacity of available public services and facilities. In order to enact this policy, the
following will be required:
1. All development including all of its future phases must ensure that all services required for the development are
in place or constructed concurrently with the timing of the project. All required service must be active by
completion of the development. All on site and/or off site improvements must be ensured they will be completed
satisfactorily and on schedule and adequate guarantees must be in place before occupancy.
2. A detailed public infrastructure review and study process is to be completed by developers of new projects.
3. All on and off site public facilities required exclusively to achieve capacity, or supply for the new development will
be constructed to city standards and specifications and paid for by the developer.
4. Prior to approval, the developer must show that the development meets, will meet or exceeds Mapleton City's
established level of service in the following categories, as adopted:
a. Water;
b. Recreation facilities;
c. Wastewater/sewer;
d. Drainage;
e. Public safety;
f. Transportation level of service.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 520/571
5. A traffic impact analysis including, at a minimum, the following:
Show that streets:
a. Are adequate to serve or accommodate emergency vehicles;
b. Will permit the installation of public utilities and other public services;
c. Are not detrimental and would not result in the inability to develop adjacent lands in conformity with sound
planning practices;
d. Will not cause existing street patterns to be fragmented;
e. Are in compliance with the Mapleton City master street plan as currently existing or as may be amended in the
future. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
18.84.430: PORTABLE SHIPPING AND CARGO STORAGE CONTAINERS:
A. Mapleton City prohibits the placing of shipping and cargo storage units used for shipping in all zones of Mapleton
City with the exception of the commercial zone and the industrial manufacturing zone, where these units are being
used for shipping merchandise, receiving merchandise or in construction sites for a period not to exceed one
hundred twenty (120) days. Violation of this section shall be a class B misdemeanor and will be prosecuted as
such. (Ord. 2002-08, 7-3-2002)
18.84.440: RESIDENTIAL SOLAR ENERGY DEVICES:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this section is to:
1. Regulate the permitting of residential solar energy devices for personal, nonutility scale use; and
2. Encourage renewable energy practices while mitigating negative effects.
B. Scope: This section shall regulate all "solar energy devices" (defined as devices designed to capture, convert,
store, or use solar energy) within the boundaries of Mapleton City, including, but not limited to:
1. Photovoltaic solar panels; and
2. Solar water heating devices.
C. Roof Mounted Devices: Roof mounted solar energy devices are allowed in residential zones, if they are incidental
to the main dwelling unit, or incidental to any other dwelling units, subject to the following conditions:
1. Solar energy devices must be mounted parallel to the roof, or mounted with a maximum separation of three feet
(3') vertically above the roof surface in order to facilitate cooling or more efficient angles for capturing solar
energy;
2. In no case shall roof mounted solar energy devices extend above the peak of the roof of a building; and
3. In no case shall the solar energy device be closer than three feet (3') from the end of the gable for purposes of
fire access.
D. Ground Mounted Devices: Ground mounted solar energy devices are allowed in residential zones.
1. Setbacks:
a. The minimum yard setbacks for a ground mounted solar energy device from side and rear property lines is ten
feet (10').
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 521/571
b. Ground mounted solar energy devices are prohibited in front yards, between the principal building and the
public street.
c. Ground mounted solar energy devices shall not be placed within any legal easement or right of way location,
or be placed within any stormwater conveyance system or in any other manner that would alter or impede
stormwater runoff from collecting in a constructed stormwater conveyance system.
2. Height:
a. Ground mounted solar energy devices shall not exceed six feet (6') in height at maximum tilt above the natural
grade surrounding the systems.
3. Coverage:
a. The surface area of the arrays of a ground mounted solar energy device, regardless of the mounted angle of
any solar panels, shall be considered impervious and calculated in the lot coverage of the lot on which the
system is located.
b. The total surface area of the arrays of ground mounted solar energy device on the property shall not exceed
more than five percent (5%) of the lot area. For example: 10,000 sf lot x 5% = 500 sf.
4. Screening:
a. Ground mounted solar energy devices shall be screened from any adjacent property that is residentially zoned
or used for residential purposes by a sight obscuring fence or by plant materials which provide a visual screen.
Visual screening or fencing is subject to the height and location restrictions found in section 18.84.130 of this
chapter. Screening must be in place prior to a final inspection by the building official for the solar energy
device.
5. Safety:
a. All power transmission lines from a ground mounted solar energy device to any building or other structure
shall be located underground and/or in accordance with the applicable electric code.
b. Appropriate safety/warning signage concerning voltage shall be placed at ground mounted electrical devices,
equipment, and structures. All electrical control devices associated with the solar energy device shall be
locked to prevent unauthorized access or entry.
6. Removal:
a. Ground mounted solar energy devices must be upgraded, repaired or removed from the property within three
(3) months of becoming inoperable, inefficient or obsolete.
E. Reduction Of Glare: All solar energy devices shall have a dark colored surface/finish on the majority of the device,
excluding incidental framing parts, which shall be designed to reduce glare.
F. Installation: The installation of solar energy devices shall require a building permit in all cases, and shall be subject
to Building Code requirements adopted by Mapleton City.
G. Solar Easements: Recognizing the property rights of other property owners to construct buildings as allowed by
Mapleton City zoning ordinances, and the rights of property owners to plant trees or vegetation on their properties,
Mapleton City shall have no obligation to ensure access to sunlight for owners of any solar energy devices. Any
property owner desiring to maintain access to sunlight for their property through adjacent properties shall obtain
solar easement(s) as provided in Utah Code title 57, chapter 13, solar easements, as amended. Solar easements
shall be privately enforced through civil action by private property owners.
H. Conflicting Provisions: Notwithstanding the provisions of this section:
1. Individual residential zones may contain stricter provisions regulating solar energy devices; and
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 522/571
2. In the case of any conflict between the provisions of this section, the individual residential zone's provisions shall
prevail.
I. Support: A structural engineer shall certify that the structure to which a solar energy device is mounted is engineered
to properly support the solar energy device. (Ord. 2016-05, 9-7-2016, eff. 10-3-2016)
18.84.450: FLAGPOLE AND FLAG:
A. A flagpole is permitted in all zones.
B. 1. Except as provided under subsection B2 of this section, the maximum height of a flagpole may not exceed the
maximum height allowed for any structure in the zone where the flag is located.
2. A conditional use permit may be granted for a flagpole displaying only the flag of the United States or State of
Utah up to a maximum height of one hundred twenty feet (120') in nonresidential zones.
C. A "flag" as defined under section 18.08.010 of this title of any type is allowed except for commercial flags used for
advertising purposes.
D. 1. A flagpole may not be located in a manner as to cause a safety hazard.
2. A flag may not extend beyond the property line of the lot on which the flagpole is located.
3. Lighting fixtures shall be shielded to prevent direct illumination of adjoining properties and public right-of-way.
E. An application for a conditional use permit authorized by subsection B2 of this section shall include a plan showing
the location, height, material, and footing specifications. (Ord. 2008-20, 11-19-2008, eff. 2-4-2009)
18.84.460: APPEALS:
A. Appeals To The Planning Commission: Decisions made by the Community Development Director or other official
enforcing the provisions of this chapter may be appealed to the Planning Commission by filing a notice of appeal in
writing with the Planning Commission Secretary. All valid appeals shall be filed within ten (10) business days of the
date of action and shall include payment of the required filing fees as established by City Council resolution.
1. Such notice of appeal shall set forth specifically the ground or grounds upon which such appeal is taken, and the
name, address and signature of the appellant.
2. Within ten (10) business days after receipt of a valid appeal the Planning Commission Secretary shall set a date
for public hearing at which the appeal shall be considered by the Planning Commission. All appeals shall be set
for the next regular Planning Commission meeting unless insufficient time exists for public notice as established
by State Code.
B. Appeals To The City Council: Decisions made by Planning Commission to approve or deny projects or appeals may
be appealed to the city council by filing a notice of appeal in writing with the city recorder. All valid appeals shall be
filed within ten (10) business days of the date of action and shall include payment of the required filing fees as
established by city council resolution.
1. Such notice of appeal shall set forth specifically the ground or grounds upon which such appeal is taken, and the
name, address and signature of the appellant.
2. Within ten (10) business days after receipt of a valid appeal the city recorder shall set a date for public hearing at
which the appeal shall be considered by the city council. All appeals shall be set for the next regular city council
meeting, unless insufficient time exists for public notice as established by state code.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 523/571
C. Stay Of Proceedings Pending Appeal: An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from,
unless the community development director, planning commission or city council certifies after the notice of appeal
shall have been filed, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would cause eminent peril of life or
property. In such case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by restraining order which may be granted
by the district court on application and notice and on due cause shown.
D. Judicial Review Of City Council's Decision: Any person aggrieved by any decision of the city council may have and
maintain a plenary action for relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction; provided petition for such relief
is presented to the court within thirty (30) days after the final decision by the city council. (Ord. 2013-04, 2-19-2013,
eff. 4-1-2013)
Chapter 18.86
SIGNS
18.86.010: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The Mapleton City, Utah, city council, finding it necessary to promote public safety and to foster an appealing
cityscape, and in accordance with the general plan, and for the general welfare, hereby desires to regulate signage
within Mapleton City limits1.
The city council finds that unregulated signage can be detrimental to public safety, that it can result in visual blight and
negatively impact local property values, and that it can displace alternative land uses. Specifically, the city council
finds it necessary:
A. To promote the health and well being of the public, generally pedestrians and motorists, by minimizing
obstruction, visual or otherwise, distraction, and related safety and traffic hazards within the city; and
B. To preserve and enhance the beauty of the city by minimizing visual clutter and regulating physical
characteristics of and placement of signage within the city. (Ord. 2015-04, 12-2-2015, eff. 12-28-2015)
18.86.020: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Signage shall be regulated within each zone of the city. Signage in residential zones shall have specific limitations
as set forth herein. Signage in commercial/industrial zones shall have specific limitations as set forth herein.
B. Signs shall be deemed either permanent or temporary.
C. All signage shall be reasonably secured and maintained so as to withstand normal weather conditions including,
but not limited to, wind, rain, snow and so forth. Signs, whether temporary or permanent, shall be constructed and
placed in such a way so as to preserve the public safety and shall be maintained in such a manner so as to
prevent disrepair and visual blight.
D. All signage shall be generally prohibited from being posted or left behind on public property, in any public right of
way, on utility poles, historical markers, on publicly owned property, including trees, and on street and traffic signs
with the following exceptions:
1. Where the city has traditionally allowed public property to be used as an open public forum, temporary
noncommercial signage shall be allowed only if the signage is handheld or personally attended, and where said
signage presentation does not block public rights of way, disrupt the peace, incite to violence, or cause any other
public disturbance.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 524/571
2. Signage dedicated for government use including traffic signs, traffic lights, street signs, directional signs, public
safety signs, advertising for community events, and related signage shall be exempt from the prohibition against
signage in any public right of way.
3. Signage approved by the city as part of a special event permit.
E. All signage shall be subject to a discontinued use limitation, whereupon the owner of said signage shall remove
such no later than thirty (30) days after a discontinued use. A "discontinued use" shall include the expiration of a
permit, abandonment of the sign, or the happening of an event or sale for which the sign was posted.
"Discontinued use" shall not include the involuntary destruction of a sign in whole or in part due to fire or other
calamity unless the sign has been abandoned. (Ord. 2015-04, 12-2-2015, eff. 12-28-2015)
18.86.030: RESIDENTIAL ZONES:
A. In residential zones, permanent signage may be placed in accordance with the following setback limitations:
1. Signage may be placed no closer than fifteen feet (15') from the edge of the street, and fifteen (15) linear feet
from a neighboring lot.
B. A temporary sign has no setback requirements in a residential zone but must be placed on private property unless
an exception applies per subsection 18.86.020D of this chapter.
C. A sign may not be placed in a "clear vision triangle", defined as follows: At intersections of alleys and driveways
(this includes private driveways and adjacent private driveways), the triangle shall be defined by drawing a line
between two (2) points that are a minimum of fifteen feet (15') from the intersection along the property lines. At
intersections of public streets, the triangle shall be defined by drawing a line between the two (2) points that are a
minimum of thirty feet (30') from the intersection along the property lines.
D. Except for window signs, only one sign not exceeding four feet (4') in height and twenty four (24) square feet in total
size shall be allowed per lot. For corner lots or lots with frontage on two (2) public streets, up to two (2) signs may
be permitted.
E. Any window sign shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the size of the window and shall not exceed a total
window display area for all windows of thirty two (32) square feet.
F. In multiple-unit residential buildings, the total window display area allowed shall apply to each individually rented or
owned unit and not to the building as a whole.
G. The display area of a two (2) faced sign with identical copy on both sides shall be counted as the display area of
only one of the faces. (Ord. 2015-04, 12-2-2015, eff. 12-28-2015)
18.86.040: COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL ZONES:
Permanent signs are the primary method for identifying businesses and providing commercial messages associated
with those businesses. Temporary signs should be used sparingly, in conjunction with the opening of a business or for
special events. Signs not specifically permitted by this part are prohibited.
A. Monument Signs: A "monument sign" is a freestanding sign that is supported by a solid base (other than poles)
such that the bottom of the sign face is three feet (3') or less above grade.
1. One monument sign shall be allowed for each site. Sites that front on more than one public street shall be
allowed one monument sign per street frontage. For the purpose of this section, "site" means a lot or lots that
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 525/571
have been developed with a common plan of development.
2. For signs representing only one business or entity, the sign shall not exceed five feet (5') in height, and forty (40)
square feet in total size. For signs representing multiple businesses or entities, the sign shall not exceed eight
feet (8') in height, and eighty (80) square feet in total size.
3. Sign height shall be measured as the plumb vertical distance from the top of the sign to the existing or finished
grade below, whichever results in a lower height. If a sign is to be located on top of a berm that is being
proposed as part of the sign application, the sign height may be measured from the top of the berm provided the
berm is part of a larger landscape proposal and not just proposed to add height to the sign.
4. The planning commission may grant additional monument signs for sites that exceed three hundred feet (300')
of frontage on any public street as part of a master signage plan. If more than one monument sign is permitted,
each monument sign shall be at least one hundred feet (100') apart.
5. The community development director or his/her designee may approve a monument sign that contains an
electronic message board if the following findings can be met:
a. That the electronic component of the sign shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the surface area of
the sign;
b. That the electronic component will only display information associated with the business(es) represented by
the monument sign; and
c. That the electronic component is simple in nature and does not include bright flashing lights or images that are
distracting to vehicles, pedestrians or neighboring uses.
6. If a monument sign is supported by pillars or posts such that the bottom of the sign does not reach the ground,
the pillars or posts must be constructed of brick, stone, stucco or wood with a thickness of at least one foot (1').
Monument signs may be placed no closer than three feet (3') from the property line facing a street or three feet
(3') from the back of the sidewalk, whichever is more restrictive. Signs must also comply with interior side and
rear lot setbacks as established in the zone in which the sign will be located.
B. Roof Signs: Roof signs that are placed on a roof between the eaves and the ridge of a building, and which are not
prohibited by section 18.86.090 of this chapter shall require review and approval by the planning commission. The
following standards shall apply to roof signs:
1. Informative of the business name and use. The business name shall be the primary design feature on the sign,
and all logos and other graphics shall be subordinate to the business name;
2. Simple in design. Any creative graphic depictions should be related to the business use and in scale with sign
text;
3. Compatible in design, color, size and scale to the business storefront, adjoining structures and surroundings;
4. Made of permanent and durable materials (i.e., wood, wrought iron, metal, slate, etc.) unless otherwise
approved by the planning commission; and
5. Consistent with the size limitations as outlined in subsection C of this section.
6. No electronic copy shall be permitted.
C. Wall Mounted Signs: Wall mounted signs or signage otherwise attached to a building shall be limited to a
cumulative display area of fifteen percent (15%) of each facade, not including the roof, of the building upon which it
is located.
D. Window Signs: Any window sign on a commercial or industrial building shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of a
window display area and shall not exceed a total window display area for all windows of one hundred (100) square
feet.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 526/571
E. Temporary Signs: Temporary signs are permitted in accordance with section 18.86.060 of this chapter.
F. General Requirements: The following requirements apply to all signs:
1. Display Area: The display area of a two (2) faced sign with identical copy on both sides shall be counted as the
display area of only one of the faces.
2. Clear Vision Triangle: A sign may not be placed in a "clear vision triangle", defined as follows: At intersections of
alleys and driveways (this includes private driveways and adjacent private driveways), the triangle shall be
defined by drawing a line between two (2) points that are a minimum of fifteen feet (15') from the intersection
along the property lines. At intersections of public streets, the triangle shall be defined by drawing a line between
the two (2) points that are a minimum of thirty feet (30') from the intersection along the property lines.
3. Lighting: Signs may include lighting provided that the lighting shall not create light pollution beyond the sign
area, and subject to the following:
a. Freestanding signs may be externally illuminated from behind the lettering or from the ground. If the lighting is
from the ground it shall be screened from the right of way by landscaping and contained within the
landscaping area.
b. Signs attached to a building may be externally illuminated from behind the lettering or from wall or roof
mounted lighting. Wall or roof mounted lighting shall only include the following:
(1) Small, bullet type fixtures.
(2) Mounted to nearby building element (wall, eave, post, etc.) or incorporated into support bracket.
(3) Not designed or mounted so as to become part of the sign.
(4) Architecturally compatible with building or mounted to be recessed or shielded or otherwise not readily
visible to pedestrians. (Ord. 2015-04, 12-2-2015, eff. 12-28-2015)
18.86.050: PERMANENT SIGNS:
A. A sign is considered to be permanent if it satisfies one or more of the following:
1. Any sign that is permanently constructed, attached, or intended to remain for more than ninety (90) days shall be
deemed permanent.
2. A sign which is standing alone and exceeds thirty two (32) square feet in display area, or exceeds six feet (6') in
height, or weighs more than fifty (50) pounds.
3. A sign that is connected to or protruding from any building or similar structure, interior window signs excluded.
B. A permit is required for a permanent sign. Permanent signs shall be subject to a fee and inspections shall be
required.
C. The city finds that permanent signage requires review by the community development director to ensure that the
constructed sign will be structurally safe and durable so as to preserve and promote public safety.
D. Permanent signage is subject to the discontinued use provision set forth above. (Ord. 2015-04, 12-2-2015, eff. 12-
28-2015)
18.86.060: TEMPORARY SIGNS:
Any sign that is not considered permanent as defined above, or that is intended for use during a specified, limited time
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 527/571
of ninety (90) days or less shall be deemed temporary and shall not require a permit or be subject to a fee. All
temporary signage shall be subject to the discontinued use provision set forth above. (Ord. 2015-04, 12-2-2015, eff.
12-28-2015)
18.86.070: WINDOW SIGNS:
A. No permit or fee required. No time limitation.
B. A window sign is any copy posted on or sign posted inside of a window of a building, house, or similar structure. No
permit or fee is required to post a window sign. Window signs shall not be limited to a specific number of days
allowed for display; however said signage shall be removed upon discontinued use. Window signs shall be subject
to the display area limitations and size limitations set forth above under signs in residential and
commercial/industrial zones. (Ord. 2015-04, 12-2-2015, eff. 12-28-2015)
18.86.080: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS SIGNAGE:
Commercial signage for a sexually oriented business shall be prohibited off site from the actual lot where the business
is lawfully located. Said signage shall be limited to alphanumeric copy only and shall be limited to a display area of
thirty two (32) square feet. (Ord. 2015-04, 12-2-2015, eff. 12-28-2015)
18.86.090: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
ABANDONED SIGN: Any sign or structure that no longer correctly directs or influences a person, identifies or
advertises a bona fide business, lessor, service, owner, product, or activity.
ANIMATED OR FLASHING SIGN: A sign that includes movement or optical illusion of movement or rotation of any
part by mechanical, artificial or atmospheric means or a sign that displays flashing or intermittent lights. Time and
temperature devices and banners and flags shall be exempted from this definition.
BALLOON OR INFLATABLE SIGN: Any device supported by heated air, forced air, or other gases for the purpose of
drawing attention.
BILLBOARD: A high profile freestanding ground sign on one or more poles, typically located along freeways or major
highways, but not limited thereto, designed or intended to direct attention to a business, product, or service that is not
sold, offered, or existing on the property where the sign is located.
MARQUEE SIGN: Any sign attached to, in any manner, or made part of a marquee. A marquee is a permanent
rooflike structure projecting beyond a building or wall of the building, generally designed and constructed to provide
protection from the weather.
MOTION SIGN: A sign that has motion either constantly or at intervals or that gives the impression of movement
through intermittent flashing, scintillating, or varying the intensity of illumination whether or not said illumination is
reflected from an artificial source or the sun.
POLE SIGN: A freestanding sign not meeting the definition of a monument sign that is detached from a building and is
supported by one or more structural elements that are: a) architecturally dissimilar to the design of the sign; and/or b)
less than one-half (1/2) the width of the sign face.
PROJECTING SIGN: A sign attached perpendicular to a building structure and extending in whole or in part more than
twelve inches (12") beyond the wall to which it is attached.
ROOF SIGN: A sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the roof of a building, supported by the roof structure,
and extending vertically above the highest portion of the roof or which lies flat on the roof.
ROTATING SIGN: Any sign or portion of a sign that moves in a revolving or similar manner.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 528/571
SNIPE SIGNS: Any sign typically made of non- or semi-durable material, mounted to a tree, to a utility pole, or to the
ground by nails, staples, a wire frame, or similar device within a right of way, including public and private parking strips
and medians, or on public property. (Ord. 2015-04, 12-2-2015, eff. 12-28-2015)
18.86.100: ISSUING A PERMIT:
A. Permit issuance is subject to the following application process and review:
1. Application Process: The city shall prepare a "sign permit application" form, which shall request the applicant or
agent's name, telephone number, address, where the proposed sign(s) will be placed, whether the sign is
intended to remain for more than one hundred eighty (180) days, whether the sign is intended to serve
commercial purposes, to identify zoning restrictions, and which may include, but is not limited to, a site plan, sign
layout, a sign depiction, elevation of existing and future buildings, and any other reasonably related information
necessary for the community development director to be able to determine whether the sign complies with the
design and placement requirements set forth in this chapter. Proposed signs that are larger and that are
intended to remain for a longer period of time will require more information to assist the community development
director in determining whether the sign will be safe and durable.
2. Required: Applications will not be accepted without the accompanying fee for a permanent sign.
3. Fees: Permanent signage shall be subject to a permit application fee as determined by the city council.
4. Form: The sign permit application form shall include a checkbox with a statement indicating that, if checked, the
applicant agrees to allow the city to enter and remove the sign for which the permit is requested if the sign's
removal period expires, in lieu of prosecution by the city prosecutor and in lieu of a fine.
5. Review: If the community development director determines that a sign permit application is incomplete, or that
signage will conflict with the provisions of this chapter because of illegal content or nonconforming proposed
design and placement, the request shall be returned to the applicant as incomplete. The applicant may revise
and resubmit the amended sign permit application with additional information as necessary.
6. Decision: The community development director shall make a decision to grant or deny a sign permit application
in accordance with this chapter and other applicable city, state, and federal laws and ordinances. No sign permit
shall be issued unless the sign permit application and sign comply with the provisions of this chapter.
7. Permanent Signs: The community development director shall issue a decision to grant, deny, or return as
incomplete the sign permit application within thirty (30) days of submission.
8. Appeal: See section 18.84.460 of this title. (Ord. 2015-04, 12-2-2015, eff. 12-28-2015)
18.86.110: PERMIT LIMITATIONS:
A. Validity:
1. Transferability: Permits, permit numbers, permit applications, and supporting information shall not be
transferable to other sites or signs and shall be valid only for a specific sign at the designated location. If at any
time a sign or sign structure is altered, removed, or relocated in a manner different from the terms of an issued
sign permit, such existing sign permit will become void and a new application must be made for the sign as
altered or relocated.
2. Exception: Signs associated with a business that has its ownership transferred with no proposed alteration to the
business name, building, or signage shall, upon notification to the city, have its permits transferred to the new
business owner without need of a new application.
B. Expiration: A permit shall expire and become null and void if work on the sign is not commenced or if work is
suspended or abandoned within sixty (60) days from the date of the permit. In such case, a new permit shall be
obtained, and where the permit is for a permanent sign, a new fee shall be paid.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 529/571
C. Suspension/Revocation: The city may in writing suspend or revoke a permit issued under provisions of this chapter
whenever the permit is issued on the basis of a material omission or misstatement of fact or in violation of any
ordinance.
D. Nuisance: No permit for a sign may be deemed to constitute permission or authorization to maintain a public or
private nuisance, nor shall any permit issued hereunder constitute a defense in any action to abate a nuisance.
(Ord. 2015-04, 12-2-2015, eff. 12-28-2015)
18.86.120: REMOVAL OF SIGNS:
A. Removal Required: The community development director is hereby authorized to require removal of any sign, in
accordance with this section.
1. Notice: Before bringing action to require removal of any sign, the community development director shall give
written notice to the owner of the sign or the owner of the premises on which such sign is located. The notice
shall state the violation charged and the reasons and grounds for removal, specifying the deficiencies or defects
and what repairs, if any, will make the sign conform to the requirements of this chapter. The notice shall also
specify that the sign must be removed or made to conform with the provisions of this chapter within the notice
period. Service of notice shall be made personally on the owner or lessee, or by certified mail addressed to the
owner or lessee at the address specified in the permit or the last known address.
2. Notice Period: Prior to enforcement the notice period for removal or conformance of permanent signs shall be
fifteen (15) days and temporary signs shall be three (3) days.
3. Prosecution: If the owner or lessee of the premises upon which the sign is located has not demonstrated to the
satisfaction of the community development director that the sign has been removed or brought into compliance
with the provisions of this chapter by the end of the notice period, the community development director shall first
submit an order for removal by the city, and if necessary, due to inability to access the sign for removal, submit
the violations to the city prosecutor for prosecution. If the city removes the sign, any and all prosecution charges
shall be dropped.
4. Reerection: Reerection of any sign or substantially similar sign on the same premises after a notice of violation
has been issued shall be deemed a continuation of the original violation.
B. Removal Of Temporary Signs: The community development director or authorized designee may remove any illegal
temporary sign which is maintained or reerected after the expiration of the notice period, if the owner or lessee of
the premises has been issued a notice of violation at least once before for the same violation involving the same or
similar sign. When temporary signs are removed by city staff, the responsible party shall be notified within two (2)
business days of the reason for the removal and the location from which the sign was removed. Removed signs
shall be made available for the responsible party to pick up for three (3) calendar days. After that time, removed
signs will be destroyed.
C. Safety Hazard: Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, the zoning administrator may cause the immediate
removal, following notice to the owner of the sign or the property on which it is located of any unsafe or defective
sign that creates an immediate hazard to persons or property. (Ord. 2015-04, 12-2-2015, eff. 12-28-2015)
18.86.130: REQUIREMENT OF CONFORMITY:
A. No sign for which a permit is issued after the effective date of this chapter, may be placed or maintained in the city
except as provided in this chapter.
B. All signs maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter are declared to be illegal and, as such, may be dealt
with or removed as provided herein.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 530/571
C. Any sign that poses a public safety hazard may be removed as specified herein. (Ord. 2015-04, 12-2-2015, eff. 12-
28-2015)
18.86.140: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
A. Nonconforming signs which preexist the effective date hereof shall be removed upon their discontinued use
according to the general discontinued use provision set forth above.
B. Nonconforming signs which become unsafe due to natural wear and tear shall be deemed a discontinued use and
subject to removal without an option to repair or replace with a similar nonconforming sign.
C. Except as provided for in the Utah Code Annotated, billboards shall be generally prohibited. Signs which constitute
billboards prior to the effective date hereof are protected only insofar as provided for in the Utah Code Annotated.
Titles within the Utah Code Annotated which protect billboards2 include, but are not limited to, title 72, chapter 7,
which is the protection of highways act and title 10, chapter 9a, which is the municipal land use, development, and
management act.
D. A temporary sign shall not be granted nonconforming status. (Ord. 2015-04, 12-2-2015, eff. 12-28-2015)
18.86.150: ENFORCEMENT:
A violation of this chapter is punishable as a class C misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than
two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) when a person fails to alter or repair or remove an illegal sign after notice of a
violation. (Ord. 2015-04, 12-2-2015, eff. 12-28-2015)
18.86.160: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS:
Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, to the extent that this chapter allows a sign containing
commercial copy, it shall allow a sign containing noncommercial copy to the same extent. Any signage containing
obscenity, defamation, fighting words, true threats or anything like unto it is prohibited as a matter of law. (Ord. 2015-
04, 12-2-2015, eff. 12-28-2015)
18.86.170: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter is found to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any court of competent
jurisdiction, that invalidity shall not affect the remaining provisions of this chapter which can be implemented without
the invalid provision, and, to this end, the provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable. (Ord. 2015-04, 12-2-
2015, eff. 12-28-2015)
18.86.180: APPLICABILITY OF THE ZONING CODE:
The regulations of this chapter are in addition to those set forth in the planning and zoning provisions of this title and
any other ordinances adopted by the city council, and do not contain any rights not otherwise granted under the
provisions and procedures contained in this chapter or any other ordinances. (Ord. 2015-04, 12-2-2015, eff. 12-28-
2015)
18.86.190: APPLICABILITY OF THE UTAH CODE:
The provisions of this chapter are enforceable only in accordance with the governing and enabling provisions of the
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 531/571
Utah Code Annotated. It is the intent of the drafters herein that this chapter comply with such governing provisions.
(Ord. 2015-04, 12-2-2015, eff. 12-28-2015)
18.86.200: SCOPE:
The requirements of this chapter shall not be construed so as to prohibit or limit other applicable provisions of this
chapter/title, this code, or the Utah Code Annotated (UCA). In the instance where provisions of this chapter conflict
with other provisions of this code, the terms of this chapter shall govern. In the instance where provisions of this
chapter conflict with provisions of the Utah code, the Utah code shall govern. (Ord. 2015-04, 12-2-2015, eff. 12-28-
2015)
18.86.210: INTERPRETATION:
A. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, the sign regulations contained herein shall be interpreted
by the community development director. If the community development director determines that an application
needs further interpretation, he may request planning commission review of the proposal.
B. The community development director and planning commission shall seek to administer this chapter in a content
neutral manner. (Ord. 2015-04, 12-2-2015, eff. 12-28-2015)
18.86.220: VARIANCES:
For rules regarding variances, see section 18.84.360 of this title. (Ord. 2015-04, 12-2-2015, eff. 12-28-2015)
Chapter 18.88
PENALTIES
18.88.010: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Violation of this title shall be punishable as a class C misdemeanor, as defined by section 1.16.010 of this code. (Ord.
2002-05, 3-20-2002)
18.88.020: OTHER REMEDIES FOR VIOLATION:
The city or any owner of real estate within the city, may, in addition to other remedies provided by law, institute
injunction, mandamus, abatement or any other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove
any violation of this title. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
18.88.030: EACH DAY A SEPARATE OFFENSE:
Each person, persons, firm or corporation found guilty of a violation of any provision of this title shall be deemed guilty
of a separate offense for every day during which such violation is committed, continued or permitted by such person,
persons, firm or corporation. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
Chapter 18.90
LANDSCAPE STANDARDS
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 532/571
18.90.010: PURPOSE:
The landscaping and buffering requirements specified in this chapter are intended to foster aesthetically pleasing
development which will protect and preserve the appearance, character, health, safety and welfare of the community.
These regulations are intended to increase the compatibility of adjacent uses and, in doing so, minimize the harmful
impacts of noise, dust and debris, motor vehicle headlight glare or other artificial light intrusions, and other
objectionable activities or impacts conducted or created by an adjoining or nearby use, thereby fostering compatibility
among different land uses. These regulations are also intended to preserve, enhance and expand the urban forest and
promote the prudent use of water and energy resources. Off street parking and unloading facilities within the PO-1,
NC-1, CC-1 and GC-1 Zones are subject to section 18.92.030 of this title. (Ord. 2017-01, 4-19-2017, eff. 5-12-2017)
18.90.020: LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Whenever the submission and approval of a landscape plan is required by this chapter, such plan shall be an
integral part of any application for a commercial project plan approval, SDP proposal, assisted living center
proposal, multiple-family development proposal, building permit or occupancy permit (aforementioned uses only).
No such permits or approvals shall be issued without City approval of a landscape plan as required in this chapter.
B. The Planning Commission may approve a project plan modifying the standards of this chapter if the property owner
seeking development approval presents substantial evidence for the modification. The Planning Commission shall
determine if the proposed modification constitutes an innovative landscaping design superior to the required
landscaping standards. If the Planning Commission grants a modification under this subsection, it shall make
particularized findings justifying the modification. (Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
18.90.030: SAVING EXISTING VEGETATION:
A. Developments shall be designed to incorporate existing large trees, clusters of trees or clusters of large shrubs
unless the Mapleton City Shade Tree Commission finds (or a certified arborist in the absence of a finding from the
Mapleton City Shade Tree Commission) that such preservation is unwise. The Planning Commission or its
designee shall review the appropriateness of removal of such vegetation if proposed in a development plan.
1. The Planning Commission may approve removal of some or all existing vegetation based on a determination of
the benefits of such vegetation and the efforts made to save and incorporate the vegetation into the design of a
development versus the problems such vegetation may create for the development. Areas of consideration will
be general construction techniques, the impact the removal will have on the character of the area, the
topography of the site and harmful conditions created by the vegetation.
2. The Planning Commission may deny a development plan if it determines trees or other vegetation were
removed prior to submittal of the development application. If existing trees, clusters of trees or clusters of large
shrubs deemed beneficial to the property are removed without City authorization prior to approval of a
development, then the replacement of a specific caliper and number of trees will be recommended by the
Mapleton City shade tree commission and shall be planted in their place.
B. Trees and other vegetation to be saved shall be clearly marked to ensure protection against removal or damage.
Snow fencing or other acceptable barriers shall be used to protect existing vegetation designated to be saved. The
planning department or shade tree commission shall approve the location of such barriers. (Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-
2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
18.90.040: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply to the regulation and control of landscaping within this title:
ANNUAL: A plant which completes its life cycle within one year of germination.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 533/571
BIENNIAL: A plant which completes its life cycle in two (2) years.
BOTANICAL NAME: The Latin scientific name of a plant.
BUFFERING: The use of landscaping (other than mere grass on flat terrain), or the use of landscaping along with
berms, walls or decorative fences that at least partially obstruct the view from the street, in a continuous manner, of
vehicular use areas, parking lots and parked cars, and detention ponds.
CALIPER: A standard trunk diameter measurement for nursery grown trees taken six inches (6") above the ground for
trees up to and including four inch (4") caliper size, and twelve inches (12") above the ground for larger size trees.
CULTIVAR: The plant variety originated in cultivation and not in the wild.
DECIDUOUS: A plant that loses its leaves at the end of the growing season.
DEEP SOAK IRRIGATION SYSTEM: An underground system meant for watering trees in parkway areas.
DETENTION AREA OR DETENTION BASIN OR RETENTION BASIN: A temporary storage of a determined quantity
of water with a release rate that is either fixed or variable.
DEVELOPMENT REVIEW COMMITTEE: The committee established to review all applications for development.
DRIP IRRIGATION: A network of narrow tubes or porous tubing which delivers small amounts of water to individual
plants in order to reduce the amount of water wasted due to wind, evaporation or spillage.
DRIP LINE: A vertical line extending from the outermost edge of the tree canopy or shrub branch to the ground.
EVERGREEN: A plant which retains its leaves in a living state during the winter.
FOUNDATION AREA: The ground area immediately adjacent to a building on all sides thereof.
GENUS: A class of plants divided into subordinate species.
GROUND COVER: A prostrate plant less than two feet (2') in height at maturity and used for ornamental purposes.
HARDSCAPE: Landscaping which may include interior decorative walkways, curbing or patio areas.
HARDY: A plant which can withstand prolonged exposure to temperatures at or below forty five degrees Fahrenheit
(45°F).
ISLAND: A raised planting area, usually curbed, and placed to guide traffic, separate lanes, limit paving (impervious
surface), preserve existing vegetation and increase aesthetic quality in parking lots and other areas.
LANDSCAPE PLAN: The preparation of graphic and written criteria, specifications, and detailed plans to arrange and
modify the effects of natural features such as plantings, ground and water forms, circulation, walks and other features
to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
LANDSCAPE YARDS: A yard devoted exclusively to landscaping except that driveways and sidewalks needed to
serve the use and buildings on the lot may be located within a required landscape yard.
LANDSCAPING: Any combination of living plants, such as trees, shrubs, vines, ground covers, flowers or grass;
natural features such as rock, stone, bark chips or shavings; and structural features, including, but not limited to,
fountains, reflecting pools, outdoor artwork, screen walls, fences, or benches.
MICROCLIMATE: A specific expression of the wind, temperature, and precipitation patterns of a specific site or
property.
MULCH: Any loose, usually organic, material placed over the soil as a protective covering or for decorative purposes
such as ground bark, sawdust, leaves, compost or straw.
PARKING LOT PLANTINGS: A planting area, within or adjacent to a parking area, designed to shade and improve the
attractiveness of large areas of pavement.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 534/571
PARKWAY AREA: The strip of land next to a road which is between the curb and the sidewalk.
PERENNIAL: A plant which will live for three (3) years or more under normal conditions.
PLANTING AREA: The area prepared for the purpose of accommodating the planting of trees, shrubs, and ground
covers.
RETENTION AREA: An area designed and used for the temporary or permanent storage of stormwater runoff.
ROOT BALL: Matted roots plus enclosed soil within the pot of a container grown plant.
SHRUB: A small, medium, or large upright plant growing less than five feet (5') to twenty feet (20') in height at maturity
that is planted for ornamental or screening purposes.
SITE ANALYSIS PLAN: A plan drawn with sufficient detail to show existing site conditions including steep slopes,
wetlands, watercourses, existing vegetation, scenic views, drainageways, fences, easements, and other existing
features pertaining to the proposed site.
SPECIES: A category of plants ranking below genus.
STREET TREE OR PUBLIC TREE: A tree in any public place, located on Mapleton City property, or street rights of
way, including, but not limited to, parkway areas.
STREET YARD: A planting area parallel to a public street designed to provide continuity of vegetation along the right
of way and to soften the impact of development by providing a pleasing view from the street.
TREE: A woody plant with a distinct central trunk.
TREE, ORNAMENTAL: A small to medium tree, growing fifteen (15) to forty feet (40') in height at maturity, that is
planted for aesthetic purposes such as colorful flowers, interesting bark, or fall foliage.
TREE PROTECTION ZONE: The area around a tree corresponding to the drip line or ten feet (10') in all directions
from the trunk.
TREE, SHADE: A large tree, growing to over forty feet (40') in height at maturity, planted to provide canopy cover
shade.
VARIETY: One of possibly many closely related plant species.
XERISCAPE: A reduced water usage landscape achieved through the use of good planning and design, limited turf
areas, soil improvements, efficient irrigation, mulching, low water use plants, and appropriate trees, shrubs, and
ground cover. (Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
18.90.050: LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS FOR SINGLE-FAMILY HOMES:
It is the intent of this section to encourage aesthetically pleasing front yards and the use of water conserving
landscaping. This section shall apply to all new subdivision lots. This section shall only apply to the front yards of
residential homes. For the purposes of this section, the "front yard" shall be defined as the area between the front
property line and the front wall of the dwelling. Unless otherwise agreed upon by the developer of a subdivision, the
homeowner, within one calendar year of receiving a certificate of occupancy, must provide landscaping with the
following minimum standards:
A. The front yard of any lot containing a dwelling shall include landscaping. The term "landscaping" shall mean and
include the installation of any combination of turf (including either sod or seeded area), planter beds, gardens,
trees, shrubs, ground cover, wood chips, mulch, rocks and boulders. At least thirty percent (30%) of the area not
covered in hardscape shall include vegetation (i.e., turf, plants, shrubs, trees, etc.).
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 535/571
B. Xeriscape designs are permitted and encouraged provided, however, that the failure of an owner to install and
maintain landscaping within the front yard under the guise that the vegetation and bare ground that occur naturally
on the site constitutes xeriscaping shall not qualify as conforming with the provisions of this section.
C. No more than forty five percent (45%) of the area within the front yard setback shall include hardscape. For the
purposes of this section "hardscape" shall be defined as any nonpermeable hard surface located within the front
setback (i.e., driveways, walkways, porch, stoop, patio, etc.). If a public sidewalk is located within a public utility
easement on the lot, the sidewalk shall not be included in the hardscape limitations.
D. A landscape plan shall be submitted with a building permit application detailing how the proposed landscaping will
comply with this section.
E. The property owner is required to maintain the landscaping in an attractive manner. Grass and weeds shall be
maintained at a height of not more than six inches (6") at any time. Dead, decayed, diseased, or hazardous trees,
weeds, hedges, and overgrown or uncultivated vegetation that is in a hazardous condition, is an obstruction to
pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or that is likely to harbor rats, vermin, or other pests shall be considered a nuisance
and shall not be permitted.
F. Automatic surface sprinkling system for front yard is encouraged. This will include lawn area, parkway in front of
house and between sidewalk and curb. Each station should provide sufficient water to meet needs of plants being
watered.
G. Separate deep soak irrigation system for street trees and trees planted in planter strips between curb and sidewalk
is also encouraged. A drip irrigation system is encouraged for other planting areas.
H. Where a parkway or planter strip is present, street trees, as approved by the Mapleton City tree list shall be
installed. The number of trees shall be determined by the spread or canopy of the tree at full maturity. Trees shall
be no less than one inch (1") caliper in size. Larger trees may be used, but are not recommended. A bond for the
trees shall be collected with the building permit for any new home with a parkway in the front or side yard (corner
lots). See section 18.90.120 of this chapter for more information on parkway landscaping. (Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-
2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
18.90.060: LANDSCAPE PLAN:
A. A landscape plan shall be required whenever landscaping or alteration of existing landscaping is required by this
title (excluding section 18.90.050 of this chapter) or title 17 of this code, and shall be submitted with the initial
application for approval. Such landscape plan shall conform to the requirements specified in this chapter.
Landscape plans shall be prepared by a licensed Utah design professional where applicable and be approved by
the planning commission or its designee prior to the issuance of a building permit. If a building permit is not
required, landscape plans shall be approved as part of a project plan.
B. All landscape plans submitted for approval shall be drawn to standard engineer's or architect's scale on twenty four
inch by thirty six inch (24" x 36") or eleven inch by seventeen inch (11" x 17") sheets and shall include the following
components:
1. Location and dimensions of all existing and proposed structures, property lines, easements, parking lots and
drives, roadways and rights-of-way, sidewalks, bicycle paths, ground signs, refuse disposal and recycling areas,
bicycle parking areas, fences, freestanding electrical equipment, tot lots and other recreational facilities, and
other freestanding structural features;
2. Location, quantity, size, and botanical and common names of all proposed plants;
3. Location, size and common names of all existing plants including trees and other plants in the parkway;
4. Indication of plants to be retained or removed and how they will be protected during construction;
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 536/571
5. Location of existing buildings, structures and plants on adjacent property within twenty feet (20') of the site;
6. Existing and proposed grading of the site using two foot (2') contour intervals;
7. Proposed berming using one foot (1') contour intervals;
8. Elevations and cross sections of all proposed fences and retaining walls;
9. Elevations and cross sections of other landscape features;
10. Summary data indicating the total area of property and percentage of the site devoted to landscape area; and
11. Irrigation system plan provided on a separate sheet of paper. (Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
18.90.070: DESIGN STANDARDS:
This section applies to all industrial projects. All areas not included as part of the parking lot or areas wherein any
structure lies, shall be landscaped according to this chapter. Parking lots shall not encroach on any required setback
area. (Ord. 2017-01, 4-19-2017, eff. 5-12-2017)
A. Landscape plans shall incorporate the design standards set forth in this section and shall be evaluated and
approved based on compliance therewith.
B. The scale and nature of landscaping materials shall be appropriate to the size of the structures on the premises and
character of the location.
1. Plants shall be selected for form, texture, color pattern of growth and adaptability to local conditions. Plants shall
be of good quality, and capable of withstanding the extremes of the Mapleton City climate. The mature height
and spread of plants shall be taken into account during selection.
2. Evergreens shall be incorporated into the landscape treatment of a site, particularly in those areas that require
screening and buffering.
3. Plants shall be placed intermittently against long expanses of building walls, fences, and other barriers to create
a softening effect.
4. Detention/retention basins and ponds shall be landscaped where possible. Such landscaping may include shade
and ornamental trees, evergreens, shrubbery, hedges, turf and ground cover.
5. Plant placement shall be designed to reduce the energy consumption needs of the development.
a. Deciduous trees shall be placed on the south and west sides of buildings to provide shade from the summer
sun.
b. Evergreens shall be concentrated on the north side of buildings to dissipate the effect of winter winds.
6. Whenever practical, earthen berms and existing topographic features shall be incorporated into the landscape
treatment of a site, particularly when combined with plant material to facilitate buffering.
C. Landscape design shall recognize the climatic and geologic limitations of the Mapleton City area and the need for
water conservation. While irrigation systems are required for certain landscape areas, and may be desirable for
other applications, all irrigation systems shall be designed to minimize the use and run off of water.
1. All areas to be landscaped with sod, seed, and/or hydroseed shall have sprinklers and/or an irrigation system.
All other landscaped areas shall be provided with drip irrigation systems.
2. Sod shall be used in areas with less than a ten percent (10%) slope to prevent the runoff of irrigation water.
3. To promote water conservation every effort should be made to use drought tolerant species that can withstand
dry conditions once established. The use of drought tolerant vegetation is encouraged in required landscape
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 537/571
areas, especially in hillside areas. The shade tree commission shall maintain a current list of drought tolerant
trees and shrubs that are locally available. Xeriscape landscaping may include a combination of drought
resistant trees, shrubs, ground covers, organic mulches as well as some dry landscape materials.
D. Annuals, biennials and perennials, decorative stone or similar materials shall be used in planting beds and may be
used as an alternative to grasses. Ground covers may be used together with mulch to provide complete coverage
of bare ground. Where ground cover is not used, planting beds shall be mulched with bark chips, decorative stone,
or similar materials. Mulch shall not be used as a substitute of plants.
E. Minimum plant sizes shall be as follows:
1. All deciduous and/or ornamental trees shall have a minimum one inch (1") caliper size.
2. All evergreen trees shall have a minimum height of five feet (5') measured from finished grade to the top of the
plant.
3. All shrubs shall have a minimum height or spread of eighteen inches (18") depending on the plant's natural
growth habit. (Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
18.90.080: INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF PLANT MATERIALS:
A. All landscaping shall be installed in accordance with planting procedures established by the American Nursery And
Landscape Association and ANSI Z60.1-1996. The installation of all plants required by this chapter may be
delayed until the next optimal planting season, as determined by the planning department, subject to the posting of
a bond to guarantee installation.
B. All landscaping materials, fences and walls, and irrigation systems shall be maintained in good condition so as to
present a healthy, neat and orderly appearance, and shall be replaced when necessary. The owner of the premises
shall be responsible for the maintenance, repair and replacement of all landscaping materials, fences and walls.
(Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
18.90.090: LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS IN THE SDP ZONE:
A. Within the SDP zone the following landscaping provisions shall apply:
1. At the time of rezoning and preliminary project plan approval, an overall landscaping plan shall be submitted
showing typical landscaping (including type, size, number, and location of plant materials) for the following areas:
project entrances, perimeter buffers, open space easements and common areas, and streetscape landscaping.
Detailed landscape plans for individual lots shall be submitted at the time of project plan approval for individual
buildings. Landscape improvements for common open space features shall be developed at each phase of the
project.
2. A minimum of thirty five percent (35%) of the overall project site and individual lots shall be maintained in
permanent landscaped open space.
3. Internal circulation roads shall be landscaped with street trees and street side planters. A minimum ten foot (10')
width shall be landscaped adjoining the right of way of any such street or road. Streetscape planting shall be
consistent throughout the development to provide a unifying landscape theme. Details for these areas shall be
submitted with the overall landscape plan at the time of preliminary plat approval. (Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff.
6-16-2016)
18.90.100: PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING:
A. All parking lots designed for six (6) or more parking spaces shall provide landscaping in accordance with the
provisions of this section. Smaller parking lots shall not be required to provide landscaping other than yard area
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 538/571
landscaping and landscaped buffer requirements as specified in other sections of this chapter.
B. Parking areas shall be landscaped at a rate of at least four (4) square feet of landscaping per required off street
parking stall. Landscaping areas located along the perimeter of a parking lot (beyond the curb or edge of pavement
of the parking lot, up to a depth of 10 feet) may be included toward satisfying this requirement. Deciduous trees
shall be planted within said parking area landscaping in a manner such that, at maturity of said trees, at least
twenty five percent (25%) of the paved surface area of the parking area will be shaded when the sun is directly
overhead.
C. Landscaped areas shall be improved in conformance with the following requirements:
1. Interior parking lot landscaping areas shall be dispersed throughout the parking lot. Landscaped islands shall be
required at the end of the parking rows, and at the midpoint of parking rows which exceed ten (10) parking stalls,
or every ten (10) stalls if parking rows exceed twenty (20) stalls.
2. Interior parking lot landscaping areas shall be a minimum of one hundred twenty (120) square feet in area and
shall be a minimum of five feet (5') in width, as measured from back of curb to back of curb.
D. The plants used to improve the landscape areas defined above shall conform to the following:
1. Primary plant materials used in the interior parking lots shall be deciduous shade tree species in conformance
with applicable provisions of section 18.90.070 of this chapter. Ornamental trees, shrubbery, hedges, and other
plants may be used to supplement the shade tree plantings in perimeter planting areas, but shall not be the only
plants used in such landscaping.
2. One shade tree shall be provided for every one hundred twenty (120) square feet of landscaping area.
3. A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of every interior parking lot landscaping area shall be planted with ground
cover at a density that will achieve complete cover within two (2) years.
E. Six inch by six inch (6" x 6") minimum poured concrete curb controls shall be constructed around all required
landscaping within the interior of parking lots for the protection of the landscaping, except as follows:
1. In the I&M-1 zone, hard surfaced areas used as operational yard areas for trucks, trailers and other incidental
vehicles, other than passenger automobiles and light trucks, and which are not parking lots for employees,
clients, and customers, shall be exempt from parking lot interior landscaping requirements. (Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-
2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
18.90.110: LANDSCAPE BUFFERS:
A. The requirements of this section shall establish the dimensions and improvement requirements of landscape
buffers as required for transitions between dissimilar uses.
B. Landscape buffers shall be reserved for vegetation and fencing. No parking, driveways, sidewalks, accessory
buildings or other impervious surfaces shall be permitted, unless specifically authorized through the project plan
review process. Landscape buffers may be located within required landscape yards as established in the
applicable zone regulations. Where both landscape buffers and parking lot landscaping is required the more
restrictive shall apply.
C. The width of landscape buffers shall be a minimum of ten feet (10'), subject to the following requirements:
1. Shade trees shall be planted at the rate of one tree for every thirty (30) linear feet of landscape buffer.
2. A continuous evergreen or deciduous shrub hedge shall be planted along the entire length of landscape buffer.
This shrub hedge shall have an expected mature height of not less than six feet (6') within three (3) years of
planting. (Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 539/571
18.90.120: PARKWAYS:
A. All parkways in new developments shall be landscaped in conformance with the provisions of this section.
B. Parkways two feet (2') or more in width shall be landscaped with turf grass or with an approved xeriscape design.
Parkways less than two feet (2') in width may be landscaped with impervious materials including brick pavers,
concrete pavers or concrete. Asphalt shall not be permitted. For xeriscape designs a landscape plan shall be
submitted that satisfies the following:
1. Plant Coverage: Thirty percent (30%) or more of the parkway surface be covered with vegetation, not including
required street trees, within three (3) years of planting or when planting has reached maturity, whichever comes
first. For lots with two (2) or more street frontages, this standard shall be applied separately to each adjacent
parkway on each street frontage. Water conserving plants shall constitute at least eighty percent (80%) of all
plants used. With the exception of trees, no planting material shall exceed thirty six inches (36") in height at
maturity.
C. Parkways four feet (4') or more in width shall include trees. Such trees shall be spaced not more than thirty feet
(30') apart and shall have a minimum caliper size of one inch (1").
1. Parkway trees may be clustered or spaced linearly in the right of way as determined by Mapleton City's shade
tree commission.
2. If adequate space is not available in the parkway, the shade tree commission may require the planting of
parkway trees on the lot adjacent to the right of way.
3. A variety of compatible species shall be included in the planting plan for a specific site or development. Trees
shall be selected from the tree selection guide maintained by the shade tree commission and shall be
appropriate to their location. Tree selection shall be reviewed and approved by the shade tree commission.
4. Trees may be planted in parkways along state highways only after a permit is issued by the Utah department of
transportation.
D. Vegetation which causes a public safety problem, as determined by the city engineer, may be removed by the city.
E. Occupancy permits for new commercial or multi-family residential buildings shall not be issued unless abutting
parkway landscaping has been installed or a bond provided to guarantee installation.
F. Where a parkway strip has been installed, the abutting property owner shall provide landscaping as provided in this
section and shall continue to maintain the landscaping in a healthy, safe, attractive, and nuisance free condition.
This shall include taking appropriate measures to water and trim plant materials, and to keep the parkway weed
free.
G. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove from a parkway any landscaping required by the provisions of this
chapter. This provision shall not apply to routine parkway maintenance.
H. In all new subdivisions and developments requiring street improvements (curb, gutter, sidewalks and street trees),
the developer shall, as part of the development, install the concrete work around the parkway strip, along with
sleeves underneath or through the sidewalk to accommodate eventual deep soak irrigation system.
I. Every developer shall install trees and improvements for each new development as provided in this section.
However, in standard subdivisions where a developer would sell off the lots, it shall be the homeowner's
responsibility to install said trees. A bond for the required trees shall be required with the building permit
application. A bond estimate shall be submitted by a local nursery. The trees shall conform to the adopted
Mapleton City tree list. Spacing of the trees shall depend on the type of tree being installed. Trees shall be a one
inch (1") caliper or greater, however, one inch (1") caliper is highly recommended. Improvement guarantee bonds
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 540/571
collected from developers shall be placed in individual project accounts with the city and shall be released to the
developer when trees are installed.
J. The city parks department may periodically prune and spray parkway trees as needed. Utah Power And Light may,
with the city's permission, maintain safe distances between tree limbs and power lines in the area.
1. If a parkway tree needs to be removed because of disease or death, the city shall do so. Removal of parkway
trees by property owners without approval from the shade tree commission shall be unlawful except as otherwise
provided by another express provision of this code. (Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
18.90.130: BONDING:
Bonding shall be required for all landscaping improvements prior to obtaining a building permit or commencing work
on any project where landscaping is required by this title. Bonds shall be subject to the requirements as outlined in the
adopted Mapleton City bond form. (Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
18.90.140: NONCOMPLYING LOT DUE TO LANDSCAPING:
If the remodeling of a building in any zone causes the exterior of the building to be enlarged, the landscaping
requirements of this chapter shall apply, with the following limitations:
A. The requirements of this chapter shall not apply where those requirements would conflict with parking
requirements, be incompatible with the design of existing buildings, or impair ingress or egress to existing buildings
or parking areas.
B. The requirements of this chapter shall not be applied to require improvements which cost more than ten percent
(10%) of a total remodeling project. (Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
18.90.150: ENFORCEMENT:
A. All landscaping shall be installed and maintained in conformance with an approved landscape plan. Any
modification to an approved plan shall require approval of the planning commission or its designee.
1. Bonding for all landscape improvements shall be held until required landscaping is inspected and shown to
conform to the approved landscape plan.
2. Unauthorized changes to a landscape plan shall be corrected by the person responsible for deviating therefrom.
Unauthorized changes which remain uncorrected shall be a violation of this chapter and subject to the fines and
penalties established in this code.
B. The planning department is hereby authorized to bring actions against property owners for violations of this chapter.
(Ord. 2016-01, 5-18-2016, eff. 6-16-2016)
Chapter 18.92
COMMERCIAL DESIGN STANDARDS
18.92.000: STANDARDS:
Commercial design standards are on file in the City. (Ord. 2017-01, 4-19-2017, eff. 5-12-2017)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 541/571
Title 19
IMPACT FEES PROCEDURES
Chapter 19.01
PURPOSE AND INTENT
19.01.010: IMPACT FEE PROCEDURES PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose and intent of the impact fee procedures is:
A. To establish uniform procedures for the imposition, calculation, collection, expenditure and administration of impact
fees imposed on new development;
B. To facilitate the implementation of the goals, objectives and policies of the Mapleton City general plan and zoning
ordinance, and assuring that new impact producing development contributes its fair share towards the costs of
providing capital facilities reasonably necessitated by such development;
C. To ensure that new development is reasonably benefited by the provision of capital facilities provided by impact
fees;
D. To ensure that all applicable legal standards are properly incorporated. (Ord. 96-02)
Chapter 19.02
DEFINITIONS
19.02.010: IMPACT FEE DEFINITIONS:
The words or phrases used herein shall have the meanings prescribed herein:
APPLICANT: A person, company or corporation who has filed an application for subdivision approval, site plan
approval, or building permit approval.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL: An application for development approval that is subject to this
chapter as set forth in chapter 19.05 of this title.
APPROPRIATION, TO APPROPRIATE, ENCUMBER: An action by the city council to identify capital facilities for
which impact fee funds may be utilized. Appropriation shall include, but shall not limited to: inclusion of a capital facility
in the adopted city budget or capital facilities plan; execution of a contract of other legal encumbrance for a capital
facility using impact fee funds; and expenditure of impact fee funds through payments made from an impact fee
account.
CAPITAL FACILITIES OR FACILITIES: Shall include "system improvements" as defined in the Utah code, and also
includes amounts appropriated in connection with the planning, design, engineering and construction of such facilities;
planning, legal, appraisal and other costs related to the acquisition of land, financing and development costs including
debt service charges; the costs of compliance with purchasing procedures and applicable administrative and legal
requirements; and all other costs necessarily incident to the provision of a capital facility as allowed by the Utah code.
Capital facilities eligible for impact fee funding, in whole or in part, shall be set forth in greater detail in the ordinances
adopting the specific impact fee schedules.
CAPITAL FACILITIES PLAN: A document, required by the Utah code identifying the demands placed upon existing
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 542/571
public facilities by new development activity; and the proposed means by which the city will meet the demands created
by new growth. The Mapleton City capital facilities plan identifies the anticipated demand for city provided capital
facilities over a six (6) year period.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PROGRAM: A long range capital facilities planning document, identifying the capital
facilities projected to be required to meet the needs of existing and future residents, and other activities located in the
city, and utilized to anticipate required future capital facilities for a twenty (20) year period.
CREDIT: A reduction in the impact fee calculated to be due from new development for the provision of new capital
facilities, including the dedication of land and/or improvements when the new capital facilities are identified in the
capital facilities plan, and are required by the city as a condition of approval for the proposed development activity.
DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY, IMPACT PRODUCING DEVELOPMENT: Any construction, expansion, change in use of
buildings, or change in use of land that has the effect of:
A. Increasing the need or demand for a capital facility; or
B. Utilizing existing capital facility capacity; or
C. Causing an existing capital facility level of service standard to decline.
DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL: Final written authorization provided by the city permitting the commencement of a
development activity including, but not limited to, final subdivision plat approval, final site plan approval, development
approval letter, and issuance of a valid building permit.
DISTRICT OR IMPACT FEE DISTRICT: A defined geographic area or subarea of the Mapleton City corporate limits
within which impact fees are collected, appropriated, and expended for capital facilities serving new development
within such area or subarea.
FEE ADJUSTMENT: A modification factor included within the impact fee calculation methodology, to avoid a potential
double charging, for consideration of prior taxes paid, and taxes anticipated to be paid in the future for the provision of
capital facilities required to serve impact producing development and included in a capital facilities plan.
IMPACT FEE: A monetary exaction imposed in connection with and as a condition of development approval and
calculated to defray all or a portion of the costs of capital facilities necessary to accommodate new impact producing
development activity and reasonably benefitting the development.
IMPACT FEE DISTRICT MAPS: The map(s) defining the geographical extent of the impact fee districts and
subdistricts for each adopted impact fee.
MULTIPLE USES: A development consisting of both residential and nonresidential uses or one or more different types
of nonresidential uses on the same site or part of the same development project. (Ord. 96-02)
Chapter 19.03
GENERAL PROVISIONS
19.03.010: TERMS:
The provisions of this title shall take effect upon passage by the city council and notice and posting as required by law.
These provisions shall remain in effect unless and until repealed, amended or modified by the city council in
accordance with applicable state law, local ordinances and procedures. (Ord. 96-02)
19.03.020: ANNUAL REVIEW:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 543/571
At least once every year and prior to the city council adoption of the city budget, the planning and zoning director shall
prepare a report on the subject of impact fees.
A. The report shall include:
1. Recommendations on amendments, if appropriate, to city requirements imposing and setting impact fees for
each category of capital facilities;
2. Proposed changes to the capital improvement program of the Mapleton City general plan and/or applicable
capital facilities plans, including the identification of capital facility projects anticipated to be funded wholly or
partially with impact fees;
3. Proposed changes to the boundaries of impact fee districts or subdistricts;
4. Proposed changes to impact fee schedules as set forth by ordinance imposing and setting impact fees;
5. Proposed changes to levels of service standards for capital facilities;
6. Proposed changes in impact fee calculation methodology;
7. Other data, analysis or recommendations as may be deemed appropriate, or as may be requested by the city
council. (Ord. 96-02)
19.03.030: SUBMISSION OF IMPACT FEE ANNUAL REPORT:
The planning and zoning director shall submit the impact fee annual report to the city council which shall receive the
report and take such actions as it deems appropriate, including, but not limited to, requesting additional data or
analyses and holding public workshops and/or public hearings. (Ord. 96-02)
19.03.040: PLANNING COMMISSION RECOMMENDATION:
The planning commission shall review and attach its recommendations to the annual report of the planning and zoning
director and the planning and zoning director shall forward the report and planning commission recommendations to
the city council. (Ord. 96-02)
19.03.050: REQUEST FOR INFORMATION:
Any person may request, and the city shall provide within fourteen (14) days, all information and other materials
related and relevant to the imposition, calculation and collection of impact fees. The city may recover all costs
generally incurred to provide the information requested. (Ord. 96-02)
Chapter 19.04
AFFECTED AREA
19.04.010: IMPACT FEE DISTRICT:
Impact fees shall be imposed on all impact producing development activity within the city impact fee district, which
may be divided into impact fee subdistricts. (Ord. 96-02)
19.04.020: MAP:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 544/571
The Mapleton City impact fee district, as shown on the impact fee district map and attached hereto, is hereby adopted
by reference and incorporated herein as though fully set forth. The impact fee district map shall be identified by the
signature of the mayor and city recorder and shall bear the seal of the city, and the date of adoption. (Ord. 96-02)
19.04.030: CHANGE IN BOUNDARIES OF IMPACT FEE DISTRICTS:
The city council, following receipt of the planning commission recommendation, may amend the boundaries of the
impact fee district, or subdistricts, at such times as may be deemed necessary to carry out the purposes and intent of
this title and applicable legal requirements for the use of impact fees. In the event of annexation of unincorporated
county land by the city, the impact fee district boundaries shall be deemed to have been changed by operation of law,
without action of the city council; provided, however, that following the annual review, the city council shall cause the
map to be changed to reflect the new impact fee district boundaries. (Ord. 96-02)
Chapter 19.05
TYPE OF DEVELOPMENT AFFECTED
19.05.010: DEVELOPMENTS AFFECTED:
The timing of the collection of each type of impact fees shall be as specified in section 19.06.040 of this title. These
requirements shall apply to all impact producing residential and nonresidential development activity for which the
following development permits are required, unless the development is determined to be a development activity that is
not affected pursuant to section 19.05.020 of this chapter:
A. A final subdivision plat; or
B. A building permit for a lot or parcel within the area of a subdivision plat; or
C. A building permit for a lot or parcel not within the area of a subdivision plat. (Ord. 2012-05, 9-4-2012, eff. 9-30-
2012)
19.05.020: TYPE OF DEVELOPMENT NOT AFFECTED:
A. Prior Building Permits: Proposed development for which a building permit has been issued prior to the effective
date of this title.
B. Previous Payment Of Impact Fees: No impact fees for a specific capital facility shall be due at a later stage of the
development approval process if impact fees for that specific capital facility have previously been paid.
C. Public Facilities: Public facilities of the county, state, school district, special districts, municipalities or political
subdivisions of the state of Utah or the federal government.
D. Replacement Residential Unit: Redevelopment or rehabilitation which replaces but which does not increase the
number of residential dwelling units above that existing on the site prior to redevelopment or rehabilitation.
E. Replacement Nonresidential Development: Redevelopment or rehabilitation which replaces, but which does not
increase the intensity of development above that existing on the site prior to redevelopment or rehabilitation nor
changes the use to one which has a greater impact producing effect with respect to any capital facility than that
existing on the site prior to redevelopment or rehabilitation.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 545/571
F. Other: Any other use, development, project, structure, building, fence, sign or other activity which is not impact
producing. (Ord. 2012-05, 9-4-2012, eff. 9-30-2012)
19.05.030: MINIMUM FEE REQUIREMENTS:
The city may authorize a minimum fee requirement for certain proposed nonresidential developments upon a finding
that the proposed use is not included in the applicable impact fee schedule nor is it similar to any listed use, and the
cost of an individual impact analysis would outweigh the impact fee otherwise calculated to be due. (Ord. 96-02)
Chapter 19.06
PROCEDURES FOR IMPOSITION, CALCULATION AND
COLLECTION OF IMPACT FEES
19.06.010: IMPOSITION:
After the effective date of this title, no application for development approval, as set forth in section 19.05.010 of this
title shall be approved by the city for any impact producing residential or nonresidential development activity unless
the applicant has paid the applicable impact fees in accordance with these procedures and requirements. (Ord. 96-02)
19.06.020: CALCULATION:
A. Upon receipt of an application for development approval, the planning and zoning director shall determine whether
the proposed project is impact producing development activity and, if so,
1. Whether it is a residential or nonresidential,
2. The class of residential or nonresidential development, and if residential, the number of dwelling units,
3. If nonresidential, the intensity of development, and
4. The impact fee district in which the proposed project is located.
B. After making these determinations, the planning and zoning director shall determine the demand for capital facilities
required by the proposed impact producing development activity and calculate the applicable impact fee,
multiplying the demand of the proposed impact producing development by the impact fee per demand unit as set
forth in the calculation methodology.
C. If the type of land use proposed for development is not expressly listed in the specific impact fee ordinance, the
planning and zoning director shall:
1. Identify the most similar land use type listed and calculate the impact fee based on the impact fee per demand
unit for that land use, or
2. Identify the broader land use category within which the specific land use would fit and calculate the impact fee
based on the impact fee per demand unit for that land use category.
D. If neither of the alternatives set forth above are appropriate, the demand may be determined by an individual impact
analysis performed by the applicant. Any individual impact analysis shall conform to the requirements of the
applicable impact fee ordinance and section 19.06.050 of this chapter.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 546/571
E. The calculation of impact fees due from a multiple use impact producing development activity shall be based upon
the aggregated demand for each capital facility generated by each land use type in the proposed development.
F. The calculation of impact fees due from a phased impact producing development shall be based upon the demand
generated by each use for which a separate final subdivision plat, final site plan, or building permit application is
received.
G. All impact fees shall be calculated based on the impact fee per demand unit in effect at the time of final subdivision
plat approval, final site plan approval, or building permit issuance. (Ord. 96-02)
19.06.030: CREDITS:
A. Credits against the amount of an impact fee due from a proposed impact producing development shall be provided
for the dedication of land and/or the provision of capital facilities by an applicant when such land or capital facilities
are determined to provide additional capacity to meet the demand generated by the development and when either:
1. The costs of such land or facilities have been included in the fee calculation methodology for the applicable
category of capital facilities, or
2. The land dedicated or capital facilities provided is determined by the planning and zoning director to be a
reasonable substitute for the cost of facilities which are included in the applicable fee calculation methodology.
B. Applications for credit shall be made to the planning and zoning director and shall be submitted at or before the
time of final subdivision plat, final site plan or building permit application. The application for a credit shall be
accompanied by relevant documentary evidence indicating the eligibility of the applicant for the credit. When an
application for a credit accompanies an application for development approval, the planning and zoning director
shall calculate the applicable impact fee without the credit and shall then determine whether a credit is due and, if
so, the amount of the credit. The credit shall be applied against the impact fee calculated to be due; provided,
however, that in no event shall a credit be granted in an amount exceeding the impact fee due.
C. Credits for dedication of land or provision of capital facilities shall be applicable only against impact fees for the
same category of capital facilities. If the value of the dedication of land or provision of a capital facility exceeds the
impact fee due for that capital facility category, the excess value may not be transferred to impact fees calculated
to be due from the applicant for other categories of capital facilities nor may the excess value be transferred to
other applicants or properties. (Ord. 96-02)
19.06.040: COLLECTION:
A. For residential projects, the city shall collect water and sewer impact fees prior to the recording of a subdivision plat,
and all other impact fees shall be collected prior to the time of building permit issuance, unless:
1. The applicant is entitled to a full credit; or
2. The applicant is not subject to the payment of impact fees; or
3. The applicant has taken an appeal, and a bond or other surety in the amount of the impact fee has been posted
with the city.
B. For commercial projects, including, but not limited to, retail, office, institutional, and industrial uses, the city shall
collect all impact fees at the time of building permit issuance, unless:
1. The applicant is entitled to a full credit; or
2. The applicant is not subject to the payment of impact fees; or
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 547/571
3. The applicant has taken an appeal, and a bond or other surety in the amount of the impact fee has been posted
with the city.
C. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections A and B of this section, if impact fees for an existing residential or
commercial subdivision lot or buildable zoning lot of record have never previously been paid, the city shall collect
all impact fees at the time of building permit issuance, unless:
1. The applicant is entitled to a full credit; or
2. The applicant is not subject to the payment of impact fees; or
3. The applicant has taken an appeal, and a bond or other surety in the amount of the impact fee has been posted
with the city. (Ord. 2012-05, 9-4-2012, eff. 9-30-2012)
19.06.050: INDIVIDUAL IMPACT ANALYSIS:
A. The applicant may request, and the city may approve or require the submittal by the applicant of an individual
impact analysis if the proposed impact producing development is a land use type generating unusual demand for
one or more types of capital facilities or is a land use type for which the city does not have adequate and current
demand data.
B. An individual impact analysis shall be performed by an independent consultant agreed upon by the applicant and
the city, and shall include:
1. The application for development approval including all information described in subsection 19.06.020A of this
chapter;
2. The demand generated by the impact producing development and the methodology used to calculate the
demand;
3. Copies of any recorded conditions on the property operating to limit the demand for capital facilities generated
by the proposed development;
4. Information and data which may be required by a specific impact fee ordinance; and
5. Any additional information, data or analysis deemed necessary by the city.
C. All costs for the preparation, submittal and review of an individual impact analysis shall be borne by the applicant.
The costs incurred shall be charged to the applicant regardless of whether the applicant proceeds to final
subdivision or final site plan approval, or building permit issuance, or whether the demand as calculated in the
individual impact analysis is accepted or rejected by the city.
D. Following the receipt of an individual impact analysis, the city shall provide a written determination of the demand
generated by the proposed impact producing development and may:
1. Find that the impact fee shall be calculated based on the demand as set forth in the individual impact analysis,
2. Find that the impact fee shall be calculated based on the demand, as set forth in the individual impact analysis,
as modified by the city, or
3. Find that the individual impact analysis does not support a different demand and, therefore, that the impact fee
should be calculated based on the demand as calculated pursuant to the impact fee ordinance. The findings of
the city shall be set forth in writing and provided to the applicant. (Ord. 96-02)
19.06.060: UNIQUE CIRCUMSTANCES:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 548/571
To maintain consistency in the collection of impact fees, and to allow the city to respond to unusual circumstances
while requiring that all impact producing development contributes to the costs of capital facilities benefitting and
necessary to accommodate the impact producing development, the planning and zoning director may recommend,
and the city council may approve the collection of an impact fee upon a finding that an extraordinary and unique
circumstance exists and the application of the provisions of sections 19.06.020, 19.06.030 and 19.06.050 of this
chapter are inappropriate. (Ord. 96-02)
Chapter 19.07
ESTABLISHMENT OF IMPACT FEE ACCOUNTS AND
APPROPRIATION OF IMPACT FEE FUNDS
19.07.010: IMPACT FEE ACCOUNTS:
An impact fee account shall be established by the city for each category of capital facilities for which impact fees are
collected. Subaccounts may be established for individual impact fee subdistricts. All impact fees collected by the city
shall be deposited into the appropriate impact fee account or subaccount, which shall be interest bearing. All interest
earned shall be considered funds of the account. The funds of these accounts shall not be commingled with other
funds or revenues of the city. The city shall establish and implement necessary accounting controls to ensure that the
impact fee funds are properly deposited and appropriated in accordance with this title and other applicable legal
requirements. (Ord. 96-02)
19.07.020: APPROPRIATION OF IMPACT FEE FUNDS:
A. General: Impact fee funds may be appropriated for capital facilities and for the payment of principal, interest and
other financing costs on contracts, bonds, notes or other obligations issued by or on behalf of the city to finance
such capital facilities.
B. Restrictions On Appropriations: Impact fees shall be appropriated only:
1. For the category of capital facility for which they were imposed, calculated and collected; and
2. Within six (6) years of the beginning of the fiscal year in which the fees were collected, unless such time period
is extended as provided herein. Impact fees shall not be appropriated for funding maintenance, operation or
repair of capital facilities.
C. Appropriation Of Impact Fee Funds Outside Of District Where Collected: Impact fee funds may be appropriated for
a capital facility located outside of the district or subdistrict where collected if the demand for the capital facility is
generated in whole or in part by the development or if the capital facility will serve the development.
D. Appropriation Of Impact Fee Funds Beyond Six Years Of Collection: Notwithstanding subsection B of this section,
impact fee funds may be appropriated beyond six (6) years from the beginning of the fiscal year in which the fees
were collected if the appropriation is for a capital facility which requires more than six (6) years to plan, design,
finance and construct. The city shall identify in writing the reasons for the appropriation of impact fee funds beyond
six (6) years of collection, and establish a date certain for their expenditure. (Ord. 96-02)
19.07.030: PROCEDURE FOR APPROPRIATION OF IMPACT FEE FUNDS:
A. The city, as part of the annual budget process, will identify capital facility projects anticipated to be funded in whole
or in part with impact fees. The city shall specify the nature of the capital facility, its location, the system capacity
added by the improvement, the service area of the improvement, and the timing of completion of the improvement.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 549/571
B. The city council may authorize impact fee funded capital facilities at such other times as may be deemed necessary
and appropriate. Such capital facilities shall also be described, as set forth above.
C. The city council shall verify that adequate impact fee funds are, or will be, available from the appropriate impact fee
accounts for the proposed capital facilities. (Ord. 96-02)
19.07.040: WASTEWATER FACILITIES (SEWER) IMPACT FEE CALCULATION:
A. The Mapleton City wastewater (sewer) capital facilities plan has identified a wastewater treatment and transmission
capacity need of 0.66 million gallons per day (mgd) by 2011 (table 1). Approximately 0.55 mgd is required to satisfy
current demand based on the estimated 2001 population at the adopted level of service (LOS) of three hundred
fifty (350) gallons per day for each equivalent residential unit (ERU). The additional 0.11 mgd is required to provide
wastewater capacity to meet the needs of projected future city development, in ERUs to the year 2011. The
existing need is anticipated to be funded by the city using user fees, while the projected future need is anticipated
to be funded by user fees and a sewer impact fee imposed and expended by the city in accordance with the
Mapleton City wastewater capital facilities plan and this title, "Impact Fees Procedures".
B. The Mapleton City sewer impact fee is designed to impose the pro rata cost of wastewater facilities on new
residential and nonresidential development based on the proportionate share of the costs attributable to new
development and based on the adopted LOS standard of three hundred fifty (350) gallons per day per ERU. The
sewer impact fee represents the average cost of providing wastewater facilities to each ERU within the city1. The
impact fee calculation methodology places on each new development a share of the costs of providing capacity in
the wastewater (sewer) system, treatment capacity and collection system capacity, needed to accommodate the
wastewater demands calculated to be generated by each type of development activity.
C. Wastewater (sewer) impact fee calculation:
1. Calculate impact fees based upon 350 gallons/day/ERU level of service.
2. Calculate treatment plant facility costs from the current contract with Spanish Fork City for the purchase of
additional capacity: $57,740.00 for 0.04 mgd; $584.50/ERU.
3. Calculate fee adjustments as a prorated share of the loan principal payments made in previous years:
payment/number of customers in July billing.
1997 $ 50,000.00/1322 = $ 37.82
1998 420,000.00/1357 = 309.50
1999 420,000.00/1440 = 291.66
2000 420,000.00/1529 = 274.69
2001 420,000.00/1590 = 264.15
2002 420,000.00/1655 = 253.78
2003 420,000.00/1704 = 246.48
4. The impact fee calculation formula does not distinguish between dwelling units by type (although this is
sometimes done in other impact fee calculations). The rationale here is that at this time no significant supporting
data or information is available for Mapleton City to indicate that wastewater facility demands differ by type of
dwelling unit, by number of bedrooms or by size of dwelling unit.
D. Calculate the calendar year 2003 sewer impact fee/ERU as the sum of the amounts in subsections C2 and C3 of
this section:
$ 584.50
37.82
309.50
291.66
274.69
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 550/571
264.15
253.78
246.48
$2,262.58/ERU
E. To assist the city provide additional treatment plant capacity in the future, and required to serve new growth, the city
has determined to impose sewer impact fees on new development necessary to provide the treatment plant
capacity. Additionally, all new development will pay its fair share to providing collection and transmission capacity
by participating with all other development within the city in the repayment of a state of Utah loan, with a loan
repayment period of twenty (20) years. This policy allows the city to provide additional treatment plant capacity, in
the future when required, and at the cost incurred by the city to provide the necessary treatment plant capacity.
F. Additional sewer capacity has been purchased from Spanish Fork City as of September 17, 2003. The additional
capacity buy-in amount is one million six hundred fifty eight thousand one hundred forty four dollars
($1,658,144.00) for a total of twenty three percent (23%) of the Spanish Fork sewer treatment plant ("the plant")
biological capacity. This price also includes Mapleton City's share of a current upgrade to the plant to install new
aerators. Based on the additional capacity available to Mapleton City, it is anticipated that there will be seven
hundred (700) new sewer hookups available based on one ERU per hookup. The additional cost for each new
hookup shall be calculated as follows:
Pay from existing impact fees $537,000.00
Pay from bonding 559,144.07
Pay from future impact fees 518,744.07
Per ERU addition to current impact fees 798.78
Therefore, each sewer hookup for all new developments will be subject to the following impact fee calculation for
sewer:
$2,262.58/ERU as per the 2003 sewer fee calculation
798.78/ERU additional cost for increased sewer capacity
$3,061.36/ERU
(Ord. 2004-03, 4-7-2004)
Chapter 19.08
REFUNDS
19.08.010: APPLICATION REQUIRED:
For efficiency in the processing of refunds the applicant is required to file a written request for a refund with the city
and provide the necessary information as identified herein. Except as provided, refunds shall be made only to the
current owner of property on which the development activity was proposed or occurred. (Ord. 96-02)
19.08.020: PAYMENT:
Refunds shall only be made following an affirmative action by the city council with the finding that:
A. The fees have not been appropriated, encumbered or spent, and
B. That no impact has occurred that would:
1. Increase the need or demand for a capital facility; or
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 551/571
2. Utilize existing capital facility capacity; or
3. Cause an existing capital facility level of service standard to decline. The city may, at its option, make refunds of
impact fees by direct payment, or by other means subject to agreement with the property owner. (Ord. 96-02)
19.08.030: INTEREST PAYABLE:
All impact fee refunds authorized by an affirmative vote of the city council shall include a pro rata share of interest
earned by the applicable impact fee account calculated at the average annual rate of interest for the years the
applicant's impact fees were in the account. (Ord. 96-02)
19.08.040: ELIGIBILITY FOR REFUND:
A. Expiration Or Revocation Of Development Permit: An applicant who has paid an impact fee for a proposed impact
producing development activity for which the applicable final site plan, final plat, or building permit has been
revoked shall be eligible to apply for a refund of impact fees paid.
B. Failure Of The City To Appropriate Impact Fee Funds Within Time Limit: An applicant may apply for a refund of
impact fees paid if the city has failed to appropriate the impact fees collected within the time limits established in
subsections 19.07.020B and D of this title.
C. Reduction In Density Or Intensity Of Development: The applicant of an area included in a final subdivision plat or
final site plan, may apply for a refund of impact fees paid if the development is reduced after approval of the final
subdivision plat or final site plan and the fees have not been appropriated in accordance with the procedures set
forth in sections 19.07.020 and 19.07.030 of this title.
D. Abandonment Of Development After Initiation Of Construction: An applicant who has paid an impact fee for a
proposed development activity for which a building permit has been issued and construction initiated, but which is
abandoned prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be eligible for a refund unless the uncompleted
building is completely demolished. (Ord. 96-02)
19.08.050: PROCESSING OF APPLICATIONS FOR A REFUND:
Applications for a refund shall include all information required by section 19.08.010 and section 19.08.060, 19.08.070,
19.08.080 or section 19.08.090 of this chapter, as appropriate. Upon receipt of a complete application for a refund, the
planning and zoning director shall review the application and all documentary evidence submitted by the applicant, as
well as such other information and evidence as may be deemed relevant, and make a recommendation to the city
council of whether a refund is due. (Ord. 96-02)
19.08.060: ABANDONMENT OF A DEVELOPMENT:
Applications for refunds due to abandonment of a development shall be made within sixty (60) days following
expiration or revocation of the development permit or demolition of the structure. The applicant shall submit:
A. Evidence that the applicant is the property owner or the duly designated agent of the property owner,
B. The amount of the impact fees paid and receipts evidencing such payments, and
C. Documentation evidencing the expiration or revocation of the development permit or demolition of the structure.
(Ord. 96-02)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 552/571
19.08.070: FAILURE TO APPROPRIATE FEES COLLECTED:
Applications for refunds due to the failure of the city to appropriate fees collected within the time limits established in
sections 19.07.020 and 19.07.030 of this title shall be made within sixty (60) days following the expiration of such time
limit. The applicant shall submit:
A. Evidence that the applicant is the property owner or the duly designated agent of the property owner,
B. The amount of the impact fee paid and receipts evidencing the impact fee payments, and
C. Description and documentation of the city's failure to appropriate impact fee funds for relevant capital facilities.
(Ord. 96-02)
19.08.080: UNDEVELOPED LOTS:
Applications for refunds for undeveloped lots shall be made to the planning and zoning director and shall include:
A. Evidence that the applicant is the subdivider or, if the applicant is the current lot owner, evidence that the subdivider
has waived his rights to a refund of impact fees as provided herein,
B. The amount of the impact fees paid by capital facilities category and receipts evidencing such payments, and
C. Documentation evidencing approval of an application to vacate the subdivision plat, or portion thereof, as provided
herein. No refund for a subdivided lot shall be approved unless and until the final subdivision plat, or that portion of
the final subdivision plat including said lot, is vacated in accordance with the provisions of the Utah code. If a
refund is approved, no construction may occur, and no building permit may be issued, until a new subdivision plat
has been approved. (Ord. 96-02)
19.08.090: REDUCTION IN DENSITY OR INTENSITY:
Applications for refunds due to a reduction in density or intensity of development shall be made to the planning and
zoning director and shall include:
A. Evidence that the applicant is the developer or subdivider for which said impact fees were collected or, if the
applicant is the current owner, evidence that the developer or subdivider has waived his rights to a refund of impact
fees as provided herein,
B. The amount of the impact fees paid by capital facilities category and receipts evidencing such payments, and
C. Documentation evidencing a reduction in density or intensity of development as provided herein. (Ord. 96-02)
19.08.100: APPROVAL OF REFUND:
No refund shall be approved unless and until:
A. The final subdivision plat or final site plan is amended, or
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 553/571
B. The original final subdivision plat or final site plan has been withdrawn by the applicant and a new final subdivision
plat or final site plan has been approved, or
C. A building permit has been issued for a building of a lower intensity. (Ord. 96-02)
Chapter 19.09
APPEALS
19.09.010: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
An appeal from any decision of the planning and zoning director pursuant to this title shall be made in writing within
thirty (30) days to the city council. Within thirty (30) days from the date the appeal is filed, the city council shall:
Conduct an appeal hearing, and
Make a final decision on the appeal.
The city council will ensure that all minutes, findings, orders, transcripts and other materials are correct and represent
the true and complete record of the proceedings of the appeal hearing. If the notice of the appeal is accompanied by a
bond or other sufficient surety satisfactory to the city attorney in an amount equal to the impact fee due, the application
for development activity may be entitled to proceed in the approval process. Final development approval will not be
authorized until the city council has rendered an appeal determination. The filing of an appeal shall not stay the
collection of the impact fee due unless a bond or other sufficient surety has been provided. (Ord. 96-02)
19.09.020: BURDEN OF PROOF:
The burden of proof shall be on the applicant to demonstrate that the decision of the planning and zoning director is
erroneous. (Ord. 96-02)
Chapter 19.10
CONFLICT AND SEVERABILITY
19.10.010: CONFLICT:
Neither this title nor the specific impact fee ordinances shall affect, in any manner, the permissible use of property,
density/intensity of development, design and improvement standards or other applicable standards or requirements of
this code, all of which shall be operative and remain in full force and effect without limitation. To the extent of any
conflict between other city ordinances or regulations and this title, the more restrictive is deemed to be controlling.
(Ord. 96-02)
19.10.020: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this title is, for any reason, held invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion
shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions of this title. (Ord. 96-02)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 554/571
Title 20
ANNEXATIONS
Chapter 20.04
ANNEXATION PROCESS
20.04.030: ANNEXATIONS:
A. Application: The party seeking annexation to the city of Mapleton shall submit an annexation petition and a plat
describing the property to the city recorder's office, meeting the criteria established by state law. If a development
agreement is proposed as a condition of the annexation, the petitioner shall submit the proposed development
agreement with the petition and plat. The fee for both the annexation petition and the development agreement shall
be established by resolution of the city council. The petition will be reviewed by the city attorney, the city engineer,
and the city planner, who shall present the petition to the plan review committee to address the items indicated in
subsection B of this section. The findings of the plan review committee shall be considered by the planning
commission as indicated in subsection C of this section. The petition will then be placed on the city council agenda
for rejection or acceptance for further review pursuant to the provisions of Utah Code Annotated section 10-2-404.
If accepted for further review, the recorder shall determine whether the petition meets the requirements of Utah
Code Annotated section 10-2-402(2), (3) and (4), and, within thirty (30) days, prepare a notice of certification or
notice of rejection as required by state law. The recorder shall then publish the notices, and provide the written
notices as required by state law and follow the requirements of state law.
The city may also initiate an annexation as outlined in Utah Code Annotated section 10-2-419 where islands or
peninsulas exist within its boundaries.
B. Plan Review Committee: The plan review committee shall address the following items in its review of the
annexation petition:
1. Whether the proposed property is within the growth management boundary of the general plan;
2. Present and proposed land use and zoning;
3. Present and potential demand for various municipal services;
4. Distances from existing utility lines, public schools, parks, and shopping areas;
5. Specific time tables for extension of services to the area and how these services would be financed;
6. Potential impact on existing and proposed streets;
7. The effect that the annexation will have upon city boundaries and whether the annexation will create potential for
islands, or difficult service areas;
8. An estimate of potential revenue versus potential service costs.
9. Any agreements or requirements upon which the annexation is conditioned.
C. Planning Commission Review: The planning commission shall consider the plan review committee's
recommendation, together with testimony from the petitioner and other interested parties, and make a
recommendation on the annexation and zoning districts to the city council.
D. City Council Review: If no protest is filed, a public hearing shall be scheduled before the city council to act upon the
petition. If a protest is filed, the council shall schedule a public hearing to act upon the petition after the county
boundary commission has rendered its decision. The petitioners shall be responsible for the costs of the feasibility
study, which payment shall be made in advance of the study. The council may schedule the matter at any time to
deny the petition.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 555/571
E. Granting Of Petition: If an annexation petition is granted, a resolution accepting the annexation and ordinance
designating the zoning shall be prepared for the territory shown on the plat map. A certified copy of the annexation
resolution and the plat shall be filed in the office of the county recorder. (Ord. 98-23)
Title 21
STORMWATER REGULATIONS
Chapter 21.04
STORMWATER PROVISIONS
21.04.010: GENERAL:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to:
1. Protect, maintain, and enhance the environment of Mapleton City Corporation.
2. Establish responsibilities for controlling and managing stormwater runoff.
3. Protect the public health, safety and the general welfare of the citizens of the city, by controlling discharges of
pollutants to the city's stormwater system and to maintain and improve the quality of the receiving waters into
which the stormwater outfalls flow, including, without limitation, lakes, rivers, streams, ponds, wetlands, and
groundwater of the city.
4. Enable the city to comply with the national pollution discharge elimination system permit (NPDES/UPDES) and
applicable regulations, 40 CFR section 122.26 for stormwater discharges.
5. Allow the city to exercise the powers granted by Utah code, which provides that, among other powers
municipalities have with respect to stormwater facilities, is the power by ordinance or resolution to:
a. Exercise general regulation over the planning, location, construction, and operation and maintenance of
stormwater facilities in the municipality, whether or not owned and operated by the municipality;
b. Adopt any rules and regulations deemed necessary to accomplish the purposes of this chapter, including the
adoption of a system of fees for services and permits;
c. Establish standards to regulate the quantity of stormwater discharged and to regulate stormwater
contaminants as may be necessary to protect water quality;
d. Review and approve plans and plats for stormwater management in proposed subdivisions or commercial
developments;
e. Issue permits for stormwater discharges, or for the construction, alteration, extension, or repair of stormwater
facilities;
f. Suspend or revoke permits when it is determined that the permittee has violated any applicable ordinance,
resolution, or condition of the permit;
g. Regulate and prohibit discharges into stormwater facilities of sanitary, industrial, or commercial sewage or
waters that have otherwise been contaminated; and
h. Expend funds to remediate or mitigate the detrimental effects of contaminated land or other sources of
stormwater contamination, whether public or private.
B. Administering Entity: The city engineer or designee shall administer the provisions of this chapter. Nothing in this
chapter shall relieve any person from responsibility for damage to other persons or property, nor impose upon
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 556/571
Mapleton City Corporation, its officers, agents or employees, any liability for damage to other persons or property.
(Ord. 2012-02, 2-21-2012, eff. 3-18-2012)
21.04.020: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply. Words used in the singular shall include the plural,
and the plural shall include the singular; words used in the present tense shall include the future tense. The word
"shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. The word "may" is permissive. Words not defined in this section shall be
construed to have the meaning given by common and ordinary use as defined in the latest edition of "Webster's
Dictionary".
AS BUILT PLANS: Drawings depicting conditions as they were actually constructed.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES OR BMPs: Physical, structural, and/or managerial practices that, when used
singly or in combination, prevent or reduce pollution of water, that have been approved by Mapleton City Corporation
and that have been incorporated by reference into this chapter as if fully set out herein. For purposes of this chapter,
the relevant BMPs are more particularly defined in the Mapleton City Corporation guidance document for stormwater
management.
CHANNEL: A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts flowing water continuously
or periodically.
CITY ENGINEER: The city engineer of Mapleton City Corporation, or authorized designee.
CITY STORMWATER SYSTEM: Storm system that receives runoff from public rights of way, natural waterways and
systems identified in a city easement.
COMMUNITY WATER: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems,
springs, wetlands, wells and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a
part of the boundaries of Mapleton City Corporation.
CONTAMINANT: Any physical, chemical, biological, or radiological substance or matter in water.
DESIGN STORM EVENT: A hypothetical storm event, of a given frequency interval and duration, used in the analysis
and design of a stormwater facility.
DISCHARGE: Dispose, deposit, spill, pour, inject, seep, dump, leak or place by any means, or that which is disposed,
deposited, spilled, poured, injected, seeped, dumped, leaked, or placed by any means including any direct or indirect
entry of any solid or liquid matter into the municipal separate storm sewer system.
EASEMENT: An acquired privilege or right of use or enjoyment that a person, party, firm, corporation, municipality or
other legal entity has in the land of another.
EROSION: The removal of soil particles by the action of water, wind, ice or other geological agents, whether naturally
occurring or acting in conjunction with or promoted by anthropogenic activities or effects.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN: A written plan (including drawings or other graphic representations)
that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during construction activities.
GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER PERMIT: Permit required by the Utah department of environmental
quality, division of water quality.
HOT SPOT (PRIORITY AREA): An area where land use or activities generate highly contaminated runoff, with
concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS: Illegal and/or unauthorized connections to the municipal separate stormwater system
whether or not such connections result in discharges into that system.
ILLICIT DISCHARGE: Any discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system that is not composed entirely of
stormwater and not specifically exempted under subsection 21.04.030D of this chapter.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 557/571
IRRIGATION DITCHES: Gravity irrigation ditches used by irrigation shareowners having a right of water passageway
by ROW, easement or prescription.
LAND DISTURBANCE PERMIT: Mapleton City Corporation land disturbance permit as adopted by the city.
LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY: Any activity on property that results in a change in the existing soil cover (both
vegetative and nonvegetative) and/or the existing soil topography. Land disturbing activities include, but are not limited
to, development, redevelopment, demolition, construction, reconstruction, clearing, grading, filling, and excavation.
MAINTENANCE: Any activity that is necessary to keep a stormwater facility in good working order so as to function as
designed. Maintenance shall include complete reconstruction of a stormwater facility if reconstruction is needed in
order to restore the facility to its original operational design parameters. Maintenance shall also include the correction
of any problem on the site property that may directly impair the functions of the stormwater facility.
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT: A document recorded in the land records that acts as a property deed restriction, and
which provides for long term maintenance of stormwater management practices.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) (MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORMWATER SYSTEM): The
conveyances owned or operated by the municipality for the collection and transportation of stormwater, including the
roads and streets and their drainage systems, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, and storm
drains.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM PERMIT OR NPDES PERMIT: A permit issued
pursuant to 33 USC 1342.
NOTICE OF VIOLATION (NOV): Whenever the city engineer or designee finds that a person is in noncompliance with
this chapter, the city engineer or designee will order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible
person. Requirements in this notice are at the discretion of the city engineer or designee, and may include monitoring,
payment to cover costs relating to the noncompliance, and the implementation of best management practices.
OFF SITE FACILITY: A structural BMP located outside the subject property boundary described in the permit
application for land development activity.
ON SITE FACILITY: A structural BMP located within the subject property boundary described in the permit application
for land development activity.
PEAK FLOW: The maximum instantaneous rate of flow of water at a particular point resulting from a storm event.
PERSON: Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any individual, firm or association and any municipal or
private corporation organized or existing under the laws of this or any other state or country.
PREEXISTING CONDITIONS: Conditions of property in its native state or changed under approval by the city or
changed property that is grandfathered.
PRIORITY AREA: See definition of Hot Spot (Priority Area).
PROPERTY OWNER: Landowner of property within the boundary of Mapleton City Corporation.
RUNOFF: That portion of the precipitation on a drainage area that is discharged from the area into the municipal
separate stormwater system. Water produced by storms, surface drainage, snow and ice melt, and other water
handled by the storm sewer drainage system.
SEDIMENT: Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved
from its site of origin by air, water, gravity, or ice and has come to rest on the earth's surface either above or below sea
level.
SEDIMENTATION: Soil particles suspended in stormwater that can settle in streambeds and disrupt the natural flow of
the stream.
SOILS REPORT: A study of soils on a subject property with the primary purpose of characterizing and describing the
soils. The soils report shall be prepared by a qualified soils engineer, who shall be directly involved in the soil
characterization either by performing the investigation or by directly supervising employees.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 558/571
STABILIZATION: Providing adequate measures, vegetative and/or structural, that will prevent erosion from occurring.
STORMWATER: Stormwater runoff, snowmelt runoff, surface runoff, street wash waters related to street cleaning or
maintenance, infiltration and drainage.
STORMWATER DESIGN STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS: Current Mapleton City Corporation stormwater
standards and regulations as adopted by the city.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT: The programs to maintain quality and quantity of stormwater runoff to
predevelopment levels.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES SYSTEM: The drainage structures, conduits, ditches, combined sewers,
sewers, and all device appurtenances by means of which stormwater is collected, transported, pumped, treated or
disposed of.
STORMWATER MASTER PLAN: Current "Mapleton City Corporation Stormwater Master Plan" as adopted by the city.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP): The set of drawings and other documents that
comprise all the information and specifications for the programs, drainage systems, structures, BMPs, concepts and
techniques intended to maintain or restore quality and quantity of stormwater runoff to predevelopment levels during
and after construction.
STORMWATER RUNOFF: Flow on the surface of the ground, resulting from precipitation.
STORMWATER UTILITY: The stormwater utility created by ordinance of the city to administer the stormwater
management ordinance, and other stormwater rules and regulations adopted by the municipality.
STRUCTURAL BMPs: Devices that are constructed to provide control of stormwater runoff.
SURFACE WATER: Includes waters upon the surface of the earth in bounds created naturally or artificially including,
but not limited to, streams, other watercourses, lakes and reservoirs.
UPDES: Utah pollution discharge elimination system.
WATERCOURSE: A permanent or intermittent stream or other body of water, either natural or manmade, which
gathers or carries surface water.
WATERSHED: All the land area that contributes runoff to a particular point along a waterway. (Ord. 2012-02, 2-21-
2012, eff. 3-18-2012; amd. Ord. 2014-03, 2-4-2014, eff. 4-13-2014)
21.04.030: LAND DISTURBANCE PERMITS:
A. When Required:
1. Every person will be required to obtain a land disturbance permit from the city engineer in the following cases:
a. Land disturbing activity generally disturbs one or more acres of land.
b. Land disturbing activity of less than one acre of land if such activity is part of a larger common plan of
development that affects one or more acres of land.
c. Land disturbing activity of less than one acre of land, if in the discretion of the city engineer or designee, such
activity poses a unique threat to water, or public health or safety.
d. The creation and use of borrow pits.
e. Development of a single-family home.
f. Processing of earthen materials such as topsoil and gravel screening.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 559/571
g. Construction of parking lots.
B. Drainage Channels, Waterways And Sensitive Areas:
1. Property owners shall not alter or restrict natural channels and waterways without proper federal, state and city
permits.
2. Modifications of sensitive areas are subject to and governed by the critical environmental zone ordinance (CE-
1). These actions will require a land disturbance permit and approval from all other governing agencies.
3. Property owners proposing to redirect runoff, surface and/or pipe flow to properties or facilities outside Mapleton
City Corporation boundaries must provide written approval from the state, county or municipality or their agents.
4. Property owners are responsible for the protection of canals per the relevant sections of this chapter.
5. Discharges or modifications to the canals require written approval from the canal owners and applicable
governing agencies.
C. Building Permit: No building permit shall be issued until the applicant has obtained a land disturbance permit where
the same is required by this chapter.
D. Exemptions: The following activities are exempt from the permit requirement:
1. Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for the protection of life, property, or natural resources.
2. Existing nursery and agricultural operations conducted as a permitted main or accessory use.
3. Any agricultural activity that is consistent with an approved farm conservation plan or a management plan
prepared or approved by the appropriate city, federal, or state agency.
4. Additions or modifications to existing single-family structures. (Ord. 2012-02, 2-21-2012, eff. 3-18-2012)
E. Application For A Land Disturbance Permit:
1. Each application shall include the following:
a. Name of applicant;
b. Business or residence address of applicant;
c. Name, address and telephone number of the owner of the property of record in the office of the assessor of
property;
d. Address and legal description of subject property including the tax reference number and parcel number of the
subject property;
e. Name, address and telephone number of the contractor and any subcontractor(s) who shall perform the land
disturbing activity and who shall implement the erosion and sediment control plan;
f. A statement indicating the nature, extent and purpose of the land disturbing activity including the size of the
area for which the permit shall be applicable and a schedule for the starting and completion dates of the land
disturbing activity.
2. The applicant shall obtain from any other state or federal agency any other appropriate environmental permits
that pertain to the property, such as the UPDES stormwater general permit for construction activities permit
UTR300000. However, the inclusion of those permits in the application shall not foreclose the city engineer from
imposing additional development requirements and conditions, commensurate with this chapter, on the
development of property covered by those permits.
3. Each application shall be accompanied by:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 560/571
a. A sediment and erosion control plan.
b. A stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) providing for stormwater management during the land
disturbing activity and after the activity has been completed meeting the requirements of the stormwater
general permit for construction activities permit. (Ord. 2014-03, 2-4-2014, eff. 4-13-2014)
4. Each application for a land disturbance permit shall be accompanied by payment of land disturbance permit and
other stormwater management fees, as adopted by resolution and found in the city fee schedule. (Ord. 2012-02,
2-21-2012, eff. 3-18-2012)
F. Review And Approval Of Application:
1. The city engineer or designee will review each application for a land disturbance permit to determine its
conformance with the provisions of this chapter. Within fifteen (15) days after receiving an application, the city
engineer or designee shall provide one of the following responses in writing:
a. Approval of the permit application;
b. Prior to the issuance and part of a land disturbance permit, the applicant and responsible parties shall enter
into a bond agreement with the city to ensure completion of, compliance with, under the terms and conditions
of this title regarding stormwater pollution prevention, including, but not limited to, compliance with the terms
and conditions of this chapter, stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP), and any additional conditions
required by the city engineer or designee as provided herein.
The bond agreement shall be in a form and contain such provisions as approved by the city. Such provisions
may be included in and combined with any other additional bonds required for a building permit, for the
project, development or construction activity;
c. Approval of the permit application, subject to such reasonable conditions as may be necessary to secure
substantially the objectives of this chapter, and issue the permit subject to these conditions; or
d. Denial of the permit application, indicating the reason(s) for the denial. (Ord. 2014-03, 2-4-2014, eff. 4-13-
2014)
2. If the city engineer or designee has granted conditional approval of the permit, the applicant shall submit a
revised plan that conforms to the conditions established by the city engineer or designee. However, the applicant
shall be allowed to proceed with his land disturbing activity so long as it conforms to conditions established by
the city engineer or designee.
No development plans will be released until the land disturbance permit has been approved.
G. Permit Duration:
1. Every land disturbance permit shall expire and become null and void if substantial work authorized by such
permit has not commenced within one hundred eighty (180) calendar days of issuance, or is not complete within
eighteen (18) months from the date of the commencement of construction.
H. Notice Of Construction:
1. The applicant must notify the city engineer or designee ten (10) working days in advance of the commencement
of construction. Regular inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by
the city engineer or designee. All inspections shall be documented and written reports prepared that contain the
following information:
a. The date and location of the inspection;
b. Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan;
c. Variations from the approved construction specifications;
d. Any violations that exist. (Ord. 2012-02, 2-21-2012, eff. 3-18-2012)
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 561/571
I. Performance Bonds:
1. The city engineer or designee may, at his discretion:
a. Require the submittal of a performance security or performance bond prior to issuance of a permit in order to
ensure that the stormwater practices are installed by the permit holder as required by the approved
stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP).
(1) The amount of the installation performance security or performance bond shall be the total estimated
construction cost of the structural BMPs approved under the permit plus any reasonably foreseeable
additional related costs, e.g., for damages or enforcement.
(2) The performance security shall contain forfeiture provisions for failure to complete work specified in the
stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP).
(3) The applicant shall provide an itemized construction cost estimate complete with unit prices which shall be
subject to acceptance, amendment or rejection by the city engineer or designee.
(4) Alternatively, the city engineer or designee shall have the right to calculate the cost of construction cost
estimates. (Ord. 2014-03, 2-4-2014, eff. 4-13-2014)
2. The performance security or performance bond shall be released in full only upon submission of as built plans
and written certification by a registered professional engineer licensed to practice in the state of Utah that the
structural BMP has been installed in accordance with the approved plan and other applicable provisions of this
chapter.
3. The city engineer or designee will make a final inspection of the structural BMP to ensure that it is in compliance
with the approved plan and the provisions of this chapter. Provisions for a partial pro rata release of the
performance security or performance bond based on the completion of various development stages can be
made at the discretion of the city engineer or designee. (Ord. 2012-02, 2-21-2012, eff. 3-18-2012)
21.04.040: STORMWATER SYSTEM DESIGN AND MANAGEMENT STANDARDS:
A. Irrigation Ditches:
1. All existing irrigation ditches located on the site or straddling a site property boundary shall be piped with a
sufficient size pipe and shall be coordinated with water user.
2. Property owners are responsible for the protection of irrigation ditches per the relevant sections of this chapter.
3. Discharges to private ditches require written approval from the ditch owners and design shall comply with the
terms of approvals and the stormwater design standards and regulations and the land disturbance permit.
4. Piping of ditches and modification to the diversion boxes require documented coordination with ditch owners or
representative but are not required to receive written approval of ditch owners. Design and coordination
requirements shall comply with the stormwater design standards and regulations and the land disturbance permit
documents.
B. Stormwater Design And BMP Manuals:
1. Adoption: The municipality adopts as its stormwater design and best management practices (BMP) manuals the
following publications, which are incorporated by reference in this chapter as if fully set out herein:
a. "Mapleton City Corporation Stormwater Design Standards And Regulations".
b. "Mapleton City Corporation Stormwater Master Plan".
c. "Mapleton City Stormwater Management Plan" (Mapleton public works department).
2. Inclusions; Updates: These manuals include a list of acceptable BMPs and include specific design performance
criteria and operation and maintenance requirements for each stormwater practice. The manuals may be
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 562/571
updated and expanded from time to time, at the discretion of the governing body of the city, upon the
recommendation of the city engineer, based on improvements in engineering, science, monitory and local
maintenance experience. Stormwater facilities that are designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with
these BMP criteria will be presumed to meet the minimum water quality performance standards.
C. General Performance Criteria For Stormwater Management: Unless granted a waiver or judged by the city engineer
or designee to be exempt, the following postconstruction performance criteria shall be addressed for stormwater
management at all sites:
1. Design of storm drain systems in boundaries and discharges into a Mapleton City Corporation storm drain
system requires direct supervision of a Utah registered professional engineer, and shall carry the seal of the
same supervising professional engineer.
2. All site designs shall control the peak flow rates of stormwater discharge associated with design storms specified
in this chapter or in the BMP manual and reduce the generation of postconstruction stormwater runoff to
preconstruction levels. These practices should seek to utilize pervious areas for stormwater treatment and to
infiltrate stormwater runoff from driveways, sidewalks, rooftops, parking lots, and landscaped areas to the
maximum extent practical to provide treatment for both water quality and quantity.
3. To protect stream channels from degradation, specific channel protection criteria shall be provided as prescribed
in the BMP manual.
4. Stormwater discharges to critical areas with sensitive resources (i.e., cold water fisheries, swimming beaches,
recharge areas, water supply reservoirs) may be subject to additional performance criteria, or may need to utilize
or restrict certain stormwater management practices.
5. Stormwater discharges from "hot spots" may require the application of specific structural BMPs and pollution
prevention practices.
6. Prior to or during the site design process, applicants for land disturbance permits shall consult with the city
engineer or designee to determine if they are subject to additional stormwater design requirements.
7. The calculations for determining peak flows as found in the BMP manual shall be used for sizing all stormwater
facilities.
D. Minimum Control Requirements:
1. Stormwater discharge during all construction activities shall comply with the terms of the land disturbance
permit, the stormwater design standards and regulations, and/or requirements set forth by the building code, and
the state of Utah UPDES requirements.
2. Stormwater designs shall meet the multistage storm frequency storage requirements as identified in the BMP
manual unless the city engineer or designee has granted the applicant a full or partial waiver for a particular
BMP under this section.
3. Runoff rates from one lot to another may not exceed preexisting conditions or in such a manner that may
unreasonably and unnecessarily cause more harm than formerly.
4. If hydrologic or topographic conditions warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control
requirements, the city engineer or designee may impose any and all additional requirements deemed necessary
to control the volume, timing, and rate of runoff.
E. Stormwater Management Plan Requirements: Property owners are responsible to manage stormwater runoff and
sediment whether in conduit systems or on the surface that traverse or originate on their property, unless this
responsibility is relinquished through the terms and conditions of an easement. The stormwater management plan
shall include sufficient information to allow the city engineer or designee to evaluate the environmental
characteristics of the project site, the potential impacts of all proposed development of the site, both present and
future, on the water resources, and the effectiveness and acceptability of the measures proposed for managing
stormwater generated at the project site. To accomplish this goal the stormwater management plan shall include
the following:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 563/571
1. Topographic Base Map: A one inch equals five hundred feet (1" = 500') topographic base map of the site which
extends a minimum of one thousand feet (1,000') beyond the limits of the proposed development and indicates:
a. Existing surface water drainage including streams, ponds, culverts, ditches, sinkholes, wetlands; and the type,
size, elevation, etc., of nearest upstream and downstream drainage structures;
b. Current land use including all existing structures, locations of utilities, roads, and easements;
c. All other existing significant natural and artificial features;
d. Proposed land use with tabulation of the percentage of surface area to be adapted to various uses; drainage
patterns; locations of utilities, roads and easements; the limits of clearing and grading;
e. Proposed structural BMPs;
f. A written description of the site plan and justification of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be
required.
2. Calculations: Hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations for the predevelopment and postdevelopment
conditions for the design storms specified in the BMP manual. These calculations must show that the proposed
stormwater management measures are capable of controlling runoff from the site in compliance with this chapter
and the guidelines of the BMP manual. Such calculations shall include:
a. A description of the design storm frequency, duration, and intensity where applicable;
b. Time of concentration;
c. Soil curve numbers or runoff coefficients including assumed soil moisture conditions;
d. Peak runoff rates and total runoff volumes for each watershed area;
e. Infiltration rates, where applicable;
f. Culvert, stormwater sewer, ditch and/or other stormwater conveyance capacities;
g. Flow velocities;
h. Data on the increase in rate and volume of runoff for the design storms referenced in the BMP manual; and
i. Documentation of sources for all computation methods and field test results.
3. Soils Information: If a stormwater management control measure depends on the hydrologic properties of soils
(e.g., infiltration basins), then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report shall be based on on-site boring
logs or soil pit profiles and soil survey reports. The number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall
be determined based on what is needed to determine the suitability and distribution of soil types present at the
location of the control measure.
4. Maintenance And Repair Plan: The design and planning of all stormwater management facilities shall include
detailed maintenance and repair procedures to ensure their continued performance. These plans will identify the
parts or components of a stormwater management facility that need to be maintained and the equipment and
skills or training necessary. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the
maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the
plan. A permanent elevation bench mark shall be identified in the plans to assist in the periodic inspection of the
facility.
5. Landscaping Plan: The applicant must present a detailed plan for management of vegetation at the site after
construction is finished, including who will be responsible for the maintenance of vegetation at the site and what
practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. Where it is required by the
BMP, this plan must be prepared by a registered landscape architect licensed in Utah.
F. Maintenance Easements: The applicant must ensure access to the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by
securing all the maintenance easements needed. These easements must be binding on the current property owner
and all subsequent owners of the property and must be properly recorded in the land record.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 564/571
G. Maintenance Agreement: The owner of property to be served by an on site stormwater management facility must
execute an inspection and maintenance agreement that shall operate as a deed restriction binding on the current
property owner and all subsequent property owners. The maintenance agreement shall:
1. Assign responsibility for the maintenance and repair of the stormwater facility to the owner of the property upon
which the facility is located and be recorded as such on the plat for the property by appropriate notation.
2. Provide for a periodic inspection by the property owner for the purpose of documenting maintenance and repair
needs and ensure compliance with the purpose and requirements of this chapter. The property owner will
arrange for this inspection to be conducted by a registered professional engineer licensed to practice in the state
of Utah who will submit a sealed report of the inspection to the city engineer or designee. It shall also grant
permission to the city to enter the property at reasonable times and to inspect the stormwater facility to ensure
that it is being properly maintained.
3. Provide that the minimum maintenance and repair needs include, but are not limited to: the removal of silt, litter
and other debris, the cutting of grass, grass cuttings and vegetation removal, and the replacement of landscape
vegetation, in detention and retention basins, and inlets and drainage pipes and any other stormwater facilities. It
shall also provide that the property owner shall be responsible for additional maintenance and repair needs
consistent with the needs and standards outlined in the BMP manual.
4. Provide that maintenance needs must be addressed in a timely manner, on a schedule to be determined by the
city engineer or designee.
5. Provide that if the property is not maintained or repaired within the prescribed schedule, the city engineer or
designee shall perform the maintenance and repair at its expense, and bill the same to the property owner. The
maintenance agreement shall also provide that the city engineer's cost of performing the maintenance shall be a
lien against the property.
H. Dedication: The municipality shall have the discretion to accept the dedication of any existing or future stormwater
management facility, provided such facility meets the requirements of this chapter, and includes adequate and
perpetual access and sufficient areas, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. Any
stormwater facility accepted by the municipality must also meet the municipality's construction standards and any
other standards and specifications that apply to the particular stormwater facility in question.
I. Sediment And Erosion Control Plans: The applicant must prepare a sediment and erosion control plan for all
construction activities that complies with this subsection.
1. The sediment and erosion control plan shall accurately describe the potential for soil erosion and sedimentation
problems resulting from land disturbing activity and shall explain and illustrate the measures that are to be taken
to control these problems. The length and complexity of the plan is to be commensurate with the size of the
project, severity of the site condition, and potential for off site damage. The plan shall be sealed by a registered
professional engineer licensed in the state of Utah. The plan shall also conform to the requirements found in the
BMP manual, and shall include at least the following:
a. Brief description of the intended project and proposed land disturbing activity including number of units and
structures to be constructed and infrastructure required.
b. A topographic map with contour intervals of five feet (5') or less showing present conditions and proposed
contours resulting from land disturbing activity.
c. All existing drainageways, including intermittent and wet weather. Include any designated floodways or
floodplains.
d. A general description of existing land covers. Individual trees and shrubs do not need to be identified.
e. Stands of existing trees as they are to be preserved upon project completion, specifying their general location
on the property. Differentiation shall be made between existing trees to be preserved, trees to be removed and
proposed planted trees. Tree protection measures must be identified, and the diameter of the area involved
must also be identified on the plan and shown to scale. Information shall be supplied concerning the proposed
destruction of exceptional and historic trees in setbacks and buffer strips, where they exist. Complete
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 565/571
landscape plans may be submitted separately. The plan must include the sequence of implementation for tree
protection measures.
f. Approximate limits of proposed clearing, grading and filling.
g. Approximate flows of existing stormwater leaving any portion of the site.
h. A general description of existing soil types and characteristics and any anticipated soil erosion and
sedimentation problems resulting from existing characteristics.
i. Location, size and layout of proposed stormwater and sedimentation control improvements.
j. Proposed drainage network.
k. Proposed drain tile or waterway sizes.
l. Approximate flows leaving site after construction and incorporating water runoff mitigation measures. The
evaluation must include projected effects on property adjoining the site and on existing drainage facilities and
systems. The plan must address the adequacy of outfalls from the development: when water is concentrated,
what is the capacity of waterways, if any, accepting stormwater off site; and what measures, including
infiltration, sheeting into buffers, etc., are going to be used to prevent the scouring of waterways and drainage
areas off site, etc.
m. The projected sequence of work represented by the grading, drainage and sedimentation and erosion control
plans as related to other major items of construction, beginning with the initiation of excavation and including
the construction of any sediment basins or retention facilities or any other structural BMPs.
n. Specific remediation measures to prevent erosion and sedimentation runoff. Plans shall include detailed
drawings of all control measures used; stabilization measures including vegetation and nonvegetation
measures, both temporary and permanent, will be detailed. Detailed construction notes and a maintenance
schedule shall be included for all control measures in the plan.
o. Specific details for the construction of rock pads, wash down pads, and settling basins for controlling erosion;
road access points; eliminating or keeping soil, sediment, and debris on streets and public ways at a level
acceptable to the city engineer or designee. Soil, sediment, and debris brought onto streets and public ways
must be removed by the end of the workday by machine, broom or shovel to the satisfaction of the city
engineer or designee. Failure to remove the sediment, soil or debris shall be deemed a violation of this
chapter.
p. Proposed structures; location (to the extent possible) and identification of any proposed additional buildings,
structures or development on the site.
q. A description of on site measures to be taken to recharge surface water into the groundwater system through
infiltration. (Ord. 2012-02, 2-21-2012, eff. 3-18-2012)
21.04.050: POSTCONSTRUCTION:
A. As Built Plans: All applicants are required to submit actual as built plans for any structures located on site after final
construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management
facilities and must be sealed by a registered professional engineer licensed to practice in Utah. A final inspection
by the city engineer or designee is required before any performance security or performance bond will be released.
The city engineer or designee shall have the discretion to adopt provisions for a partial pro rata release of the
performance security or performance bond on the completion of various stages of development. In addition,
occupation permits shall not be granted until corrections to all BMPs have been made and accepted by the city
engineer or designee.
B. Landscaping And Stabilization Requirements: Any area of land from which the natural vegetative cover has been
either partially or wholly cleared by development activities shall be revegetated according to a schedule approved
by the city engineer or designee. The following criteria shall apply to revegetation efforts:
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 566/571
1. Reseeding must be done with an annual or perennial cover crop accompanied by placement of straw mulch or
its equivalent of sufficient coverage to control erosion until such time as the cover crop is established over ninety
percent (90%) of the seeded area.
2. Replanting with native woody and herbaceous vegetation must be accompanied by placement of straw mulch or
its equivalent of sufficient coverage to control erosion until the plantings are established and are capable of
controlling erosion.
3. Any area of revegetation must exhibit survival of a minimum of seventy five percent (75%) of the cover crop
throughout the year immediately following revegetation. Revegetation must be repeated in successive years until
the minimum seventy five percent (75%) survival for one year is achieved.
4. In addition to the above requirements, a landscaping plan must be submitted with the final design describing the
vegetative stabilization and management techniques to be used at a site after construction is completed. This
plan will explain not only how the site will be stabilized after construction, but who will be responsible for the
maintenance of vegetation at the site and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative
cover is preserved.
C. Inspection Of Stormwater Management Facilities: Periodic inspections of facilities shall be performed as provided
for in section 21.04.040 of this chapter.
D. Records Of Installation And Maintenance Activities: Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a
stormwater management facility shall make records of the installation of the stormwater facility, and of all
maintenance and repairs to the facility, and shall retain the records for at least three (3) years. These records shall
be made available to the city engineer or designee during inspection of the facility and at other reasonable times
upon request.
E. Failure To Meet Or Maintain Design Or Maintenance Standards: If a responsible party fails or refuses to meet the
design or maintenance standards required for stormwater facilities under this chapter, the city engineer or
designee, after reasonable notice, may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance needs by
performing all necessary work to place the facility in proper working condition. In the event that the stormwater
management facility becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the city engineer or designee shall notify
in writing the party responsible for maintenance of the stormwater management facility. Upon receipt of that notice,
the responsible person shall have fifteen (15) days to effect maintenance and repair of the facility in an approved
manner. In the event that corrective action is not undertaken within that time, the city engineer may take necessary
corrective action. The cost of any action by the city engineer or designee under this section shall be charged to the
responsible party. (Ord. 2012-02, 2-21-2012, eff. 3-18-2012)
21.04.060: WAIVERS:
A. General: Every applicant shall provide for postconstruction stormwater management as required by this chapter,
unless a written request is filed to waive this requirement. Requests to waive the stormwater management plan
requirements shall be submitted to the city engineer or designee for approval.
B. Conditions For Waiver: The minimum requirements for stormwater management may be waived in whole or in part
upon written request of the applicant, provided that at least one of the following conditions applies:
1. It can be demonstrated that the proposed development is not likely to impair attainment of the objectives of this
chapter.
2. Alternative minimum requirements for on site management of stormwater discharges have been established in a
stormwater management plan that has been approved by the city engineer or designee.
3. Provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off site facility. The off site facility must be in place and
designed to provide the level of stormwater control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded
by on site practices. Further, the facility must be operated and maintained by an entity that is legally obligated to
continue the operation and maintenance of the facility.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 567/571
C. Downstream Damage, Etc., Prohibited: In order to receive a waiver, the applicant must demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the city engineer or designee that the waiver will not lead to any of the following conditions
downstream:
1. Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures;
2. Degradation of biological functions or habitat;
3. Accelerated stream bank or streambed erosion or siltation;
4. Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life or property.
D. Land Disturbance Permit Not To Be Issued Where Waiver Requested: No land disturbance permit shall be issued
where a waiver has been requested until the waiver is granted. If no waiver is granted, the plans must be
resubmitted with a stormwater management plan. (Ord. 2012-02, 2-21-2012, eff. 3-18-2012)
21.04.070: EXISTING LOCATIONS AND DEVELOPMENTS:
A. Requirements For All Existing Locations And Developments: The following requirements shall apply to all locations
and development at which land disturbing activities have occurred previous to the enactment of this chapter:
1. Denuded areas must be vegetated or covered under the standards and guidelines specified in the BMP manual
and on a schedule acceptable to the city engineer or designee.
2. Cuts and slopes must be properly covered with appropriate vegetation and/or retaining walls constructed.
3. Drainageways shall be properly covered in vegetation or secured with riprap, channel lining, etc., to prevent
erosion.
4. Trash, junk, rubbish, etc., shall be cleared from drainageways.
5. Stormwater runoff shall be controlled to the extent reasonable to prevent pollution of local waters. Such control
measures may include, but are not limited to, the following:
a. Ponds:
(1) Detention pond.
(2) Extended detention pond.
(3) Wet pond.
(4) Alternative storage measures.
b. Constructed wetlands.
c. Infiltration systems:
(1) Infiltration/percolation trench.
(2) Infiltration basin.
(3) Drainage (recharge) well.
(4) Porous pavement.
d. Filtering systems:
(1) Catch basin inserts/media filter.
(2) Sand filter.
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 568/571
(3) Filter/absorption bed.
(4) Filter and buffer strips.
e. Open channel:
(1) Swale.
B. Requirements For Existing Problem Locations: The city engineer or designee shall in writing notify the owners of
existing locations and developments of specific drainage, erosion or sediment problem affecting such locations and
developments, and the specific actions required to correct those problems. The notice shall also specify a
reasonable time for compliance.
C. Inspection Of Existing Facilities: The city engineer or designee may, to the extent authorized by state and federal
law, establish inspection programs to verify that all stormwater management facilities, including those built before
as well as after the adoption of this chapter, are functioning within design limits. These inspection programs may be
established on any reasonable basis, including, but not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections;
inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; inspection of drainage basins or areas
identified as higher than typical sources of sediment or other contaminants or pollutants; inspections of businesses
or industries of a type associated with higher than usual discharges of contaminants or pollutants or with
discharges of a type which are more likely than the typical discharge to cause violations of the municipality's
NPDES/UPDES stormwater permit; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or
safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling
discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in drainage control facilities; and evaluating the
condition of drainage control facilities and other BMPs.
D. Corrections Of Problems Subject To Appeal: Corrective measures imposed by the city engineer or designee under
this section are subject to appeal under section 21.04.110 of this chapter. (Ord. 2012-02, 2-21-2012, eff. 3-18-
2012)
21.04.080: ILLICIT DISCHARGES:
A. Scope: This section shall apply to all water generated on developed or undeveloped land entering the municipality's
separate storm sewer system.
B. Prohibition Of Illicit Discharges: No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the municipal separate
storm sewer system any discharge that is not composed entirely of stormwater. The commencement, conduct or
continuance of any nonstormwater discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system is prohibited except as
described as follows:
1. Uncontaminated discharges from the following sources:
a. Water line flushing or other potable water sources,
b. Landscape irrigation or lawn watering with potable water,
c. Diverted stream flows,
d. Rising groundwater,
e. Groundwater infiltration to storm drains,
f. Uncontaminated pumped groundwater,
g. Foundation or footing drains,
h. Crawl space pumps,
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 569/571
i. Air conditioning condensation,
j. Springs,
k. Natural riparian habitat or wetland flows,
l. Swimming pools (if dechlorinated - typically less than 1 ppm chlorine),
m. Firefighting activities. (Ord. 2014-03, 2-4-2014, eff. 4-13-2014)
2. Discharges specified in writing by the city engineer or designee as being necessary to protect public health and
safety.
3. Dye testing is an allowable discharge if the city engineer or designee has so specified in writing.
4. The prohibition shall not apply to any nonstormwater discharge permitted under a UPDES permit, waiver, or
waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the state of Utah division
of water quality, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or
order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any
discharge to the storm drain system.
C. Prohibition Of Illicit Connections:
1. The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the separate municipal storm
sewer system is prohibited.
2. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether
the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
D. Reduction Of Stormwater Pollutants By The Use Of Best Management Practices: Any person responsible for a
property or premises, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at the
person's expense, the BMPs necessary to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate
storm sewer system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge
of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed in compliance with the
provisions of this section.
E. Notification Of Spills: Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or
operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting in, or may result in, illicit discharges or pollutants discharging
into stormwater, the municipal separate storm sewer system, the person shall take all necessary steps to ensure
the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials the
person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services.
In the event of a release of nonhazardous materials, the person shall notify the city engineer or designee in person
or by telephone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by telephone shall be
confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the city engineer or designee within three (3) business days of
the telephone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial
establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on site written record of the
discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three (3)
years. (Ord. 2012-02, 2-21-2012, eff. 3-18-2012)
21.04.090: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Enforcement Authority: The city engineer or his designees shall have the authority to issue notices of violation, stop
work orders, and citations, and to impose the civil penalties provided in this section.
1. With the issuance of a city land disturbance permit (as identified in section 21.04.030 of this chapter), the city
engineer or designee shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to this chapter at all reasonable
times and as often as necessary to determine compliance. Failure to comply with the terms of this chapter may
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 570/571
result in punitive actions by Mapleton City Corporation ordinance enforcement, by Utah County health
department, or by other means identified in permits or terms set forth in development applications.
B. Immediate Enforcement: In the case of violation involving continuing construction or development, storm drainage,
an emergency situation, multiple or repeated violations, or for any other reason as reasonably determined by the
city engineer or designee, the same may use the enforcement powers and remedies available to it under this
chapter, including issuance of a civil citation following notification as outlined in subsection C of this section.
C. Notification Of Violation:
1. Written Notice: Whenever the city engineer or designee finds that any permittee or any other person discharging
stormwater has violated or is violating this chapter or a permit or order issued hereunder, the city engineer or
designee may serve upon such person written notice of the violation. Within ten (10) days of this notice, an
explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific
required actions, shall be submitted to the city engineer or designee. Submission of this plan in no way relieves
the discharger of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation.
2. Consent Orders: The city engineer or designee is empowered to enter into consent orders, assurances of
voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with the person responsible for the
noncompliance. Such orders will include specific action to be taken by the person to correct the noncompliance
within a time period also specified by the order. Consent orders shall have the same force and effect as
administrative orders issued pursuant to subsections C4 and C5 of this section.
3. Show Cause Hearing: The city engineer or designee may order any person who violates this chapter or permit
or order issued hereunder, to show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall
be served on the person specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action and the
reasons for such action, and a request that the violator show cause why this proposed enforcement action
should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail
(return receipt requested) at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing.
4. Compliance Order: When the city engineer or designee finds that any person has violated or continues to violate
this chapter or a permit or order issued hereunder, he may issue an order to the violator directing that, following
a specific time period, adequate structures, devices, be installed or procedures implemented and properly
operated. Orders may also contain such other requirements as might be reasonably necessary and appropriate
to address the noncompliance, including the construction of appropriate structures, installation of devices, selfmonitoring,
and management practices.
5. Cease And Desist Orders: When the city engineer or designee finds that any person has violated or continues to
violate this chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder, the director may issue an order to cease and desist
all such violations and direct those persons in noncompliance to:
a. Comply forthwith; or
b. Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or
threatened violation, including halting operations and terminating the discharge.
D. Conflicting Standards: Whenever there is a conflict between any standard contained in this chapter and in the BMP
manual adopted by the municipality under this chapter, the strictest standard shall prevail.
E. Violations: Any person who shall commit any act declared unlawful under this chapter, who violates any provision of
this chapter, who violates the provisions of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, or who fails or refuses to
comply with any lawful communication or notice to abate or take corrective action by the city engineer or designee,
shall be guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 2014-03, 2-4-2014, eff. 4-13-2014)
21.04.100: PENALTIES:
A. Violations Constitute A Penalty: Under the authority provided in Utah Code Annotated 4-2-15 the municipality
declares that any person violating the provisions of this chapter may be assessed a penalty by the city engineer or
9/10/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=801 571/571
designee of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per day for
each day of violation. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate violation.
B. Measuring Civil Penalties: In assessing a civil penalty, the city engineer or designee may consider:
1. The harm done to the public health or the environment;
2. Whether the civil penalty imposed will be a substantial economic deterrent to the illegal activity;
3. The economic benefit gained by the violator;
4. The amount of effort put forth by the violator to remedy this violation;
5. Any unusual or extraordinary enforcement costs incurred by the municipality;
6. The amount of penalty established by ordinance or resolution for specific categories of violations; and
7. Any equities of the situation which outweigh the benefit of imposing any penalty or damage assessment.
C. Recovery Of Damages And Costs: In addition to the civil penalty in subsection A of this section, the municipality
may recover:
1. All damages proximately caused by the violator to the municipality, which may include any reasonable expenses
incurred in investigating violations of, and enforcing compliance with, this chapter, or any other actual damages
caused by the violation.
2. The costs of the municipality's maintenance of stormwater facilities when the user of such facilities fails to
maintain them as required by this chapter.
D. Other Remedies: The municipality may bring legal action to enjoin the continuing violation of this chapter, and the
existence of any other remedy, at law or equity, shall be no defense to any such actions.
E. Remedies Cumulative: The remedies set forth in this section shall be cumulative, not exclusive, and it shall not be a
defense to any action, civil or criminal, that one or more of the remedies set forth herein has been sought or
granted. (Ord. 2012-02, 2-21-2012, eff. 3-18-2012)
21.04.110: APPEALS:
A. Appeals To Municipal Governing Body: Pursuant to Utah Code Annotated 17-27a-707, any person aggrieved by the
imposition of a civil penalty or damage assessment as provided by this chapter may appeal said penalty or
damage assessment to the municipality's governing body.
B. Appeals To Be In Writing: The appeal shall be in writing and filed with the municipal recorder or clerk within fifteen
(15) days after the civil penalty and/or damage assessment is served in any manner authorized by law.
C. Public Hearing: Upon receipt of an appeal, the municipality's governing body shall hold a public hearing within thirty
(30) days. Ten (10) days' prior notice of the time, date, and location of said hearing shall be published in a daily
newspaper of general circulation. Ten (10) days' notice by registered mail shall also be provided to the aggrieved
party, such notice to be sent to the address provided by the aggrieved party at the time of appeal. The decision of
the governing body of the municipality shall be final.
D. Appealing Decisions Of The Municipality's Governing Body: Any alleged violator may appeal a decision of the
municipality's governing body pursuant to the provisions of Utah Code Annotated 17-27a-707. (Ord. 2012-02, 2-21-
2012, eff. 3-18-2012)