Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Chapters:
1.01         Code Adoption
1.04         General Provisions
1.08         General Penalty
1.12         Imprisonment
1.16         Ordinances
1.20         City Seal
1.21         Official Name
1.24         Rewards
1.28         City Boundaries
1.32         City Annexation Policies and Procedures

   
Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTION

Sections:
1.01.010     Adoption.
1.01.020     Title--Citation--Reference.
1.01.030     Codification authority.
1.01.040     Ordinances passed prior to adoption of the code.
1.01.050     Reference applies to all amendments.
1.01.060     Title, chapter and section headings.
1.01.070     Reference to specific ordinances.
1.01.080     Effect of code on past actions and obligations.
1.01.090     Effective date.
1.01.100     Constitutionality.

1.01.010 Adoption.
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 10-6-12 of the Utah Code Annotated, there is adopted the “Moab Municipal Code,” as compiled, edited and published by Book Publishing Company, Seattle, Washington. The City of Moab hereby incorporates the State of Utah Land Use and Management Act 10-9a-101 through 10-9a-803. Where the City codes and the state codes conflict, state codes shall apply. (Ord. 06-01 (part), 2006; Ord. 87-02 §1, 1987)

1.01.020 Title--Citation--Reference.
This code shall be known as the “Moab Municipal Code” and it shall be sufficient to refer to said code as the “Moab Municipal Code” in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the “Moab Municipal Code.” Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the “Moab Municipal Code” and such references shall apply to that numbered title, chapter, section and subsection as it appears in the code. (Ord. 87-02 §2, 1987)

1.01.030 Codification authority.
This code consists of all the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of the administrative ordinances of the City of Moab, Utah, codified pursuant to the provisions of Section 10-6-12 of the Utah Code Annotated. (Ord. 87-02 §3, 1987)

1.01.040 Ordinances passed prior to adoption of the code.
The last ordinance included in the initial code is Ordinance 86-02, passed May 6, 1986. The following ordinances, passed subsequent to Ordinance 86-02, but prior to adoption of this code, are adopted and made a part of this code: Ordinance 86-03, Ordinance 86-04, Ordinance 86-05, Ordinance 86-06, Ordinance 87-01 and Ordinance 87-04. (Ord. 87-02 §4, 1987)

1.01.050 Reference applies to all amendments.
Whenever a reference is made to this code as the “Moab Municipal Code” or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the City of Moab, Utah, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. (Ord. 87-02 §5, 1987)

1.01.060 Title, chapter and section headings.
Title, chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intents of the provisions of any title, chapter or section hereof. (Ord. 87-02 §6, 1987)

1.01.070 Reference to specific ordinances.
The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. (Ord. 87-02 §7, 1987)

1.01.080 Effect of code on past actions and obligations.
Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal or amendments hereby of any ordinance or part or portion of any ordinance of the City shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any license, fee, or penalty at said effective date due and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such license, fee, or penalty, or the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 87-02 § 8, 1987)

1.01.090 Effective date.
This code shall become effective on the date the ordinance adopting this code as the “Moab Municipal Code” shall become effective. (Ord. 87-02 § 9, 1987)

1.01.100 Constitutionality.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The Council hereby declares that it would have passed this code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional, and if for any reason this code should be declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be in full force and effect. (Ord. 87-02 § 10, 1987)

Chapter 1.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:
1.04.010     Designation and citation.
1.04.020     Definitions and rules of construction.
1.04.030     Catchlines of sections.
1.04.040     Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances.
1.04.050     Omission of general law not waiver of same.
1.04.060     Effect of ordinance repeal.
1.04.070     Severability.

1.04.010 Designation and citation.
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated “The Code of the City of Moab, Utah,” and may be so cited. Such code may also be cited as the “Moab City Code.” (Prior code § 1-1)

1.04.020 Definitions and rules of construction.
In the construction of this code and of all ordinances of the City, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the City Council or the context clearly requires otherwise:
    1. City. The words “the City” or “this City” shall be construed as if followed by the words “of Moab, Utah.”
    2. City Council. The term “City Council” shall be construed to mean the City Council of the City of Moab, Utah.
    3. Code. The words “the code” or “this code” mean the code of the City of Moab, Utah.
    4. Computation of Time. The time in which any act provided by law is to be done is computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless the last day is a holiday and then it is also excluded.
    5. County. The words “the county” or “this county” mean the county of Grand.
    6. Day. A “day” is the period of time between any midnight and the midnight following.
    7. Daytime, Nighttime. “Daytime” is the period of time between sunrise and sunset. “Nighttime” is the period of time between sunset and sunrise.
    8. Gender. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
    9. In the City. The words “in the City” mean and include all territory over which the City now has, or shall hereafter acquire, jurisdiction for the exercise of its police powers or other regulatory powers.
    10. Jail. The term “jail” means and includes the jail or prison in which prisoners of the City are confined.
    11. Joint Authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers.
    12. Month. The word “month” means a calendar month.
    13. Number. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular.
    14. “Oath” includes an affirmation.
    15. Officers, Departments, etc. “Officers, departments, boards, commissions and employees” referred to in this code mean officers, departments, boards, commissions and employees of the City, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
    16. Official Time. Whenever certain hours are named in this code, they mean Mountain Standard Time or Daylight Saving Time as may be in current use in the City.
    17. Owner. The word “owner,” applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land.
    18. “Person” includes any person, firm, association, organization, partnership, business trust, corporation or company.
    19. “Personal property” includes every species of property, except real property, as defined in this section.
    20. Preceding, Following. The words “preceding” and “following” mean next before and next after, respectively.
    21. “Process” includes a writ or summons issued in the course of judicial proceedings of either a civil or criminal nature.
    22. Property. The word “property” includes real and personal property.
    23. “Real property” includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
    24. Shall, May. “Shall” is mandatory and “may” is permissive.
    25. Signature or Subscription by Mark. “Signature” or “subscription” includes a mark when the signer or subscriber cannot write, such signer’s or subscriber’s name being written near the mark by a witness who writes his own name near the signer’s or subscriber’s name; but, a signature or subscription by mark can be acknowledged or can serve as a signature or subscription to a sworn statement only when two witnesses so sign their own names thereto.
    26. State. The words “the state” or “this state” shall be construed to mean the state of Utah.
    27. Tenant or Occupant. The words “tenant” or “occupant,” applied to a building or land, include any person holding a written or an oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others.
    28. Tenses. The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future includes the present.
    29. Week. A week consists of seven consecutive days.
    30. Writing. “Writing” includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is required or authorized by this code, it shall be made in writing in the English language, unless it is expressly provided otherwise.
    31. Year. The word “year” means a calendar year, except where otherwise provided. (Prior code § 1-2)

1.04.030 Catchlines of sections.
The catchlines of the several sections of this code, immediately preceding each section, are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such section, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (Prior code § 1-3)

1.04.040 Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances.
The provisions appearing in this code, so far as they are in substance the same as those of ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. (Prior code § 1-4)

1.04.050 Omission of general law not waiver of same.
The omission to specify or enumerate in this code those provisions of the general law applicable to all cities shall not be construed as a waiver of the benefits of any such provisions. (Prior code § 1-15)

1.04.060 Effect of ordinance repeal.
A. The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect.
B. The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for any offense committed under the ordinance repealed. (Prior code § 1-5)

1.04.070 Severability.
It is declared to be the intention of the City Council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and section of this code. (Prior code § 1-6)

Chapter 1.08 GENERAL PENALTY

Sections:
1.08.010     Designated-Continuing violations.
1.08.020     Liability of employers and agents.
1.08.030     Class B misdemeanor.
1.08.040     Procedure for charges requiring state enforcement.

1.08.010 Designated-Continuing violations.
A. Whenever in this code or in any other ordinance of the City or in any rule, regulation or order promulgated or issued pursuant thereto any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or a misdemeanor, when no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this code or any other ordinance of the City or any such rule, regulation or order shall be punished by fine not more than one thousand dollars or by imprisonment for a period not longer than six months or both such fine and imprisonment.
B. Every day any violation of this code or any other ordinance of the City or rule, regulation or order promulgated or issued pursuant thereto shall continue, shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 86-06 § 1, 1986: prior code § 1-7)

1.08.020 Liability of employers and agents.
When the provisions of this code or any other ordinance of the City prohibit the commission or omission of an act, not only the person actually doing the prohibited thing, or omitting the directed act, but also the employer and all other persons concerned or aiding or abetting therein shall be guilty of the offense described and liable to the penalty prescribed for the offense. (Prior code § 1-8)

1.08.030 Class B misdemeanor.
All violations of the City code are classified as Class B misdemeanors, punishable by a fine not to exceed the sum of one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 89-10, 1989: Ord. 86-06 § 2, 1986: Ord. 85-04, 1985)

1.08.040 Procedure for charges requiring state enforcement.
Section 76-1-101 et seq., Utah Code Annotated, 1953 as amended, excluding all sections covering charges municipalities are unable to prosecute, and also Section 57-37a-5, Utah Code Annotated, 1953 as amended, is adopted and is included in the Moab Municipal Code. (Ord. 92-06, 1992)

Chapter 1.12 IMPRISONMENT

Sections:
1.12.010     Violators to be imprisoned in jail.
1.12.020     Prisoners required to labor.

1.12.010 Violators to be imprisoned in jail.
Any person sentenced to imprisonment for the violation of this code or any other ordinance of the City shall be committed to the jail for incarceration therein. (Prior code § 1-9)

1.12.020 Prisoners required to labor.
Whenever any person is sentenced to imprisonment for violation of this code or any other ordinance of the City, and such person is required by the judgment of the court to labor, such labor shall be performed under the direction of the Chief of Police. (Prior code § 1-10)

Chapter 1.16 ORDINANCES

Sections:
1.16.010     Effective date-Adoption of technical codes by reference.

1.16.010 Effective date-Adoption of technical codes by reference.
A. All ordinances before taking effect shall be deposited in the office of the City Recorder and published at least once in some newspaper published within the City, or if there is no newspaper published therein, then by posting in three public places therein; provided, that whenever a revision is made and the revised ordinances are published by authority of the City Council no further publication shall be deemed necessary, and that ordinances establishing rules and regulations for the construction of buildings, the installation of plumbing, electric wiring or other related or similar work, and rules and regulations controlling traffic and relating to the prevention of fires within the City where such rules and regulations have been printed as a code in book form, may be adopted and shall take effect without further publication or posting thereof, if reference is made to such code, and not less than three copies of such code shall have been filed for use and examination by the public in the office of the City Recorder prior to the adoption of such ordinance by the City Council. Ordinances shall not go into effect at the time of enactment but on the twentieth day after their publication or posting, nor until the thirtieth day after publication or posting, or such thirtieth day after such final passage, or whichever of such days is the most remote from the final passage of such ordinance. Ordinances, if so provided therein, may take effect at a later date. Measures necessary for the immediate preservation of the peace, health or safety of the City may, if so provided in the ordinance, take effect at an earlier date.
B. The City Recorder shall record all resolutions and ordinances in a book kept for that purpose, together with the affidavit of publication by the publisher or his agent, or, if posted, with the certificates of the due posting thereof; and such book, or a certified copy of the ordinances and affidavit of publication or posting, under the seal of the City, shall be received as evidence in all courts and places without further proof, or if printed in book or pamphlet form by authority of the City Council they shall be so received. (Prior code § 1-16)

Chapter 1.20 CITY SEAL

Sections:
1.20.010     Description.

1.20.010 Description.
The official and corporate seal of the City shall be one and one-half inches in diameter and the following device:
Horizontally through the center, the word “Seal,” encircling the word “Seal” and near the outer edge of the seal, commencing at the left-hand portion, the words “City of Moab, State of Utah.” (Prior code § 1-14)

Chapter 1.21 OFFICIAL NAME

Sections:
1.21.010     Purpose and scope.
1.21.020     Repeal of inconsistent provisions.

1.21.010 Purpose and scope.
The official name of the City shall be the “City of Moab.” the City shall be authorized to transact business in the official name; to sue and be sued; to maintain financial accounts; borrow moneys; hold property; enter into contracts; and otherwise engage in all lawful business under the official name. All official documents, letterheads, deeds, publications, and city vehicles and equipment, and similar city property shall bear the official name. (Ord. 98-07 (part), 1998)

1.21.020 Repeal of inconsistent provisions.
The enactment of this chapter shall not be construed to repeal or invalidate prior acts under any other corporate name. To the extent public documents or provisions of this code reference other public names they shall be construed to incorporate the official name by this reference. (Ord. 98-07 (part), 1998)

Chapter 1.24 REWARDS

Sections:
1.24.010     Rewards offered by city.

1.24.010 Rewards offered by city.
The Mayor may offer, when necessary, rewards for the arrest or arrest and conviction of offenders against this code or any other ordinances of the City in any sum not exceeding one hundred dollars. (Prior code § 1-12)

Chapter 1.28 CITY BOUNDARIES

Sections:
1.28.010     Map of city to be recorded.

1.28.010 Map of city to be recorded.
It shall be the duty of the Mayor to have recorded in the Recorder’s office of the county a plat or map describing the correct boundaries of the City. (Prior code § 1-13)

Chapter 1.32 CITY ANNEXATION POLICIES AND PROCEDURES

Sections:
1.32.010     Annexation petition.
1.32.020     Annexation procedure.
1.32.030     Annexation policy plan.

1.32.010 Annexation petition.
A. An annexation petition is required by Utah State Code to initiate annexation of properties into the City of Moab, except when the parcel to be annexed is an island or peninsula contiguous to the City; and
    1. Has a majority of residential or commercial development;
    2. Requires delivery of municipal services; and,
    3. Has been provided most or all municipal services for more than one year.
B. Where applicable, annexation petitions are to be filed with the City Recorder and contain:
    1. Signatures of a majority of the private real property owners of the area proposed for annexation;
    2. Signatures of the private real property owners who account for one-third value of all private property within that same area;
    3. Be accompanied by an accurate and recordable map that is prepared and signed by a licensed surveyor; and,
    4. Signatories who are designated as sponsors of the petition for future contact.
C. If practicable and feasible, boundaries of the area proposed for annexation should be drawn:
    1. Along existing jurisdictional boundaries;
    2. To eliminate islands and peninsulas of territory not receiving services;
    3. To promote the efficient delivery of services; and,
    4. To encourage the equitable distribution of community resources and obligations. (Ord. 03-02 (part), 2003)

1.32.020 Annexation procedure.
A. The City Recorder, upon receiving a petition for annexation, shall:
    1. Submit the petition to the City Council, which shall accept the petition for further consideration or reject the petition fourteen days.
    2. If the petition is rejected by the City notification shall be sent to the county clerk and to the sponsors of the petition within five days of the denial.
    3. If accepted by the City Council, the petition shall be reviewed by the City Recorder for completeness and compliance with applicable law, which review and certification shall be completed within thirty days of acceptance. If the petition complies, the City Recorder shall certify the petition and provide notice of same to the City Council.
    4. Within ten days of receipt notice of certification by the City Council, notification of the proposed annexation shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation for three consecutive weeks.
    5. Within twenty days of receipt of notice of certification by the City Council, notification of said annexation shall be sent to all affected entities listed in 1.32.030.H.
B. Upon certification by the City Recorder the petition or application may be submitted to the Planning Commission for analysis and review according to the annexation policy plan and for recommendations with respect to the appropriate zoning.
C. Protests to the proposed annexation shall be:
    1. Filed no later than thirty days after receipt by the City Council of certification from the City Recorder.
    2. Protests may be filed by the legislative bodies of affected entities listed in 1.32.030.H.
    3. If protests are filed, the City Council may deny the annexation at the next meeting, or it may await the decision by the boundary commission.
    4. If no protests are filed, the City Council may approve the annexation at a public hearing held after providing not less than seven days advance notice.
    5. The boundary commission shall hear protests within thirty days of the deadline for filling said protests.
    6. Within thirty days of initiating hearings on protests filed, the boundary commission shall render a written decision.
    7. The City Council may deny or grant annexation after receiving the decision of the boundary commission approving the annexation. In the event of denial of the annexation by the boundary commission the City Council shall deny the annexation. (Ord. 03-02 (part), 2003)

1.32.030 Annexation policy plan.
A. Pursuant to U.C.A. 10-2-401.5, the City hereby adopts the following annexation policy declaration.
    1. Sound urban development is essential to the continued economic development of this state;
    2. Municipalities are created to provide urban governmental services essential for sound urban development and for the protection of public health, safety and welfare in residential, commercial and industrial areas, and in areas undergoing development;
    3. Municipal boundaries should be extended, in accordance with specific standards, to include areas where a high quality of urban governmental services is needed and can be provided for the protection of public health, safety and welfare and to avoid the inequities of double taxation and the proliferation of special service districts;
    4. Areas annexed to municipalities in accordance with appropriate standards should receive the services provided by the annexing municipality as soon as possible following the annexation;
    5. Areas annexed to municipalities should include all of the urbanized unincorporated areas contiguous to municipalities, securing to residents within the areas a voice in the selection of their government;
    6. Decisions with respect to municipal boundaries and urban development need to be made with adequate consideration of the effect of the proposed actions on adjacent areas and on the interests of other government entities, on the need for and cost of local government services, and the ability to deliver the services under the proposed actions and on factors related to population growth and density and the geography of the area; and
B. Map showing the anticipated future extent of the City of Moab’s boundaries and areas that are more readily available for service.
    1. This portion of the City of Moab’s Master Annexation Policy declaration describes the geographic areas considered most favorable for future city expansion.
    2. The map (which is on file at the City clerk’s office) visually displays the existing boundaries of the City of Moab in a green line and the future boundaries by a black line. The future boundaries include the following description:
    General Plan annexation area boundary descriptionThe boundary encompasses:
    Portions of Sections 25, 26, 27, 34 and all of Sections 35 and 36 in Township 25 South, Range 21 East, Salt Lake Base & Meridian;
    Portions of Section 31 in Township 25 South, Range 22 East, Salt Lake Base & Meridian;
    All of Sections 1, 2 and 12 together with portions of Sections 11 in Township 26 South, Range 21 East, Salt Lake Base & Meridian;
    All of Sections 6, 7 and 18, together with portions of Sections 5, 8, and 17 in Township 26 South, Range 22 East, Salt Lake Base & Meridian, and is more particularly described as:
    Beginning at the SW Corner of Section 18, T 26 S, R 22 E, SLBM;
    Thence northerly to the NW Corner of said Section 18;
    Thence westerly to the SW Corner of Section 12, T 26 S, R 21 E, SLBM;
    Thence northerly to the SE Corner of Government Lot 1, Section 11, T 26 S, R 21 E, SLBM;
    Thence westerly to the NE corner of Section 10, T 26 S, R 21 E, SLBM;
    Thence northerly to the SW Corner of Section 2, T 26 S, R 21 E, SLBM;
    Thence northerly to the NW Corner of said Section 2;
    Thence westerly to the SW Corner of the SE1/4SW1/4 of Section 34, T 25 S, R 21 E, SLBM;
    Thence northerly to the NW Corner of Government Lot 10, Section 27, T 25 S, R 21 E, SLBM;
    Thence easterly to the NE Corner of Government Lot 8, Section 26, T 25 S, R 21 E, SLBM;
    Thence southerly to the SE Corner of said Government Lot 8;
    Thence easterly to a point on the West Section Line of said Section 26;
    Thence southerly to the NE Corner of the SE1/4SE1/4 of said Section 26;
    Thence easterly to the NE Corner of Government Lot 6, Section 25, T 25 S, R 21 E, SLBM;
    Thence southerly to the NW Corner of Government Lot 3, Section 31, T 25 S, R 21 E, SLBM;
    Thence easterly to the NE Corner of the SE1/4NW1/4 of said Section 31;
    Thence southerly to the SE Corner of Government Lot 9, said Section 31;
    Thence easterly to the NE Corner of Section 6, T 26 S, R 22 E, SLBM;
    Thence easterly to the NE Corner of Government Lot 4, Section 5, T 26 S, R 22 E, SLBM;
    Thence southerly to the SE Corner of the SW1/4SW1/4 of said Section 5;
    Thence southerly to the SE Corner of the SW1/4SW1/4 of Section 8, T 26 S, R 22 E, SLBM;
    Thence southerly to the SE Corner of Government Lot 35, Section 17, T 26 S, R 22 E, SLBM;
    Thence westerly to the SE Corner of Section 18, T 26 S, R 22 E, SLBM;
    Thence westerly to the SW Corner of said Section 18, said point being the POINT OF BEGINNING.
C. Criteria as required by state law, together with additional criteria and policies for city acceptance of an annexation.
    1. The City endorses the intent of the Utah Annexation Act, U.C.A. 10-2-401, et seq., as amended. Criteria for annexation of property to the City are as follows:
        a. The property must be contiguous to the boundaries of the City.
        b. The property must lie within the area projected for the City municipal expansion.
        c. The property must not be included within the boundaries of another incorporated municipality.
        d. The annexation must not create unincorporated islands within the boundaries of the City.
        e. The property proposed to be annexed hereunder will not be annexed for the sole purpose of acquiring municipal revenue or for retarding the capacity of any other municipality to annex into the same or related area.
    2. The City will evaluate the following for each annexation:
        a. Compliance with all requirements of appropriate state code provisions.
        b. The current and potential population of the area, and the current residential densities.
        c. Land uses proposed in addition to those presently existing.
        d. The assessed valuation of the current properties or proposed uses.
        e. The potential demand for various municipal services, especially those requiring capital improvements.
        f. Recommendations of other local government jurisdictions regarding the proposal and potential impact of the annexation.
        g. How the proposed area, and/or its potential land uses would contribute to the achievement of the goals and policies of the City.
        h. Identification of any special districts or county departments that are currently providing services. If the proposed area is receiving services that are to be assumed by the City, a statement should be included indicating that steps can be taken to assure an effective transition in the delivery of services. A timetable for extending services should be included if the City is unable to provide services immediately. If the proposed area is receiving services that are not going to be assumed by the City a statement to that effect will be included in the annexation agreement.
        i. If an application for annexation includes a specific proposal for urban development, an understanding as to the provision of improvements should be concluded between the City and the applicant.
        j. New annexations should create areas in which services can be provided efficiently. The annexation should not create geographically isolated areas, areas for which the provision of services would be costly or difficult, or an area in which surface water runoff would create multi-jurisdictional problems.
        k. The tax consequences for affected entities should be addressed.
    3. In order to facilitate orderly growth, the following city policies will apply to every annexation proposal. However, compliance with any policy not expressly required by state law is not mandatory, and failure to comply with any policy not expressly required by state law shall in no way affect or jeopardize an annexation petition that otherwise meets the standards established in the Utah Code.
        a. The City’s policy is to consider annexation only in those areas where the City has the potential to provide urban services (either directly or through interlocal cooperative agreement). These areas may include locations served or to be served by city utilities, electrical service, police and fire protection facilities, etc.
        b. The City declares its interest in those areas identified in this policy declaration and other areas lying within one-half mile of the City’s boundary. Any urban development as defined by state law proposed within this specified area is subject to review and approval of the City as provided in U.C.A. 10-2-418, as amended.
        c. Due to the extraterritorial powers granted as part of the Utah Boundary Commission Act, the City may exercise its initiative to prepare and adopt a General Plan for future development in those extraterritorial areas of interest for future annexation, as indicated in this policy declaration. This General Plan will define proposed land uses, nature, and density of development desired by the City in each particular area. Once this ordinance is adopted, any proposed development in an area to be annexed must conform to the General Plan, notwithstanding said plan may be amended from time to time as deemed necessary and appropriate.
        d. It is the policy of the City to require new development in annexed areas to comply with all city standards and regulatory laws. Proposed actions to be taken to overcome deficiencies should be identified and costs estimated.
        e. To avoid creation of islands and peninsulas, unincorporated territory and publicly-owned land such as roadways, schools, parks or recreational land, may be annexed as part of other logical annexations.
        f. In order to facilitate orderly growth and development in the City, the Planning Commission may review a proposed annexation and make recommendations to the City Council concerning the parcel to be annexed, the effect on city development, and the recommended zoning district designation for the proposed annexed area. Review by the Planning Commission is not a requirement for annexation, and approval from the Planning Commission is not necessary for annexation.
        g. The City Council shall designate the zoning for the territory being annexed in the ordinance annexing the territory. The zoning designations must be consistent with the General Plan. The City Council shall not be bound by the zoning designations for the territory prior to annexation. Nothing in this section shall be construed as allowing the City Council to change zoning designations in areas that are already within the municipal boundaries, without following the procedures for zoning amendments found in the City code.
        h. Landowners petitioning for annexation must file an application and follow the procedures for annexation required by state law and the procedures specified by the City.
        i. The City may require an annexation fee reasonable to the cost incurred as part of the annexation process.
        j. From time to time, the City may amend this master annexation policy declaration. This policy declaration, including maps, may be amended by the City Council after at least fourteen days’ notice and public hearing. Annexation policy declarations for individual annexations may be considered amendments to this master annexation policy declaration and likewise require adequate notice and public hearing as herein specified.
D. The character of the community.
    1. The areas anticipated for future annexation contain a wide variety of land uses. There is vacant land, as well as residentially developed property, and property developed and being developed for commercial uses.
    2. The City was incorporated in December 20, 1902 and has entertained numerous proposals for annexation since that time. Recent interest in annexation has been shown by many surrounding property owners. This policy declaration will help to define those areas that the City will consider in a favorable manner.
E. The need for municipal services in developing unincorporated areas.
    1. The City recognizes that municipal services to developed areas which may be annexed should, to the greatest extent possible, be provided by the City. It may, however negotiate service agreements in annexing areas.
    2. For developing unincorporated areas to be annexed to the City, general government services and public safety service will be provided by the City as the area is annexed and developed. Where feasible and in the public interest to the citizens of the City, public utility services will be provided by the City or through the appropriate utility companies or improvement districts.
    3. Subsequent policy declarations on individual parcels will address provision of utility service to that particular area. Determination of how utility service will be provided to developing areas proposed for annexation will be developed following discussion with the public works department and other appropriate utility officials or entities.
F. Financing and time frame for the extension of municipal services.
    1. Those areas identified in this master policy declaration as being favorable for annexation are located near to the City. A basic network of collector roads presently exists in many of these areas and the City can readily extend such services as police protection, street maintenance, and general government services. Unless otherwise specified, city services for police and street maintenance will begin in newly annexed areas immediately following the effective date of annexation.
    2. Services for newly annexed areas will be provided for out of the general and/or enterprise funds. However, it is the City’s policy that all new development in areas requiring service bears the burden of providing necessary facilities. If and when the property sought to be annexed is developed, the developer will have to construct and install appropriate municipal service facilities such as streets, curb, gutter, sidewalk, water and sewer lines, as provided by city code. Construction of water and/or sewer line extensions involving multiple properties will be phased to coincide with the financial readiness of said property owners and the City.
    3. If services in an annexed area are substandard, then the financing of improvements to bring the area up to city standards may be necessary through such means as a special improvement district. The City may decline to annex areas that contain significant substandard improvements. The site annexation policy declaration, submitted with individual annexations, will identify a schedule for necessary improvements to the area.
    4. Unless otherwise agreed by the City in writing, the annexation of real property into the municipal, limits shall not obligate the City to construct or install utilities or other public infrastructure. The decision to extend or install such improvements shall be vested solely in the discretion of the City Council.
G. The estimate of tax consequences. The estimate of tax consequences to residents in both new and old territory of the City resulting from the proposed future annexations cannot be accurately assessed at this time. As each annexation proposal occurs, the City will review the tax consequences of that annexation.
H. Affected entities. The following is a list of potentially-affected entities, to which copies of the annexation policy declaration has been supplied prior to its adoption. In addition, as annexation proposals occur, the entities affected by the proposed annexation will be notified.Grand County
125 East Center
Moab, Utah 84532
Grand County School District
264 South 400 East
Moab, Utah 84532
Moab Fire Department
45 South 100 East
Moab, Utah 84532
Grand Water & Sewer Agency
3025 East Spanish Trail
Moab, Utah 84532
259-8121
Grand County Hospital Service District
245 West Williams Way
Moab, Utah 84532
Health Department of Southeastern Utah
P.O. Box 800
Price, Utah
Cemetery District
P.O. Box 64
Moab, Utah 84532
Moab Mosquito Abatement District
P.O. Box 142
Moab, Utah 84532
Grand County Library Board
25 South 100 East
Moab, Utah 84532
Solid Waste District
P.O. Office Box 980
Moab, Utah 84532
Recreation District
P.O. Box 715
Moab, Utah 84532
Grand County Boundary Commission
125 East Center
Moab, Utah 84532
(Ord. 08-23, 2008; Ord. 03-02 (part), 2003)

Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL

Chapters:
2.01         Ethics for City Employees and Officials
2.04         City Council
2.08         Mayor
2.10         City Manager
2.12         Duties of City Recorder
2.14         Finance Director
2.16         City Treasurer
2.20         Reserved
2.24         City Attorney
2.28         Purchasing Procedures
2.32         Reserved
2.36         Reserved
2.40         Reserved
2.44         Salaries
2.48         Elections
2.49         Campaign Finance Disclosure
2.52         Planning Commission
2.56         Police Department
2.60         Personnel Rules
2.61         Reserved
2.62         Employee Appeals Board
2.64         Records Access and Management Program
2.68         Reserved
2.72         Reserved
2.76         Relocation Assistance Plan
2.80         Medical Reimbursement Policy
2.84         Reserved
2.88         Reserved
2.90         Moab Water Conservation and Drought Management Advisory Board

Chapter 2.01 ETHICS FOR CITY EMPLOYEES AND OFFICIALS

Sections:
2.01.010     Definitions.
2.01.020     Provisions supplemental to state law.
2.01.030     Employee and official ethics.
2.01.040     Remedies.

2.01.010 Definitions.
The following definitions apply to this chapter:
A. “Employee” means a person who is not an elected officer of the City of Moab and who performs services for the City on a full or part time basis in exchange for wages.
B. “Entity” means a sole proprietorship, partnership, association, joint venture, corporation, trust, limited liability company, or similar business entity.
C. “Interest” means a pecuniary, monetary, or other material benefit which may accrue to a city official or employee as a result of any business transaction, contract, or official act by the City. For purposes of this chapter, an official or employee of the City shall be deemed to have an interest in the affairs of:
    1. A spouse, sibling, child (whether natural or adoptive and regardless of age), parent/grandparent, aunt/uncle, niece/nephew, or first cousin;
    2. A household member, which is defined to be an unrelated adult living with the official or employee in the same domicile;
    3. A business entity in which the official or employee is an officer, director, manager, or employee; or
    4. A business entity in which the official or employee holds legal or beneficial ownership in excess of ten percent of the total stock or total beneficial ownership.
D. “Official” means the Mayor, the members of the City Council, and the appointed members of all other city boards or commissions. (Ord. 18-03 (part), 2018)

2.01.020 Provisions supplemental to state law.
This provisions of this chapter are supplemental, and in addition to, the provisions of the Utah Municipal Officers’ and Employees’ Ethics Act, Section 10-3-1301, et seq., Utah Code Annotated 1953. (Ord. 18-03 (part), 2018)

2.01.030 Employee and official ethics.
A. No Oversight of Related Persons. An employee or official of the City shall not supervise or exercise oversight with respect to any city contract where the employee or official has an interest, as defined by this chapter, in the party performing the contract.
B. Disclosure as to Related Businesses--Disqualification. Every employee or official of the City who has an interest, as defined by this chapter, in a related person, business, or entity shall publicly disclose to the City, in writing and on forms maintained by the City, the nature of that interest immediately prior to any official action or discussion with respect to that related person, business, or entity. For purposes of this subsection, the disclosure is required where the employee or official has an interest in a person, business, or entity or who:
    1. Maintains or anticipates entering into a contract with the City;
    2. Seeks city approval of a license, permit, land use application, or similar city decision; or
    3. May be subject to regulatory, enforcement, or legal action by the City.
    4. The employee or official having an interest as described in this subsection shall not vote or otherwise participate in any decision or official action pertaining to that related person, business, or entity, and the disclosure shall be noted in the minutes of the decision making body.
C. Annual Disclosures. Employees and officials shall disclose in writing, at least annually, their interest in all entities doing business with the City. Written disclosures shall be updated promptly when there is any change in the employee or official’s interest in the related entity.
D. No Disclosure of Confidential Information Pertaining to City Business. No city employee or official, with respect to any contract, transaction, or decision which is or may be the subject of an official act of the City shall, without proper legal authorization, disclose private, controlled, or protected information concerning the transaction, any actions of the City, or otherwise use such information to benefit the personal or economic interest of the employee or official, or others.
    1. The terms “private,” “controlled,” or “protected” shall have the same meanings as defined in the Utah Government Records Access and Management Act (GRAMA), Section 63G-2-103, Utah Code Annotated 1953.
E. Retaliation Prohibited. Employees who act in good faith to report or disclose to the City any misconduct or actions undertaken in violation of this chapter shall not be subjected to any adverse employment action for doing so. Nothing in this provision shall be deemed to alter any other employment policies or procedures.
F. Employees and Officials Prohibited from Using Position to Secure Special Privileges for Related Parties. No employee or official shall use his or her office or position for the purpose of securing special privileges or pecuniary benefits for the employee or official, or for entities or persons in which that employee has an interest, as defined by this chapter.
G. Disclosure of Persons and Businesses Doing Business with the City. The identity of persons or entities doing business or maintaining contracts with the City is public information which is subject to disclosure pursuant to requests under the Government Records Access and Management Act. (Ord. 18-03 (part), 2018)

2.01.040 Remedies.
The sole remedies for violations of this chapter are as follows:
A. A contract, transaction, or decision which is approved in violation of this chapter is voidable, in whole or in part, in the discretion of the City Council or applicable decision making body.
B. An employee who knowingly violates this chapter may face disciplinary action, subject to applicable personnel policies, up to and including termination.
C. An official who knowingly violates this chapter may be subject to removal from office in the manner otherwise provided by law.
D. Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted as conferring a private cause of action upon any person who may seek to set aside a particular contract, transaction, or decision. (Ord. 18-03 (part), 2018)

Chapter 2.04 CITY COUNCIL

Sections:
2.04.010     Oath required.
2.04.015     Role of the City Council.
2.04.020     Meetings--Time and place.
2.04.040     Meetings--Procedure generally.
2.04.050     Meetings--Reconsideration of votes.
2.04.060     Meetings--Deferral of action on reports.
2.04.070     Meetings--Special meetings.
2.04.080     Vacancies.
2.04.090     Reinvestment agency authority.
2.04.100     Meetings – Electronic participation.

2.04.010 Oath required.
Each member of the City Council, before assuming the duties of his office, shall take and subscribe the constitutional oath of office. (Ord. 18-04 (part), 2018: prior code § 2-7)

2.04.015 Role of the City Council.
The City operates under the form of government as identified under U.C.A. Section 10-3b-301. The City Council shall review and approve all resolutions and ordinances; appropriate funds and adopt the annual budget and any amendments; set all mill levies or other taxes; review municipal administration as set out herein; and perform all other duties that may be required of it by law. With appointment from the Mayor and with the consent of the Council, the Council shall designate a person to serve as the Mayor Pro Tempore. The Mayor Pro Tempore shall carry out all duties and responsibilities of the Mayor when the Mayor is absent or unable to perform same. Any executive or administrative power held previously by the City Council is now delegated to the City Manager. (Ord. 18-04 (part), 2018: Ord. 93-09 § 5, 1993. Formerly 2.10.050)

2.04.020 Meetings--Time and place.
A. The stated meetings of the City Council shall be held at a place designated by the City Council on the second and fourth Tuesday of each month; provided, that when any meeting occurs on a general holiday, the meeting shall be held on the next succeeding day. The Council may hold other or special meetings at such times it determines to be convenient.
B. All meetings may be adjourned from time to time as business may require. The hour of regular meetings shall be seven p.m.
C. All regular City Council meetings may be preceded by a pre-meeting workshop for the purpose of allowing the Council to receive staff reports and recommendations on regular meeting agenda items. The workshop shall commence one-half hour before the meeting, or such longer period of time as the Council shall by notice designate.
D. All pre-meeting workshops shall be open to the public, but shall not be regarded as “public hearings” for the purposes of allowing testimony or comment from the public.
E. Pre-meeting workshops shall be conducted in an informal manner in the discretion of the governing body. Final action on any ordinance, resolution, or agenda item reviewed at a pre-meeting workshop shall be reserved for the regular meeting. (Ord. 18-04 (part), 2018: Ord. 98-04 § 1 (part), 1998; Ord. 96-08, 1996: prior code § 2-8)

2.04.040 Meetings--Procedure generally.
The City Council shall sit with unlocked doors and shall keep minutes of its own proceedings. The votes for or against shall be taken upon the passage of all ordinances, all propositions to create any liability against the City, and in all other cases at the request of any member, which shall be entered upon the minutes of its proceedings. Unless otherwise provided for by law, the concurrence of a majority of the Council shall be necessary for the passage of any such ordinance or proposition. A majority of the Council shall constitute a quorum to transact council business. (Ord. 18-04 (part), 2018: prior code § 2-10)

2.04.050 Meetings--Reconsideration of votes.
No vote of the City Council shall be reconsidered or rescinded at a special meeting, unless at such special meeting there are present as large a number of city Councilmembers as were present when such vote was taken. (Ord. 18-04 (part), 2018: prior code § 2-11)

2.04.060 Meetings--Deferral of action on reports.
Upon request of any two members of the City Council, action on any report of a committee of the City Council shall be deferred to a future meeting of the City Council. (Ord. 18-04 (part), 2018: prior code § 2-12)

2.04.070 Meetings--Special meetings.
The Mayor or any two members of the City Council may call a special meeting of the City Council by giving a notice thereof to each of the members of the City Council. Notice may be served personally, left at their domicile, or via email. Email is considered the preferred manner of providing notice. (Ord. 18-04 (part), 2018: prior code § 2-13)

2.04.080 Vacancies.
If any vacancy shall occur in the office of city Councilmember by death, resignation, removal or otherwise, such vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term by a vote of the City Council. Should the City Council fail for forty-five days to fill the vacancy in the City Council, the City Recorder shall sit as a member of the City Council for the purpose of choosing some person to fill such vacancy. (Ord. 18-04 (part), 2018: prior code § 2-14)

2.04.090 Reinvestment agency authority.
Pursuant to Section 17C-1-102 et seq. of the Utah Code Annotated, as amended, the Community Reinvestment Agency Act, a community reinvestment agency of the City is hereby created, and the City Council is designated as the governing body. The Council shall have the power to transact business and exercise all of the powers of such agency as otherwise provided by law. (Ord. 18-04 (part), 2018: Ord. 88-06, 1988)

2.04.100 Meetings – Electronic participation.
A. Electronic Participation Authorized. Moab City Councilmembers, the Mayor, and/or City staff may participate in an electronic meeting of the City Council as provided in this section. All actions undertaken at an electronic meeting held in compliance with this section are valid and binding, to the same extent as if all participants had been physically present at the anchor location. A request to participate by electronic means shall be made to the City Manager not less than forty-eight hours prior to the meeting in question and may be denied if this City does not have the technical capability to connect electronically to the remote location.
B. Definitions. The following definitions apply to this section:
    1. “Anchor location” means the Moab City Council Chambers, or any other physical location where a meeting is held and from which the electronic meeting originates.
    2. “Electronic meeting” means a meeting of the City Council convened or conducted where a Councilmember, the Mayor, or City staff members participate via real-time audio or video telecommunication means.
    3. “Remote location” means any place, other than the anchor location, where a Councilmember, the Mayor, or City staff may be located, and where meeting participants can establish electronic access to the meeting.
C. Quorum for Electronic Meetings. 
    1. As otherwise defined in this chapter, a majority of the City Council constitutes a quorum for the transaction of business. A quorum must be present at the anchor location to convene an electronic meeting of the City Council.
    2. Except as noted in subsection (D) of this section, Councilmembers participating in an electronic meeting from a remote location shall be considered present and are authorized to vote and otherwise participate in the meeting as if they were at the anchor location.
    3. In the event of an equipment failure, or other similar event which causes an interruption of communication with the remote location, the Council has discretion to either: (a) act on the matters up for consideration on its agenda; or (b) continue the matter to a subsequent meeting.
D. General Procedures. 
    1. Notice of any electronic meeting of the Council shall be given in the same manner as provided for all other City Council meetings. Meeting procedures for electronic meetings of the Council shall be the same as for nonelectronic meetings, except as noted below.
    2. A speakerphone, or similar amplifying electronic device, shall be connected in such a manner that comments made by the persons participating electronically will be broadcast at the anchor location. The presiding officer shall allow remote participants to participate in the discussion to the same extent as if they were present at the anchor location.
    3. Matters called to a vote in an electronic meeting shall be via roll-call vote, and Councilmembers or the Mayor (if applicable) participating from a remote location must state their name and their vote audibly when asked by the Recorder.
    4. Minutes of all meetings shall record the presence of members participating through electronic means. The roll call for members present will be taken verbally and recorded.
    5. City Councilmembers shall not participate in a closed session of the City Council via electronic means.
    6. All electronic meetings of the City Council shall be chaired by a person physically present at the anchor location. (Ord. 19-16, 2019)

Chapter 2.08 MAYOR

Sections:
2.08.010     Oath required.
2.08.015     Role of the Mayor.
2.08.020     Office to be vacant upon removal from city.
2.08.030     Vacancy--Filling.

2.08.010 Oath required.
The Mayor, before assuming the duties of his office, shall take and subscribe the constitutional oath of office. (Ord. 18-04 (part), 2018: prior code § 2-16)

2.08.015 Role of the Mayor.
The powers and duties of the Mayor are as follows:
A. The Mayor is the Chief ceremonial officer of the City and the presiding officer at all meetings of the City Council.
B. The Mayor is a nonvoting member of the Council, but may vote where there is a tie vote of the other Councilmembers, or as otherwise provided by law.
C. The Mayor, as a member of the Council, may participate in all deliberations of the Council in setting policy for the City.
D. The Mayor shall retain any legislative or quasi-judicial powers vested by law.
E. The Mayor shall appoint, with the advice and consent of the Council, persons to fill any vacancies on commissions, boards, or committees of the City.
F. The Mayor is the primary contact for the City Manager, and provides day to day oversight and supervision of the City Manager. The Mayor, in consultation with the other Councilmembers, is responsible for facilitating the employee evaluation process for the City Manager.
G. Any other executive or administrative power held previously by the Mayor under prior law is delegated to the City Manager. (Ord. 18-04 (part), 2018: Ord. 93-09 § 6, 1993. Formerly 2.10.060)

2.08.020 Office to be vacant upon removal from city.
If at any time during his/her term of office the Mayor shall no longer make his/her primary residence within the City, the office shall thereby become vacant. (Ord. 18-04 (part), 2018: prior code § 2-17)

2.08.030 Vacancy--Filling.
Whenever a vacancy shall occur in the office of Mayor, the City Council shall appoint a Mayor, who shall possess all the rights and powers of Mayor until the next municipal election, and until his/her successor is elected and qualified. (Ord. 18-04 (part), 2018: prior code § 2-18)

Chapter 2.10 CITY MANAGER

Sections:
2.10.010     Office created.
2.10.020     Appointment.
2.10.030     Term.
2.10.040     Powers and duties.
2.10.070     Salary.

2.10.010 Office created.
As authorized by U.C.A. Section 10-3b-303 there is created the office of City Manager of Moab, Utah. (Ord. 18-04 (part), 2018: Ord. 93-09 § 1, 1993)

2.10.020 Appointment.
The appointment of a person to be known as City Manager shall be by the City Council, including the Mayor. Once approved by the City Council, the Mayor shall sign the contract entered into with the City Manager on behalf of the City. (Ord. 18-04 (part), 2018: Ord. 93-09 § 2, 1993)

2.10.030 Term.
The City Manager shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council, except that the Council shall employ the manager for a term not to exceed three years. The term of employment may be renewed at any time. Any person serving as City Manager may be removed with or without cause by a majority vote of the City Council. (Ord. 18-04 (part), 2018: Ord. 93-09 § 3, 1993)

2.10.040 Powers and duties.
The powers, duties, and obligations of the City Manager are as follows:
A. The administrative powers, authority, and duties are vested in the City Manager.
B. The City Manager shall be the Chief Administrative Officer of the City and shall be responsible to the City Council for the administration of all city affairs placed in his or her charge. All city employees, contractors, or appointees (excluding persons appointed to city boards or commissions) shall be under the supervision and direction of the City Manager.
C. Subject to the terms of applicable contracts or personnel policies, the City Manager shall hire and, when he/she deems it necessary, suspend or remove all city employees and contractors. The City Manager has discretion to delegate personnel authority to any subordinate employee or department head with respect to employees under that person’s direct supervision.
D. The City Manager shall direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices and agencies of the City, except as otherwise provided by law.
E. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the City Council and its members shall deal with the administrative service solely through the City Manager and neither the Council, nor any member thereof, or the Mayor shall give orders to any subordinates of the City Manager, either publicly or privately.
F. The City Manager shall attend meetings of the City Council with the right to take part in the discussion but not to vote. The City Manager may recommend to the City Council for adoption such measures as she/he may deem necessary or prudent.
G. The City Manager is designated as the budget officer for the City and shall perform or cause to be performed all of the duties of such office as set forth in the Uniform Municipal Fiscal Procedures Act. As budget officer, the City Manager shall prepare and submit the annual budget to the City Council, along with any proposed amendments to the budget.
H. The City Manager shall promptly notify the Mayor and City Council of any emergency existing in any city department or body.
I. The City Manager shall perform such other duties as may be required by law, or by the City Council through ordinance, resolution, or informal direction.
J. In the manager’s temporary absence, the Assistant City Manager shall exercise the powers and perform the duties of the City Manager.
K. The City Manager shall carry out the policies and programs established by the Council.
L. The City Manager may examine and inspect the books, records, and official papers of any office, department, agency, board, or commission of the City and make investigations and require reports from all personnel. (Ord. 18-04 (part), 2018: Ord. 94-16, 1994; Ord. 93-09 § 4, 1993)

2.10.070 Salary.
The salary of the City Manager shall be set from time to time by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 18-04 (part), 2018: Ord. 93-09 § 7, 1993)

Chapter 2.12 DUTIES OF CITY RECORDER

Sections:
2.12.010     Oath required.
2.12.020     Duties.
2.12.030     Records of ordinances to be kept.
2.12.040     Papers, records, transcripts--Copies.

2.12.010 Oath required.
The City Recorder, before assuming the duties of the office, shall take and subscribe the constitutional oath. (Ord. 18-04 (part), 2018: prior code § 2-27)

2.12.020 Duties.
Pursuant to U.C.A. Section 10-3-916 the Recorder is appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council. The Recorder shall perform all duties as may by law devolve upon him/her as recorder of a city of the fifth class under the laws of the state of Utah. The Recorder shall keep records properly indexed of all city contracts, and the records shall be open to inspection by all interested persons. Unless otherwise provided by ordinance, the Recorder shall be ex-officio city collector. The Recorder shall perform such other and further duties as the City Council may by ordinance provide. Within the office of the Recorder a properly qualified employee may be appointed by the Recorder as the Deputy Recorder. The Deputy Recorder is authorized to perform, and shall perform, all duties of the Recorder during such times when the Recorder is unavailable or unable to perform same. Any official act of the Deputy Recorder taken in the absence of the Recorder shall be valid and binding to the same extent as if done by the Recorder. The Recorder, in addition to the powers and duties imposed by law and ordinance, shall perform the following duties:
A. The Recorder shall issue notices to the members of the City Council, when directed to do so by that body, and to members of the different committees and to all persons whose attendance is required before any committee, when directed or requested so to do by the chairman of such committee. The Recorder shall also issue notices of special meetings of the City Council.
B. The Recorder shall attest all licenses granted under this code or any other ordinance of the City, and shall keep a record of the issuance thereof.
C. The Recorder shall, without delay, deliver to the officers of the City, and all committees of the City Council, all resolutions and communications referred to such officers or committees by that body.
D. The Recorder shall, without delay, deliver to the Mayor all ordinances or resolutions which may be required to be approved or otherwise acted upon by the Mayor, together with all papers on which the same are founded.
E. The Recorder shall sign and attest all ordinances passed by the City Council that are signed by the Mayor or other officer.
F. The Recorder shall certify to the publication of all ordinances, resolutions, or other official documents.
G. The Recorder shall attest all papers signed by the Mayor officially, and keep and affix the corporate seal.
H. The Recorder shall keep correct records and minutes of all proceedings of the City Council, recording the same to the extent otherwise provided by law.
I. The Recorder shall countersign all contracts made on behalf of the City or to which the City is a party. Any city contract shall be void unless signed by the Recorder. The Recorder shall endorse a certificate upon every bond, warrant, or other evidence of debt issued pursuant to law by the City stating that the same is within the lawful debt limit of the City, and is issued according to law.
J. The Recorder shall deliver to the successor in office the corporate seal, together with all books, papers, records and other property of the City.
K. The Recorder shall have the power to administer oaths in all matters in any way connected with the City government.
L. The Recorder shall attend to all official correspondence and report the same to the City Council as needed. (Ord. 18-04 (part), 2018: prior code § 2-30)

2.12.030 Records of ordinances to be kept.
A. The Recorder shall keep records of all ordinances, together with affidavits of publication by the publisher. Before taking effect, all ordinances shall be deposited in the office of the Recorder.
B. The originals of all ordinances passed by the City Council shall be filed in the Recorder’s office. (Ord. 18-04 (part), 2018: prior code § 2-31)

2.12.040 Papers, records, transcripts--Copies.
Upon request and upon the payment of such fees set by the City Council, the Recorder shall make, affix the corporate seal thereto and certify copies of all papers filed in the Recorder’s office and transcripts of all records of which the Recorder is the lawful custodian. (Ord. 18-04 (part), 2018: prior code § 2-32)

Chapter 2.14 FINANCE DIRECTOR

Sections:
2.14.010     Position created.
2.14.020     Appointment.
2.14.030     Term.
2.14.040     Powers and duties.

2.14.010 Position created.
As authorized by U.C.A. Section 10-6-157, the City establishes the position of finance director of the City of Moab, Utah. (Ord. 18-18 Att. A (part), 2018)

2.14.020 Appointment.
The appointment of a person to be known as the finance director shall be by the Mayor, upon subsequent confirmation by the City Council. The finance director shall report to and be supervised by the City Manager. (Ord. 18-18 Att. A (part), 2018)

2.14.030 Term.
The term of employment is subject to the provisions of the contract agreed to by the finance director and the City. The finance director is an at-will, exempt employee. Any person serving as finance director may be removed with or without cause by the Mayor with the consent of the City Council. (Ord. 18-18 Att. A (part), 2018)

2.14.040 Powers and duties.
The powers, duties, and obligations of the finance director shall be enumerated in the position description on file with the office of the City Recorder. (Ord. 18-18 Att. A (part), 2018)

Chapter 2.16 CITY TREASURER

Sections:
2.16.010     Oath required.
2.16.020     Appointment of deputies and assistants.
2.16.030     Powers and duties generally.
2.16.040     Collection of special taxes.
2.16.050     Receipts to be given.
2.16.060     Payments.
2.16.070     Investment decisions at authorized banking institutions.

2.16.010 Oath required.
The Treasurer, before entering upon the duties of office, shall take and subscribe the constitutional oath of office. (Ord. 18-04 (part), 2018: prior code § 2-33)

2.16.020 Appointment of deputies and assistants.
Pursuant to U.C.A. Section 10-3-916 the Treasurer is appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council. The Treasurer shall have power to appoint from within the office of the Treasurer a properly qualified employee who shall be designated the Deputy Treasurer. The Deputy Treasurer is authorized to perform, and shall perform, all duties of the Treasurer during such times when the Treasurer is unavailable or unable to perform same. Any official act of the Deputy Treasurer taken in the absence of the Treasurer shall be valid and binding to the same extent as if done by the Treasurer. (Ord. 18-04 (part), 2018: prior code § 2-34)

2.16.030 Powers and duties generally.
The Treasurer shall receive all money belonging to the City, including all taxes, license fees, utility billings, fines, and other funds owed to or held by the City, and shall keep an accurate and detailed account thereof, in such manner as may be provided by law, and shall collect all special taxes and assessments as provided by law. The Treasurer shall reconcile all accounts with the Recorder, as the City Council may direct at the end of every month, and turn over all warrants, interest coupons, bonds or other evidence of the indebtedness of the City which may have been redeemed during the month, taking the receipts of the Recorder therefor, and all such warrants, orders or other evidence of indebtedness shall be cancelled by the Treasurer and have written or stamped thereon the date of their payment or redemption. (Ord. 18-04 (part), 2018: prior code § 2-35)

2.16.040 Collection of special taxes.
The Treasurer is ex-officio collector of special taxes. (Ord. 18-04 (part), 2018: prior code § 2-36)

2.16.050 Receipts to be given.
The Treasurer shall give every person paying money to the City a receipt therefor, specifying the date of payment and upon what account paid; and he/she shall also file the duplicate of such receipt with the Recorder at the date of the monthly report. (Ord. 18-04 (part), 2018: prior code § 2-37)

2.16.060 Payments.
The Treasurer shall not pay any funds owned or held by the City to any person unless the expenditure is duly appropriated and authorized upon action of the City Council, the purchasing agent, or the City Manager as otherwise provided by law. (Ord. 18-04 (part), 2018: prior code § 2-38)

2.16.070 Investment decisions at authorized banking institutions.
A. The Treasurer is authorized to take any and all such actions in the name of and on behalf of the City in order to utilize investment opportunities available at banking institutions approved by the Utah Money Management Act. Such actions shall include but not be limited to setting up sweep accounts, zero balance accounts, automatic transfer of funds accounts and similar deposit and investment arrangements, entering into transactions similar to the foregoing, and performing such actions as may be required in connection with any of the foregoing. From time to time the Treasurer shall present to the City Council for approval all necessary resolutions for designation of depository institutions and authorized signatories.
B. Agreements, instruments, or documents properly executed and delivered to any banking institution approved by the Utah Money Management Act by the City Treasurer shall be binding and enforceable obligations of the City, enforceable in accordance with their respective terms. (Ord. 18-04 (part), 2018: Res. 05-99, 1999)

Chapter 2.20 RESERVED1
1 Editor’s note: Ord. No. 18-04, adopted April 10, 2018, repealed Chapter 2.20, 2.20.010 and 2.20.020, which pertained to the City collector and derived from prior code §§ 2-41 and 2-42.

Chapter 2.24 CITY ATTORNEY

Sections:
2.24.010     Establishment--Appointment--Term.
2.24.020     Oath required.
2.24.030     Delegation of tasks.
2.24.040     Employment of special counsel.
2.24.050     Succession--Delivery of records.
2.24.060     Powers and duties.
2.24.070     Reporting.

2.24.010 Establishment--Appointment--Term.
There is established the office of City Attorney. The person(s) providing legal services to the City as City Attorney may be independent contractors designated by the City Manager or may be a full-time city employee. Any applicable contracts for legal services are subject to approval by the City Council. Persons providing legal services to the City shall do so without a specified term, and services may be terminated as otherwise provided by contract. (Ord. 18-04 (part), 2018: prior code § 2-43)

2.24.020 Oath required.
The City Attorney, before assuming the duties of his office, shall take and subscribe the constitutional oath of office. (Ord. 18-04 (part), 2018: prior code § 2-44)

2.24.030 Delegation of tasks.
Where appropriate, the City Attorney may delegate certain tasks to an associate or assistant attorney; provided, that the City Attorney shall retain responsibility for all such tasks. (Ord. 18-04 (part), 2018: prior code § 2-45)

2.24.040 Employment of special counsel.
The City Attorney shall have the power to employ, by and with the consent of the City Manager, special counsel on matters pertaining to the legal affairs of the City, if the same is deemed necessary and advisable. Such special counsel shall be compensated by the City as provided by contract. (Ord. 18-04 (part), 2018: prior code § 2-46)

2.24.050 Succession--Delivery of records.
Upon the termination of legal services or upon request by the City, the City Attorney shall promptly deliver to any successor or such person(s) designated by the City copies of all books and papers, including but not limited to those in electronic form, pertaining to pending or concluded city legal matters. (Ord. 18-04 (part), 2018: prior code § 2-47)

2.24.060 Powers and duties.
The City Attorney shall be responsible for prosecuting and conducting all cases for violations of this code or any other ordinances of the City. The City Attorney shall appear on behalf of the City in all suits in which the City, city employees or officials are a party, and shall prosecute or defend them, as the case may be, in any courts until they are concluded. It shall be the duty of the City Attorney to advise all city employees, the City Manager, the Mayor, and City Council with respect to their official duties; to prepare the draft of all such ordinances as the City Council or City Manager from time to time shall instruct; and to perform such other duties as this code and any other ordinances of the City and the general laws require, or as the City Council may specially direct. In addition to the powers and duties imposed by law or ordinance, the City Attorney shall have the following powers and duties:
A. He/she shall advise the City Council and its committees on such legal questions as may arise in relation to the business of the City, and attend the meetings of the City Council when required. He/she shall report periodically on any matter as necessary for the approval of the City Council or as necessary for oversight.
B. Whenever a criminal action for the violation of this code or any other ordinance of the City is brought in any court, it shall be the duty of the City Attorney to appear and prosecute such action.
C. When requested, the City Attorney shall furnish written opinions or memoranda upon subjects submitted to him/her by the Mayor, the City Council, the City Manager, or the head of any department.
D. He/she shall draft any deeds, leases, contracts or other papers and forms required by the business of the City, when requested so to do by the Mayor, the City Council, the City Manager, or the head of any department.
E. He/she shall keep accurate records of all actions in which the City Attorney appears as counsel. Such books shall at all times be open to the inspection of the Mayor, the City Council, and/or the City Manager. (Ord. 18-04 (part), 2018: prior code § 2-48)

2.24.070 Reporting.
Periodically, or as requested by the Mayor or the City Council, the City Attorney shall provide oral reports or written memoranda detailing the status of pending legal matters or tasks which have been assigned. Day to day reporting on pending legal matters shall be provided to the City Manager. (Ord. 18-04 (part), 2018: prior code § 2-49)

Chapter 2.28 PURCHASING PROCEDURES

Sections:
2.28.010     Purpose.
2.28.020     Definitions.
2.28.030     Purchasing agent.
2.28.040     Purchasing authority--Small purchases.
2.28.050     Competitive proposals for projects up to fifty thousand dollars.
2.28.060     Unresponsive bidders for competitive proposals.
2.28.070     Essential public works projects.
2.28.080     Sealed bids for projects in excess of fifty thousand dollars.
2.28.090     Local business preference.
2.28.100     Repeat purchases not to evade procurement thresholds.
2.28.110     Procurement exceptions.
2.28.120     Certification and approval of bills.
2.28.130     Authority for contract execution.
2.28.140     Construction bonding.
2.28.150     Recorder to maintain contract records.
2.28.160     Surplus personal property.
2.28.170     Sales tax exemption.
2.28.180     Debarment procedures.
2.28.190     Debarment appeals.
2.28.200     Remedies.

2.28.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to ensure integrity in the procurement process by assuring that purchases are conducted in an open and competitive manner. Additionally, this chapter is intended to establish standards of conduct for city employees and officials, and avoid conflicts of interest in procurement decision making. (Ord. 18-03 (part), 2018)

2.28.020 Definitions.
The following definitions apply to this chapter:
A. “City Manager” means the person appointed as City Manager, as defined under Chapter 2.10.
B. “Debarment” means a classification under this chapter by which a person is precluded, in whole or in part, from bidding or being selected for the award of a contract with the City of Moab.
C. “Employee” means a person who is not an elected officer of the City of Moab and who performs services for the City on a full or part time basis in exchange for wages.
D. “Essential public works” mean the City culinary water system, wastewater treatment system, stormwater conveyance system, flood control system, or streets and sidewalks.
E. “Local vendor” means a person or business entity holding a business license and having its sole place of business within Grand County, Utah.
F. “Nonresponsive” means a proposal or bid from a person which does not conform to the published requirements for a procurement as to such terms as: quantity, scope of services, price, quality, time of submittal or performance, or other material requirements established by the purchasing agent.
G. “Official” means the Mayor, the members of the City Council, and the appointed members of all other city boards and commissions.
H. “Prequalification” means a screening process whereby persons who may wish to enter into a contract with the City are evaluated for eligibility pursuant to a set of criteria published by the purchasing agent.
I. “Procurement” means the process of contracting for construction, goods, services, equipment, or personal property by the City pursuant to established purchasing procedures.
J. “Procurement threshold” as used in Section 2.28.100 means the dollar limits on purchasing and the associated purchasing procedures, as set forth in Section 2.28.040, 2.28.050, 2.28.070, or 2.28.080.
K. “Proposal” means a written statement by a person to provide goods, services, or both having a value of no more than fifty thousand dollars which is submitted in response to a city request for proposals. A proposal may contain terms other than price and include details as to: experience, quality, suitability for intended purposes, scheduling or manner of delivery, or other criteria.
L. “Purchasing agent” means the person tasked with administering this chapter, as specified from time to time. Unless otherwise designated by the City Council, the purchasing agent shall be the Recorder.
M. “Purchasing order” means a document issued by the purchasing agent whereby the City undertakes to purchase goods, services, or other property from an outside vendor or provider by specifying the types, quantities, price, and other material terms.
N. “Recorder” means the City Recorder as appointed pursuant to Chapter 2.12 or the Deputy Recorder, who may perform those functions in the Recorder’s absence.
O. “Sealed bid” means a written statement by a person to provide goods, services, or both which is submitted confidentially and opened publicly at a time specified by the City in its invitation for bids. A sealed bid responds to the detailed specifications outlined in the City’s invitation for bids and is the offer of the person submitting the bid to enter into a contract in accordance with its terms. (Ord. 18-03 (part), 2018)

2.28.030 Purchasing agent.
The purchasing agent shall be responsible for all purchases of equipment, goods, or services required by the City. It is the duty of the purchasing agent and all city employees to engage in purchasing in a manner which is honest, transparent, and which provides the most advantageous terms to the City. All city department heads shall transmit their written purchasing requests to the purchasing agent for review and approval.
A. The purchasing agent shall evaluate all requests for expenditures to determine if: (1) sums requested have been budgeted; (2) procurement processes have been followed; (3) contract provisions have been performed; and (4) city expenditures have been properly coded using expense accounting procedures.
B. The purchasing agent will confer with the City Manager and department heads with respect to the development of requests for proposals (RFPs) where necessary as part of the procurement process.
C. The purchasing agent shall verify that parties awarded contracts under this chapter possess all required licenses and permits (e.g., engineering, construction trades licensing, building permits, or the like) needed to perform the specified tasks. (Ord. 18-03 (part), 2018)

2.28.040 Purchasing authority--Small purchases.
Upon the request of any department head or upon the purchasing agent’s own request, the purchasing agent has authority to procure goods, services, equipment, or other personal property with a cost of less than twenty-five thousand dollars (small purchases) by issuing a purchasing order to the applicable vendor. The purchasing agent shall engage in reasonable diligence to assure that small purchases are obtained upon the best possible terms, considering price, quality, reliability, availability, and performance of the vendor.
A. Professional services, design services, or construction services procured under this section shall be confirmed by award of a contract, in the form approved by the City, containing all required specifications. A department shall include minimum specifications when using the small purchase threshold for professional, design, or construction services. (Ord. 18-03 (part), 2018)

2.28.050 Competitive proposals for projects up to fifty thousand dollars.
For all procurements having a cost which is likely to exceed twenty-five thousand dollars, but which is not to exceed fifty thousand dollars, the purchasing agent shall solicit competitive proposals from at least three vendors. All responsive proposals shall be reviewed by the purchasing agent as to the most favorable proposal with respect to price, quality, reliability, availability, and performance of the vendor. The purchasing agent, in his/her discretion, may approve the procurement, request additional information, reject all proposals, or refer the procurement to the City Council for a decision. (Ord. 18-03 (part), 2018)

2.28.060 Unresponsive bidders for competitive proposals.
In procurements subject to Section 2.28.050, if fewer than three proposals are received by the submittal deadline and the department head provides sufficient documentation to the purchasing agent that the request for proposals have been sent to: (1) five providers; and (2) all local providers of the property or service to be procured, then the requirement for at least three proposals may be waived by the purchasing agent if the proposals received are deemed competitive and fair. (Ord. 18-03 (part), 2018)

2.28.070 Essential public works projects.
For procurements involving essential public works and having a cost in excess of twenty-five thousand dollars but not exceeding fifty thousand dollars, the purchasing agent and the City Manager may waive the competitive proposals requirement; provided, that the purchasing agent obtains written proposals from at least three vendors and the purchasing agent determines that the proposals are competitive and fair. (Ord. 18-03 (part), 2018)

2.28.080 Sealed bids for projects in excess of fifty thousand dollars.
For all procurements having a cost which is likely to exceed fifty thousand dollars, the purchasing agent shall solicit sealed bids from responsible bidders. The purchasing agent, in conjunction with the applicable department head, shall develop specifications for the procurement and may prequalify vendors who, on the basis of experience, training, financial strength, past performance, or the like, have the capability to perform.
A. Procurements subject to sealed bids shall be published in a manner calculated to provide notice to interested vendors, but which shall at least include publication on the City’s website and by newspaper, and via other relevant bid advertising media. The purchasing agent may re-publish or extend the bidding deadline if the notice has generated insufficient vendor response.
B. Bids shall be opened publicly at a date and time which is published.
C. The purchasing agent may reject nonresponsive bids. Bids which contain a mathematical or similar error may be withdrawn by the bidder at any time prior to acceptance by the City.
D. All responsive bids shall be presented to the City Council, subject to a recommendation by the purchasing agent as to the most favorable proposal with respect to adherence to specifications, price, quality, reliability, availability, and performance of the vendor. The City Council will review the recommendation and, in its discretion, may approve the recommendation, request additional information, or reject all proposals. (Ord. 18-03 (part), 2018)

2.28.090 Local business preference.
Local vendors, as defined by this chapter, may receive a procurement preference as follows:
A. A request for a local business preference along with any necessary documentation establishing that a party is a local vendor must be submitted to the purchasing agent in writing in conjunction with the delivery of the vendor proposal or bid.
B. A responsive proposal or bid from a local vendor will be deemed the lowest proposal or bid if the total cost is no more than five percent greater than the lowest responsive proposal or bid from a nonlocal vendor.
C. The local vendor preference shall not exceed the sum of twenty-five thousand dollars. For example, if a nonlocal bidder bids six hundred thousand dollars for a procurement and a local vendor bids six hundred thirty thousand dollars (within five percent of the nonlocal bid), the contract will be awarded to the local vendor in an amount not to exceed six hundred twenty-five thousand dollars. A local vendor who cannot honor the cap on the bid preference may withdraw its bid at any time prior to acceptance.
D. The City may reject an award of a contract subject to a local vendor preference if the preference would result in a contract exceeding budgeted or legally available amounts. (Ord. 18-03 (part), 2018)

2.28.100 Repeat purchases not to evade procurement thresholds.
City employees or officials shall not engage in any practice or actions which have the purpose or effect of evading the procurement rules of this chapter.
A. Annual Review of Program Purchases. Where programmatic or repeated procurements in the defined areas specified in this section, as anticipated in approved budgets, are individually beneath any particular procurement threshold, but likely to exceed a procurement threshold when combined, the purchasing agent shall confer with the applicable department head and define an expected scope of procurements for the fiscal year.
B. Routine Retail Purchases Excluded. The restrictions of this section shall not apply to repeat or routine purchases of items from retail businesses where a procurement process would be inefficient (e.g., repeat purchases of lumber, hardware, or janitorial supplies on an as-needed basis).
C. Professional, Design, and Construction Services Cumulative Threshold. Where professional services, design services, or construction services are procured under small purchases purchasing authority, Section 2.28.040, the cumulative amount of repeat purchases (such as separate task orders) in any fiscal year shall not exceed fifty thousand dollars for that provider contract. (Ord. 18-03 (part), 2018)

2.28.110 Procurement exceptions.
The following procurement exceptions are authorized by this chapter:
A. Emergencies. Where there is an emergency situation involving a threat to public health, welfare, or safety, including, but not limited to, essential public works such as the wastewater treatment system, culinary water system, stormwater system, or the like, the purchasing agent, in consultation with the City Manager, may waive the procurement rules specified by this chapter. The purchasing agent shall report the emergency procurement exception to the City Council no later than thirty days from the date of the procurement. The purchasing agent shall assure that the terms of the procurement are as competitive and favorable as the circumstances will allow. When the emergency has passed all further procurement shall be conducted in conformity with the other procedures of this chapter.
    1. City department heads should seek to obtain competitive emergency purchases by using telephone quotes, internet or catalog quotes, limited invitations to bid, or similar procedures to the extent practicable, and consistent with the need to protect public health and safety.
    2. The purchasing agent and City Manager shall make a written determination documenting the emergency and the selection of the procurement item. A record of the determination and selection shall be kept in the contract file. The documentation may be made after the emergency condition has passed.
B. State Approved Contracts. Pursuant to Section 11-13-201, Utah Code Annotated 1953, the City is authorized to enter into joint purchasing arrangements with other governmental entities. Where the state of Utah or other competitive purchasing groups have established standard procurement contracts for state agencies which are available to local governments, the City is not required to engage in a different procurement process, and may purchase goods, services, equipment, or the like pursuant to the published price schedules, catalog prices, or specified terms established by the state or the competitive purchasing group. City departments are encouraged to utilize state of Utah competitive purchasing group procurements where appropriate. The purchasing agent must approve the purchase order in advance and, if it exceeds the sum of one hundred thousand dollars, the purchase is subject to City Council review and approval.
C. Single Source Procurement. Where there is only a single source available for a particular procurement, the purchasing agent may waive proposal or bid requirements; provided, that the department head undertakes reasonable efforts to: (1) document that no alternative provider is available; and (2) secure the most advantageous terms for the City. The purchasing agent must approve the purchase order in advance and, if it exceeds the sum of fifty thousand dollars, the purchase is subject to City Council review and approval.
    1. Sole-source procurement awards do not involve standard procurement process and should only be used when justified after reasonable research has been conducted to determine if there are other available sources, and an analysis has been done to determine if a sole-source award is cost-justified.
    2. Circumstances for which a sole-source contract awards may be justified include:
        a. A procurement item for which there is no comparable product or service, such as a one-of-a-kind item available from only one vendor;
        b. A component or replacement part for which there is no commercially available substitute, and which can only be obtained directly from the manufacturer; or
        c. An exclusive maintenance, service, or warranty agreement.
    3. Prior to awarding a sole-source contract, the applicable department shall conduct a price analysis to determine if the same or similar items are available from another source.
    4. An urgent or unexpected circumstance for a procurement does not justify the ward of a contract using the sole-source exception.
D. Exclusions. The following contracts or transactions are excluded from the procurement provisions of this chapter: contracts for the purchase/sale of an interest in real estate; employment contracts; contract change orders or modifications; intergovernmental agreements; grant or similar agreements where the City serves as a funding conduit to a third party; nonemployee statutory appointee contracts; utility, franchise, or public right-of-way agreements; extensions of existing contracts; and agreements with interlocal co-op entities (e.g., local government mutual insurance agencies).
E. Alternative Procurement Processes. The City Council may authorize other or alternative procurement procedures on a case-by-case basis upon a showing of good cause. (Ord. 18-03 (part), 2018)

2.28.120 Certification and approval of bills.
The purchasing agent shall receive all invoices, bills, and other sums claimed to be owing by the City. In consultation with the City Manager and department heads, the purchasing agent shall review and certify for payment all account payable items. Upon certification by the purchasing agent the invoices and bills shall then be deemed payable as an obligation of the City. During any City Council meeting, the City Council may choose to review the purchasing agent’s payment certification and, if satisfied as to its accuracy, approve the certification. Any concerns as to whether any expenditure is proper shall be promptly brought to the attention of the City Manager and purchasing agent. (Ord. 18-03 (part), 2018)

2.28.130 Authority for contract execution.
The City Manager has authority to execute all contracts under this chapter, including contract modifications, extensions, and change orders, with a contract price of not exceeding fifty thousand dollars. All other contracts awarded under this chapter shall be executed by the Mayor. To be valid, the Recorder must attest the signatures of the Mayor or City Manager on all contracts executed pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 18-03 (part), 2018)

2.28.140 Construction bonding.
General contractors and others providing construction services pursuant to a contract with the City shall deliver a bond from a surety authorized to do business in the state of Utah or other approved form as provided in this chapter.
A. A bid security bond in an amount equal to five percent of the amount of the bid is required for all construction projects in which the bid amount exceeds fifty thousand dollars.
B. Payment and performance bonds in an amount equal to one hundred percent of the contract price are required for all construction contracts in excess of fifty thousand dollars, unless alternative security is authorized pursuant to this chapter.
C. The City Manager and purchasing agent may waive or alter the bonding requirements on contracts with a total contract price of not more than five hundred thousand dollars where: (1) it is determined that bonding in the required amount cannot be reasonably obtained; and (2) alternative means of security which provide an adequate substitute for payment and performance bonds are sufficient. This staff-level waiver shall be made in writing, with notice to the City Council.
D. In every construction contract where there is a modification of bonding requirements, or where no bonding is required (e.g., contracts under fifty thousand dollars in value), the construction contract shall contain one or more alternative security mechanisms to secure performance by the contractor and/or payment to subcontractors, laborers, and material suppliers. Alternative security mechanisms may include: (1) an irrevocable letter of credit payable to the City; (2) a first position deed of trust on real property; (3) a cash deposit to be held by the City; or (4) other collateral, contract, or security instruments as approved by the City Attorney.
E. In every construction contract where there is a modification of bonding requirements, or where no bonding is required, the City is authorized to: (1) issue payment in the form of joint payee checks payable to the general contractor and subcontractors, laborers, or material suppliers; (2) require that subcontractors, laborers, and material suppliers execute payment waivers extinguishing claims against the City, in a form acceptable to the City Attorney, concurrent with progress payments and at final completion; and/or (3) alter retainage disbursements. (Ord. 18-03 (part), 2018)

2.28.150 Recorder to maintain contract records.
The Recorder shall keep records documenting all contracts entered into by the City and documenting all expenditures under those contracts. (Ord. 18-03 (part), 2018)

2.28.160 Surplus personal property.
The Recorder may dispose of surplus personal property of the City at a publicly noticed and advertised sale. All such sales shall be undertaken in a commercially reasonable manner, after notice to the City Council, and in conformity with the surplus property policy, as established by the City from time to time. (Ord. 18-03 (part), 2018)

2.28.170 Sales tax exemption.
In all contracts awarded under this chapter the contractor shall provide to the City proof that all goods, services, materials, equipment, or fixtures which are purchased under the contract are subject to the sales tax exemption possessed by the City as a governmental entity. No contract awarded under this chapter shall include any purported mark up or other charge for sales tax. (Ord. 18-03 (part), 2018)

2.28.180 Debarment procedures.
No person who has been debarred by the City shall be eligible to bid or enter into any contracts with the City during the period of debarment.
A. Grounds for Debarment. Causes for debarment include:
    1. Conviction under state or federal law of the offense of embezzlement, theft, forgery, bribery, or any similar offense indicating dishonesty;
    2. Failure without good cause to perform any contract with the City of Moab, including any warranty provisions;
    3. Failure to perform any bid or proposal made to the City of Moab;
    4. Engaging in any acts which are a violation of this chapter;
    5. Unlawful acts (including, but not limited to, lack of proper licensure), dishonesty, or incompetence in the performance of any contract with the City of Moab; or
    6. Any other cause which the City determines to be so serious or compelling as to affect the responsibility of the contractor, including debarment or criminal proceedings involving another governmental entity.
B. Notice. Before entering any debarment decision, the purchasing agent shall deliver written notice to the person who may be subject to debarment. The notice shall be delivered to the last known address of the person by in-person delivery, courier, certified mail, or first-class mail. The notice shall disclose the facts or events giving rise to a debarment determination in reasonable detail, and shall advise the recipient that he/she may request a hearing by delivering written notice to the City no later than thirty days from the date of the debarment notice.
C. Hearing Procedures. A debarment hearing shall be conducted informally before the City Manager. The rules of evidence shall not apply to the hearing, but both parties shall be permitted to offer testimony, exhibits, or other information in support of their positions. An audio or video recording of the hearing shall be kept. The City shall maintain the record of the hearing, together with copies of all documents and evidence submitted by the parties or otherwise relied upon in reaching the decision.
D. Decision. The City Manager may: (1) reject debarment; (2) order debarment for a period of time of not less than thirty days, nor more than three years; or (3) issue a partial debarment order limiting, for example, the types of work, total dollar amount of work, or other conditions under which a person shall be authorized to enter into contracts with the City. All decisions shall be issued promptly following the conclusion of the hearing and be in writing. The decision shall state in reasonable detail the reasons for the decision. (Ord. 18-03 (part), 2018)

2.28.190 Debarment appeals.
Any person who is debarred pursuant to this chapter may appeal that decision by filing an action in the Seventh Judicial District Court no later than thirty days from the date of the decision which is subject to appeal. The City shall promptly transmit the record of the proceedings to the court. Review by the district court shall be based on the record before the City Manager.
A. Standard of Review. No person shall appeal to the district court a decision by the City unless that person has exhausted his/her administrative remedies. District court review shall be limited to those matters which were actually contested before the City. The court shall: (1) presume that the decision is valid; and (2) determine only whether or not the decision is arbitrary, capricious, or illegal. (Ord. 18-03 (part), 2018)

2.28.200 Remedies.
The sole remedies for violations of this chapter (excluding Sections 2.28.180 and 2.28.190 pertaining to contractor debarment) are as follows: 
A. A contract, transaction, or decision which is entered into in violation of this chapter is voidable, in whole or in part, in the discretion of the City Council.
B. An employee who knowingly violates this chapter may face disciplinary action, subject to applicable personnel policies, up to and including termination.
C. An official who knowingly violates this chapter may be subject to removal from office in the manner otherwise provided by law.
D. Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted as conferring a private cause of action upon any person seeking to set aside a particular contract, transaction, or decision. (Ord. 18-03 (part), 2018)

Chapter 2.32 RESERVED1
1 Editor’s note: Ord. No. 18-04, adopted April 10, 2018, repealed Chapter 2.32, §§ 2.32.010--2.32.030, which pertained to the utilities superintendent and derived from prior code §§ 2-57--2-59.

Chapter 2.36 RESERVED1
1 Editor’s note: Ord. No. 18-04, adopted April 10, 2018, repealed Chapter 2.36, § 2.36.010, which pertained to the superintendent of streets and derived from prior code § 21-1.

Chapter 2.40 RESERVED1
1 Editor’s note: Ord. No. 18-04, adopted April 10, 2018, repealed Chapter 2.40, §§ 2.40.010--2.40.030, which pertained to city officers and derived from prior code §§ 2-2, 2-4 and 2-6.

Chapter 2.44 SALARIES1

Sections:
2.44.010     Salaries to be fixed by motion or resolution.

2.44.010 Salaries to be fixed by motion or resolution.
All salaries of the elective and appointive officers of the City and the other employees of the City shall be fixed by motion or resolution of the City Council as in accordance with existing law. (Prior code § 2-5)
1 Editor’s note: Salaries for city officials are set out in Ords. 84-02, 84-06, 85-06, 86-04, 88-04, 89-08, 90-08, 90-09, 91-05 and 92-20.

Chapter 2.48 ELECTIONS

Sections:
2.48.010     Elections.

2.48.010 Elections.
All municipal elections and special elections within the City shall be held and conducted, and returns made thereof, as is provided by law. (Prior code § 2-3)

Chapter 2.49 CAMPAIGN FINANCE DISCLOSURE

Sections:
2.49.010     General.
2.49.015     Definitions.
2.49.020     Filing of disclosure reports.
2.49.025     Time of filing.
2.49.030     Contents of statement.
2.49.035     Public information.
2.49.040     Penalty for noncompliance.
2.49.050     Failure to file-Removal of candidate’s name from ballot.

2.49.010 General.
All candidates for elective municipal office shall comply with the campaign finance disclosure requirements set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 03-08 (part), 2003)

2.49.015 Definitions.
The following definitions shall be applicable to this chapter:
A. “Candidate” shall mean any person who files a declaration of candidacy for an elective office of the City; or is nominated by a committee, party, or petition; or received contributions or made expenditures or consents to another person receiving contributions or making expenditures with a view to bringing about such person’s nomination or election to such office; or causes on his/her behalf, any written material or advertisement to be printed, published, broadcast, distributed or disseminated which indicates an intention to seek such office.
B. “Contribution” shall mean monetary and non-monetary contributions such as in-kind contributions and contributions of tangible things but shall not include personal services provided without compensation by individuals volunteering their time on behalf of a candidate.
C. “Election” shall mean both primary and final elections.
D. “Expenditure” shall mean a purchase, payment distribution, loan, advance, deposit or gift of money or anything of value made for the purpose of influencing the nomination or election of any candidate. (Ord. 03-08 (part), 2003)

2.49.020 Filing of disclosure reports.
Each candidate for elective office who either receives more than seven hundred fifty dollars in campaign contributions or spends more than seven hundred fifty dollars in campaign expenses shall file with the City Recorder dated and signed financial reports which comply with this chapter. Forms shall be made available by the City. Other forms in substantially the same format are also acceptable. (Ord. 03-08 (part), 2003)

2.49.025 Time of filing.
The reports required by this chapter shall be filed at least seven days before both the primary and general elections and at least once within thirty days following the final election. A candidate losing in the primary election shall file the final report within thirty days of the date of the primary election. (Ord. 03-08 (part), 2003)

2.49.030 Contents of statement.
A. The statements filed seven days before the election shall include:
    1. A list of each contribution of more than fifty dollars received by the candidate, and the name of the donor;
    2. An aggregate total of all contributions of fifty dollars or less received by the candidate; and
    3. A list of each expenditure for political purposes made during the campaign period as of seven days before the date of the election, and the recipient of each expense.
B. The statement filed thirty days after the elections shall include:
    1. A list of each contribution of more than fifty dollars received after the cutoff date for the statement filed seven days before the election, and the name of the donor;
    2. A total of all contributions of fifty dollars or less received by the candidate after the cutoff date for the statement filed seven days before the election;
    3. A list of all expenditures for political purposes made by the candidate after the cutoff date for the statement filed seven days before the election, and the recipient of each expense.
C. All contributions and expenditures related to the candidate’s candidacy should be accounted for between the pre-election and post-election statement. (Ord. 03-08 (part), 2003)

2.49.035 Public information.
The statements required by this chapter shall be public documents and shall be available for public inspection and copying during regular business hours. Appropriate costs may be assessed pursuant to the provisions of the Government Records Access and Management Act. (Ord. 03-08 (part), 2003)

2.49.040 Penalty for noncompliance.
Any candidate who fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter is guilty of an infraction of the Moab Municipal Code. (Ord. 03-08 (part), 2003)

2.49.050 Failure to file-Removal of candidate’s name from ballot.
A. If a candidate fails to file an interim report due before the election, the City Recorder shall, after making a reasonable attempt to discover if the report was timely mailed, inform the appropriate election official who:
    1. Shall, if practicable, remove the name of the candidate by blacking out the candidate’s name before the ballots are delivered to voters; or
    2. Shall, if removing the candidate’s name from the ballot is not practicable, inform the voters by any practicable method that the candidate has been disqualified and that votes cast for the candidate will not be counted; and
    3. May not count any votes for that candidate.
B. Notwithstanding subsection A above, a candidate is not disqualified if:
    1. The candidate files the reports required by this section;
    2. Those reports are completed, detailing accurately and completely the information required by this section except for inadvertent omissions or insignificant errors or inaccuracies; and
    3. Those omissions, errors, or inaccuracies are corrected in an amended report or in the next scheduled report.
C. A report is considered filed if:
    1. It is received in the City Recorder’s office no later than five p.m. on the date that it is due;
    2. It is received in the City Recorder’s office with a postmark three days or more before the date the report was due; or
    3. The candidate has proof that the report was mailed, with appropriate postage and addressing, three days before the report was due. (Ord. 03-08 (part), 2003)

Chapter 2.52 PLANNING COMMISSION

Sections:
2.52.010     Establishment--Composition.
2.52.020     Appointment of members--Qualifications--Compensation.
2.52.030     Terms--Minimum attendance--Standards removal--Filling vacancies.
2.52.050     Organization--Meetings.
2.52.060     Powers and duties.

2.52.010 Establishment--Composition.
The Planning Commission shall consist of seven regular members. (Ord. 18-04 (part), 2018: Ord. 06-01 (part), 2006: prior code § 2-60)

2.52.020 Appointment of members--Qualifications--Compensation.
The members of the Planning Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the City Council from among the qualified electors of the City. Such members shall be selected without respect to political affiliations, and may serve with compensation to be determined by the City Council. (Ord. 18-04 (part), 2018: Ord. 06-01 (part), 2006: prior code § 2-61)

2.52.030 Terms--Minimum attendance--Standards removal--Filling vacancies.
The terms of office of each member of the Planning Commission shall be for three years. Planning Commission members must attend a minimum of seventy-five percent of all Planning Commission meetings held during the course of a calendar year in order to remain a member of the Planning Commission. This ongoing determination of attendance shall be conducted by planning department staff and forwarded to the chairperson of the Planning Commission, the City Manager and Mayor and City Council. Vacancies and/or removals occurring otherwise than through the expiration of terms shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor with the consent of City Council. Members may be removed, with or without cause, by a majority vote of City Council. (Ord. 18-04 (part), 2018: Ord. 95-18, 1995: prior code § 2-62)

2.52.050 Organization--Meetings.
The Planning Commission shall elect from its membership a chair and vice chair and shall conduct meetings in accordance with the adopted bylaws and rules of procedure for Planning Commission meetings. The City Recorder shall keep a public record of Planning Commission proceedings. (Ord. 18-04 (part), 2018: prior code § 2-64)

2.52.060 Powers and duties.
The Planning Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
A. After holding public hearings, the Planning Commission may recommend to the City Council a General Plan for the physical development of the City. The General Plan shall show the Planning Commission recommendations and may include, among other things, the general location, character and extent of streets, parks, parkways, and other public places; the general location and extent of public utilities; recommendations for future zoning designations and land uses; recommendations for future land use policy initiatives and long term goals; plans for the development of additional housing; a future land use plan; and other elements as may be required by law (Utah State Code). The Planning Commission may from time to time review the General Plan and forward recommendations to the City Council for amendments or revisions.
B. From time to time the Planning Commission may review the land use ordinances of the City and consider amendments to same. It may recommend amendments or new ordinances to the City Council, either on its own initiative or upon referral by the City Council or staff.
C. The Planning Commission shall act as an advisory body, reviewing and making recommendations to the City Council with respect to those land use applications or proceedings as otherwise specified by ordinance. Additionally, the Planning Commission shall act as the land use authority on those matters specified by ordinance.
D. In its discretion, the Planning Commission may recommend that staff undertake studies or may recommend to the Mayor and City Council programs or policies for the improvement of land development within the City.
E. The Planning Commission may exercise those additional powers as are reasonable or necessary to carry out and perform the enumerated powers and duties specified above. (Ord. 18-04 (part), 2018: prior code § 2-65)

Chapter 2.56 POLICE DEPARTMENT

Sections:
2.56.010     Establishment--Composition.
2.56.020     Powers and duties of police officers.
2.56.030     Chief--Appointment.
2.56.035     Appointment of deputies and assistants.
2.56.040     Chief--Oath required.

2.56.010 Establishment--Composition.
There is established a regularly constituted police force to be known as the City Police Department which shall consist of a Chief of Police and such other police officers as shall be employed by the City from time to time. (Ord. 18-04 (part), 2018: prior code § 20-1)

2.56.020 Powers and duties of police officers.
The Chief of Police and all police officers of the City shall have the following powers and duties:
A. To suppress riots, disturbances and breaches of the peace, and to apprehend all persons committing any offense against the laws of the state, this code, or any other ordinances of the City;
B. To execute and serve all warrants, processes, commitments and all writs whatsoever, issued by any court;
C. To preserve the public peace, prevent crime, detect and arrest offenders, protect persons and property, remove nuisances existing in the public streets, roads and highways, enforce every law relating to the suppression of offenses, render such assistance in the collection of licenses as shall be required by the license collector and perform all duties enjoined upon them by law and ordinance; and
D. To arrest and take into custody any person who shall commit or threaten or attempt to commit in the presence of the officer, or within the view of the officer, any breach of the peace, or any offense directly prohibited by the laws of the state of Utah or this code. (Ord. 18-04 (part), 2018: prior code § 20-2)

2.56.030 Chief--Appointment.
The City Manager shall appoint the Chief of Police. (Ord. 18-04 (part), 2018: prior code § 20-3)

2.56.035 Appointment of deputies and assistants.
The police chief shall have power to appoint a properly qualified employee who shall be designated the Assistant Chief. The Assistant Chief is authorized to perform, and shall perform, all duties of the Chief during such times when the Chief is unavailable or unable to perform same. Any official act of the Assistant Chief taken in the absence of the Chief shall be valid and binding to the same extent as if done by the Chief. (Ord. 18-04 (part), 2018)

2.56.040 Chief--Oath required.
The Chief of Police shall before assuming the duties of office take and subscribe the constitutional oath of office. (Ord. 18-04 (part), 2018: prior code § 20-4)

Chapter 2.60 PERSONNEL RULES

Sections:
2.60.010     Personnel rules.

2.60.010 Personnel rules.
Personnel rules shall be established by the Personnel Policies and Procedures Manual, which shall be adopted by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 01-03, 2001)

Chapter 2.61 RESERVED1
1 Editor’s note: Ord. No. 18-04, adopted April 10, 2018, repealed Chapter 2.61, §§ 2.61.010--2.61.030, which pertained to statutory appointee severance benefits appeals and derived from Ord. 98-06.

Chapter 2.62 EMPLOYEE APPEALS BOARD

Sections:
2.62.010     Created.
2.62.020     Powers and duties.
2.62.030     Terms.
2.62.040     Membership.
2.62.050     Appeal procedures.

2.62.010 Created.
An appeals board is created which shall consist of five members, three of whom shall be chosen by and from the appointive officers and employees of Moab City and two of them shall be members of the governing body of Moab City. (Ord. 92-27 § 1, 1992)

2.62.020 Powers and duties.
The appeals board shall have all rights, powers, and duties as outlined by Section 10-3-1106 of the Utah Code Annotated. (Ord. 92-27 § 2, 1992)

2.62.030 Terms.
The members of the appeals board shall serve for a term of office of one year. (Ord. 92-27 § 3, 1992)

2.62.040 Membership.
The three members of the appeals board elected by the employees shall be from the appointed officers or employees who have previously been elected to the Moab City personnel policies and procedures committee. The current members of the Moab City personnel policies and procedures committee shall assign three members of their board to serve as members of the appeals board for each individual appeal that may be filed pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 92-27 § 4, 1992)

2.62.050 Appeal procedures.
The procedures for filing the appeal, the time limits for the appeal and the process for handling the appeal shall be as set forth in Section 10-3-1106 of Utah Code Annotated. (Ord. 92-27 § 5, 1992)

Chapter 2.64 RECORDS ACCESS AND MANAGEMENT PROGRAM

Sections:
2.64.010     Short title.
2.64.020     Purpose and intent.
2.64.030     Definitions.
2.64.040     Right of public access.
2.64.050     Access to non-public records.
2.64.060     Fees.
2.64.070     Procedures for records access.
2.64.080     Records request denial.
2.64.090     Required records disclosure.
2.64.100     Private records.
2.64.110     Controlled records.
2.64.120     Protected records.
2.64.130     Records classification and designation.
2.64.140     Records retention.
2.64.150     Segregation of records.
2.64.160     Appeals.
2.64.170     Judicial review.
2.64.180     Confidential treatment of records for which no exemption applies.
2.64.190     Request to amend a record.
2.64.200     Rights of individuals on whom data is maintained.
2.64.210     Criminal penalties.

2.64.010 Short title.
The ordinance codified in this chapter is known as the “Moab City Corporation Government Records Access and Management Act.” (Ord. 93-18 § 1, 1993)

2.64.020 Purpose and intent.
A. In enacting the ordinance codified in this chapter, the City recognizes two fundamental constitutional rights:
    1. The right of privacy in relation to personal data gathered by the City; and
    2. The public’s right of access to information concerning the conduct of the public’s business.
B. It is the intent of the City to:
    1. Establish fair information practices to prevent abuse of personal information by the City while protecting the public’s right of easy and reasonable access to unrestricted public records;
    2. Provide guidelines of openness to government information and privacy of personal information consistent with nationwide standards;
    3. Establish and maintain an active, continuing program for the economical and efficient management of the City’s records as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 93-18 § 2, 1993)

2.64.030 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:
A. “Audit” means:
    1. A systematic examination of financial, management, program, and related records for the purpose of determining the fair presentation of financial statements, adequacy of internal controls, or compliance with laws and regulations; or
    2. A systematic examination of program procedures and operations for the purpose of determining their effectiveness, economy, efficiency and compliance with statutes and regulations.
“Chronological logs” means the regular and customary summary records of law enforcement agencies and other public safety agencies that show the time and general nature of police, fire and paramedic calls made to the agency and any arrests or jail bookings made by the agency.
“Classification,” “classify,” and their derivative forms mean determining whether a record series, record, or information within a record is public, private, controlled, or protected, or exempt from disclosure under Utah Code, Section 63-2-201(3)(b).
“Computer program” means a series of instructions or statements that permit the functioning of a computer system in a manner designed to provide storage, retrieval, and manipulation of data from the computer system, and any associated documentation and source material that explain how to operate the computer program.
“Computer program” does not mean:
    1. The original data, including numbers, text, voice, graphics, and images;
    2. Analysis, compilation, and other manipulated forms of the original data produced by use of the program; or
    3. The mathematical or statistical formulas (excluding the underlying mathematical algorithms contained in the program) that could be used if the manipulated forms of the original data were to be produced manually.
“Contractor” means:
    1. Any person who contracts with the City to provide goods or services directly to the City, or
    2. Any private, nonprofit organization that receives funds from the City.
“Contractor” does not mean a private provider.
“Controlled record” means a record containing data on individuals that is controlled as provided by Section 2.64.110.
“Designation,” and “designate,” and their derivative forms mean indicating, based on the City’s familiarity with a record series or based on the City’s review of a reasonable sample of a record series, the primary classification that a majority of records in a record series would be given if classified and the classification that other records typically present in the record series would be given if classified.
“Gross compensation” means every form of remuneration payable for a given period to an individual for services provided including salaries, commissions, vacation pay, severance pay, bonuses, and any board, rent, housing, lodging, payments in kind, and any similar benefit received from the individual’s employer.
“Individual” means a human being.
“Initial contact report” means an initial written or recorded report, however titled, prepared by peace officers engaged in public patrol or response duties describing official actions initially taken in response to either a public complaint about or the discovery of an apparent violation of law, which report may describe:
    1. The date, time, location, and nature of the complaint, the incident, or offense;
    2. Names of victims;
    3. The nature or general scope of the agency’s initial actions taken in response to the incident;
    4. The general nature of any injuries or estimate of damages sustained in the incident;
    5. The name, address, and other identifying information about any person arrested or charged in connection with the incident;
    6. The identity of the public safety personnel (except undercover personnel) or prosecuting attorney involved in responding to the initial incident.
Initial contact reports do not include follow-up or investigative reports prepared after the initial contact report. However, if the information specified in this definition appears in follow-up or investigative reports, it may only be treated confidentially if it is private, controlled, protected, or exempt from disclosure under Section 63-2-201(3)(b) of the Utah Code.
“Person” means any individual, nonprofit or profit corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, or other type of business organization.
“Private provider” means any person who contracts with the City to provide services directly to the public.
“Private record” means a record containing data on individuals that is classified private as provided by Section 2.64.100.
“Protected record” means a record that is classified protected as provided by Section 2.64.120.
“Public record” means a record that has not been appropriately classified private, controlled, or protected as provided in Sections 2.64.100 through 2.64.120.
“Record” means all books, letters, documents, papers, maps, plans, photographs, films, cards, tapes, recording, or other documentary materials, and electronic data, regardless of physical form or characteristics, prepared, owned, used, received, or retained by the City; “Record” does not mean:
    1. Temporary drafts or similar materials prepared for the originator’s personal use or prepared by the originator for the personal use of an individual for whom he is working;
    2. Materials that are legally owned by an individual in his private capacity;
    3. Materials to which access is limited by the laws of copyright or patent unless the copyright or patent is owned by the City;
    4. Proprietary software;
    5. Junk mail or commercial publications received by the City or an official or employee of the City;
    6. Books and other materials that are cataloged, indexed, or inventoried and contained in the collections of libraries open to the public, regardless of physical form or characteristics of the material;
    7. Daily calendars and other personal notes prepared by the originator for the originator’s personal use or for the personal use of an individual for whom he is working; or
    8. Computer programs as defined that are developed or purchased by or for the City for its own use.
    9. Notes or internal memoranda prepared as part of the deliberative process by a member of the judiciary, an administrative law judge, a member of the Board of Pardons, or a member of any other body charged by law with performing a quasi-judicial function.
“Record series” means a group of records that may be treated as a unit for purposes of designation, description, management, or disposition.
“Records officer” means the City Recorder and other individuals as appointed by the City Recorder to work in the care, maintenance, scheduling, designation, classification, disposal and preservation of records.
“Summary data” means statistical records and compilations that contain data derived from private, controlled or protected information but that do not disclose private, controlled or protected information. (Ord. 93-18 § 3, 1993)

2.64.040 Right of public access.
A. Every person has the right to inspect a public record free of charge and the right to take a copy of a public record during normal working hours, subject to the payment of costs and fees pursuant to Section 2.64.060.
B. All records are public unless otherwise expressly provided by this chapter or state or federal law or regulation.
C. The following records are not public:
    1. Records that are appropriately classified private, controlled or protected as allowed by Sections 2.64.100 through 2.64.120.
    2. Records to which access is restricted pursuant to court rule, another state statute, federal statute, or federal regulation, including records for which access is governed or restricted as a condition of participation in a state or federal program or for receiving state or federal funds.
D. Only those records specified in Sections 2.64.100 through 2.64.120 may be classified private, controlled, or protected.
E. 
    1. The City may not disclose a record that is private, controlled or protected to any person except as provided in subsection E2 of this section or Section 2.64.050.
    2. The City may, at its discretion, disclose records that are private under Section 2.64.100 B or protected under Section 2.64.120 to persons other than those specified in Section 2.64.050 if the City Council, or a designee, determines that there is no interest in restricting access to the record, or that the interests favoring access outweigh the interest favoring restriction of access.
F. 
    1. The disclosure of records to which access is governed or limited pursuant to court rule, another state statute, federal statute, or federal regulation, including records for which access is governed or limited as a condition of participation in a state or federal program or for receiving state or federal funds, is governed by the specific provisions of that statute, rule or regulation.
    2. This chapter applies to records described in subsection F1 of this section insofar as this chapter is not inconsistent with the statute, rule, or regulation.
G. The City shall provide a person with a certified copy of a record if:
    1. The person requesting the record has a right to inspect it;
    2. Identifies the record with reasonable specificity; and
    3. Pays the lawful fees.
H. 
    1. The City is not required to create a record in response to a request.
    2. Nothing in this chapter requires the City to fulfill a person’s records request if the request unreasonably duplicates prior records requests from that person.
I. If a person requests copies of more than fifty pages of records, and if the records are contained in files that do not contain records that are exempt from disclosure, the City may:
    1. Provide the requester with the facilities for copying the requested records and require that the requester make the copies himself; or
    2. Allow the requester to provide his own copying facilities and personnel to make the copies at the City offices, and waive the fees for copying the records.
J. 
    1. If the City owns an intellectual property right and offers the intellectual property right for sale, or license, the City may control by ordinance or policy the duplication, and distribution of the material based on terms the City considers to be in the public interest.
    2. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit or impair the rights or protections granted to the City under federal copyright or patent law as a result of its ownership of the intellectual property right.
K. The City may not use the physical form, electronic or otherwise, in which a record is stored to deny, or unreasonably hinder the rights of persons to inspect and receive copies of a record under this chapter. (Ord. 93-18 § 4, 1993)

2.64.050 Access to non-public records.
A. Upon request the City shall disclose a private record to:
    1. The subject of the record;
    2. The parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor who is the subject of the record;
    3. The legal guardian of a legally incapacitated individual who in the subject of the record;
    4. Any other individual who:
        a. Has a power of attorney from the subject of the record; or
        b. Submits a notarized release from the subject of the record or his legal representative dated no later than ninety days before the date the request is made; or
    5. Any person to whom the record must be provided pursuant to court order.
B. 
    1. Upon request, the City shall disclose a controlled record to:
        a. A physician, psychologist, or certified social worker upon submission of a notarized release from the subject of the record that is dated no more than ninety days prior to the date the request is made and a signed acknowledgement of the terms of disclosure of controlled information as provided by subsection B(2) of this section; and
        b. Any person to whom a record must be disclosed pursuant to court order.
    2. A person who receives a record from the City in accordance with subsection B1a of this section may not disclose controlled information from that record to any person, including the subject of the record.
C. If there is more than one subject of a private or controlled record, the portion of the record that pertains to another subject shall be segregated from the portion that the requester is entitled to inspect.
D. Upon request the City shall disclose a protected record to:
    1. The person who submitted the information in the record;
    2. Any other individual who:
        a. Has a power of attorney from the all persons, governmental entities, or political subdivisions whose interests were sought to be protected by the protected classification; or
        b. Submits a notarized release from their legal representatives dated no more than ninety days prior to the date the request is made; or
        c. Any person to whom a record must be provided pursuant to a court order.
E. The City may disclose a record classified private, controlled, or protected to another governmental entity, city, another state, the United States, or a foreign government only as provided by Utah Code Annotated 63-2-206.
F. Before releasing a private, controlled or protected record, the City shall obtain evidence of the requester’s identity.
G. The City shall disclose a record pursuant to the terms of a court order signed by a judge from a court of competent jurisdiction; provided, that:
    1. The record deals with a matter in controversy over which the court has jurisdiction;
    2. The court has considered the merits of the request for access to the record; and
    3. The court has considered and, where appropriate, limited the requester’s use and further disclosure of the record in order to protect privacy interests in the case of private or controlled records, business confidentiality interests in the case of records protected under Subsections 63-2-304(1) and (2), Utah Code Annotated, and privacy interests or the public interest in the case of other protected records;
    4. To the extent the record is properly classified private, controlled, or protected, the interests favoring access, considering limitations thereon, outweigh the interests favoring restriction of access; and
    5. Where access is restricted by a rule, statute or regulation referred to in Section 2.64.040 C2, the court has authority independent of this chapter to order disclosure.
H. 
    1. The City may disclose or authorize disclosure of private or controlled records for research purposes if the City:
        a. Determines that the research purpose cannot reasonably be accomplished without use of disclosure of the information to the researcher in individually identifiable form;
        b. Determines that the proposed research is bona fide, and that the value of the research outweighs the infringement upon personal privacy;
        c. Requires the researcher to assure the integrity, confidentiality and security of the records and requires the removal or destruction of the individual identifiers associated with the records as soon as the purpose of the research project has been accomplished;
        d. Prohibits the researcher from disclosing the record in individually identifiable form except as provided in subsection H2 of this section, or from using the record for purposes other than the research approved by the City; and
        e. Secures from the researcher a written statement of his understanding of and agreement to the conditions of this subsection and his understanding that violation of the terms of this subsection may subject him to criminal prosecution under Section 63-2-801 of the Utah Code.
    2. A researcher may disclose a record in individually identifiable form if the record is disclosed for the purpose of auditing or evaluating the research program and no subsequent use or disclosure of the record in individually identifiable form will be made by the auditor or evaluator except as provided by this section.
    3. The City may require indemnification as a condition of permitting research under this subsection.
I. 
    1. Under Sections 2.64.040(E)(2) or 2.64.160(D) the City may disclose records that are private under Section 2.64.100, or protected under Section 2.64.120 to persons other than those specified in this section.
    2. Under Section 2.64.160 the City Council may require the disclosure of records that are private under Section 2.64.100, controlled under Section 2.64.110, or protected under Section 2.64.120 to persons other than those specified in this section.
    3. Under Subsection 63-2-404(8) of the Utah Code the court may require the disclosure of records that are private under Section 2.64.100, controlled under Section 2.64.110, or protected under Section 2.64.120 to persons other than those specified in this section. (Ord. 93-18 § 5, 1993)

2.64.060 Fees.
A. The City may charge reasonable fees to cover the City’s actual cost of compiling a record or duplicating a record. The fees shall be established by resolution of the City Council. The initial fees, until changed by resolution, are as set forth in “Exhibit A” attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter and found on file in the office of the City Recorder.
B. When the City compiles a record in a form other than that normally maintained by the City, the actual costs under this section may include the following:
    1. The cost of staff time for compiling, formatting, manipulating, packaging, mailing, summarizing, copying, scanning, printing, or tailoring the record into certain formats or media to meet the person’s request;
    2. The cost of staff time to search for, locate, and retrieve the record, and other direct administrative costs for complying with a request;
    3. In the case of fees for a record that is the result of computer output other than word processing, the actual incremental cost of providing the electronic services and products together with a reasonable portion of the costs associated with formatting or interfacing the information for particular users, and the administrative costs as set forth in subsections (B)(1) and (B)(2) of this section; and
    4. Fees for paper photocopies of records or digital copies of records, fees for packaging supplies, and postage fees for mailing records.
C. An hourly charge under subsection (B) of this section may not exceed the fully loaded cost of employment of the lowest paid employee who, in the discretion of the custodian of records, has the necessary skill and training to perform the request.
D. The City may fulfill a record request without charge when it determines that:
    1. Releasing the record primarily benefits the public rather than a person;
    2. The individual requesting the record is the subject of the record;
    3. The requester’s legal rights are directly implicated by the information in the record, and the requester is impecunious; or
    4. The individual has requested in writing a waiver of the fees due to indigency, and the requester has been granted such waiver by the City Recorder.
E. The City may not charge a fee for:
    1. Reviewing a record to determine whether it is subject to disclosure, except as permitted by subsection (B) of this section; or
    2. Inspecting a record; or
    3. Classification of a record.
F. A person who believes that there has been an unreasonable denial of a fee waiver under subsection (D) of this section may appeal the denial to the City Manager as the Chief Administrative Officer of the City. The appeal must be made in writing and within ten days of the denial of the fee waiver.
G. The adjudicative body hearing the appeal:
    1. Shall review the fee waiver de novo, but shall review and consider the City’s denial of the fee waiver and any determination under subsection (D) of this section; and
    2. Has the same authority when a fee waiver or reduction is denied as it has when the inspection of a public record is denied.
H. All fees received under this section by the City shall be retained by the City as a dedicated credit. Those funds shall be spent on the actual costs and expenses incurred by the City in providing the requested records.
I. The City may require payment of past fees and future estimated fees before beginning to process a request if:
    1. Fees are expected to exceed fifty dollars; or
    2. The requester has not paid fees from previous requests.
Any prepaid amount in excess of fees due shall be returned to the requester.
J. This section does not alter, repeal, or reduce fees established by other sections of this municipal code. (Ord. 18-04 (part), 2018: Ord. 93-18 § 6, 1993)

2.64.070 Procedures for records access.
A. A person making a request for a record shall furnish the City with a written request containing his name, mailing address, daytime telephone number if available, and a description of the records requested that identifies the record with reasonable specificity.
B. As soon as reasonably possible, but no later than ten business days after receiving a written request, or five business days after receiving a written request if the requester demonstrates that expedited response to the record request benefits the public rather than the person, the City shall respond to the request by:
    1. Approving the request and providing the record;
    2. Denying the request;
    3. Notifying the requester that it does not maintain the record and providing, if known, the name and address of where the record can be found; or
    4. Notifying the requester that because of one of the extraordinary circumstances listed in subsection D of this section, it cannot immediately approve or deny the request. The notice shall describe the circumstances relied upon and specify the earliest time and date when the records will be available.
C. Any person who requests a record to obtain information for a story or report for publication or broadcast to the general public is presumed to be acting to benefit the public rather than a person.
D. The following circumstances constitute “extraordinary circumstances” that allow the City to delay approval or denial by an additional period of time as specified in subsection E of this section if the City determines that due to the extraordinary circumstances it cannot respond within the time limits provided in subsection B of this section:
    1. Another governmental entity is using the record, in which case the City shall promptly request that the governmental entity currently in possession return the record;
    2. Another governmental entity is using the record as part of an audit and returning the record before the completion of the audit would impair the conduct of the audit;
    3. The request is for a voluminous quantity of records;
    4. The City is currently processing a large number of records requests;
    5. The request requires the City to review a large number of records to locate the records requested;
    6. The decision to release a record involves legal issues that require the City to seek legal counsel for the analysis of statutes, rules, ordinances, regulations, or case law;
    7. Segregating information that the requester is entitled to inspect from information that the requester is not entitled to inspect requires extensive editing; or
    8. Segregating information that the requester is entitled to inspect from information that the requester is not entitled to inspect requires computer programming.
E. If one of the extraordinary circumstances listed in subsection D of this section precludes approval or denial within the time specified in subsection B of this section, the following time limits apply to the extraordinary circumstances:
    1. For claims under subsection D1 of this section, the governmental entity currently in possession of the record shall return the record to the originating entity within five business days of the request for the return unless returning the record would impair the holder’s work.
    2. For claims under subsection D2 of this section, the originating city shall notify the requester when the record is available for inspection and copying.
    3. For claims under subsections D3 through 5 of this section, the City shall:
        a. Disclose the records that it has located which the requester is entitled to inspect;
        b. Provide the requester with an estimate of the amount of time it will take to finish the work required to respond to the request; and
        c. Complete the work and disclose those records that requester is entitled to inspect as soon as reasonably possible.
    4. For delays under subsection D6 of this section, the City shall either approve or deny the request within five business days after the response time specified for the original request has expired.
    5. For delays under subsection D7 of this section, the City shall fulfill the request within fifteen business days from the date of the original request.
    6. For delays under subsection D8 of this section, the City shall complete its programming and disclose the requested records as soon as reasonably possible.
F. If the City fails to provide the requested records or issue a denial within the specified time period, that failure is considered the equivalent of a determination denying access to the records. (Ord. 93-18 § 7, 1993)

2.64.080 Records request denial.
A. If the City denies the request in whole or part, it shall provide a notice of denial to the requester either in person or by sending the notice to requester’s address.
B. The notice of denial shall contain the following information:
    1. A description of the record or portions of the record to which access was denied, provided that the description does not disclose private, controlled, or protected information or records to which access is restricted pursuant to court rule, another state statute, federal statute, or federal regulation, including records for which access is governed or restricted as a condition of participation in a state or federal program or for receiving state or federal funds;
    2. Citations to the provisions of this chapter, another state statute, federal statute, court rule or order or federal regulation that exempts the record or portions of the record from disclosure; provided, that the citations do not disclose private, controlled, or protected information;
    3. Statement that the requester has the right to appeal the denial to the City Council; and
    4. A brief summary of the appeals process, and the time limits for filing an appeal.
C. Unless otherwise required by a court or agency of competent jurisdiction, the City may not destroy or give up custody of any record to which access was denied until the period for an appeal has expired, or the end of the appeals process, including judicial appeal. (Ord. 93-18 § 8, 1993)

2.64.090 Required records disclosure.
A. The following records are public:
    1. Laws and ordinances;
    2. Names, gender, gross compensation, job titles, job descriptions, business addresses, business telephone numbers, number of hours worked per pay period, dates of employment, and relevant education, previous employment, and similar job qualification of the City’s former and present employees and officers excluding undercover law enforcement personnel or investigative personnel if disclosure could reasonably be expected to impair the effectiveness of investigations or endanger any individual’s safety;
    3. Final opinions, including concurring and dissenting opinions, and orders that are made by the City in an administrative, adjudicative or judicial proceeding except that if the proceedings were properly closed to the public, the opinion and order may be withheld to the extent that they obtain information that is private, protected, or controlled;
    4. Final interpretation of statutes or rules by the City unless classified as protected as provided in Section 2.64.120 15, 16 and 17
    5. Information contained in or compiled from a transcript, minutes, or report of the open portion of a meeting of the City including the records of all votes of each member of the City Council;
    6. Judicial records unless a court orders the records to be restricted under the rules of civil or criminal procedure or unless the records are private under this chapter;
    7. Records filed with or maintained by county recorders, clerks, treasurers, surveyors, zoning commissions, the Division of State Lands and Forestry, the Division of Oil, Gas and Mining, the Division of Water Rights, or other governmental entities that give public notice of:
        a. Titles or encumbrances to real property;
        b. Restrictions on the use of real property;
        c. The capacity of persons to take or convey title to real property, or
        d. Tax status for real and personal property;
    8. Records of the Department of Commerce that evidence incorporations, mergers, name changes, and uniform commercial code filings;
    9. Data on individuals that would otherwise be private under this chapter if the individual who is the subject of the record has given the City written permission to make the records available to the public;
    10. Documentation of the compensation that the City pays to a contractor or private provider; and
    11. Summary data.
B. The following records are normally public, but to the extent that a record is expressly exempt from disclosure, access may be restricted under Section 2.64.040 C2 or Sections 2.64.100 through 2.64.120.
    1. Administrative staff manuals, instructions to staff, and statements of policy;
    2. Records documenting a contractor’s or private provider’s compliance with the terms of a contract with the City;
    3. Records documenting the services provided by a contractor or a private provider to the extent the records would be public if prepared by the City;
    4. Contracts entered into by the City;
    5. Any account, voucher, or contract that deals with the receipt or expenditure of funds by the City;
    6. Records relating to governmental assistance or incentives publicly disclosed, contracted for, or given by the City, encouraging a person to expand or relocate a business in Utah, except as provided in Subsection 63-2-304(34) of the Utah Code;
    7. Chronological logs and initial contact reports;
    8. Correspondence by and with the City in which the City determines or states an opinion upon the rights of the state, a political subdivision, the public, or any person;
    9. Empirical data contained in drafts if:
        a. The empirical data is not reasonably available to the requester elsewhere in similar form, and
        b. The City is given a reasonable opportunity to correct any errors or make nonsubstantive changes before release;
    10. Drafts that are circulated to anyone other than the City, state or to anyone other than a federal agency if the City, state or federal agency are jointly responsible for implementation of a program or project that has been legislatively approved;
    11. Drafts that have never been finalized but were relied upon by the City in carrying out action or policy;
    12. Original data in a computer program if the City chooses not to disclose the program;
    13. Arrest warrants after issuance, except that, for good cause, a court may order restricted access to arrest warrants prior to service;
    14. Search warrants after execution and filing of the return, except that a court, for good cause, may order restricted access to search warrants prior to trial;
    15. Records that would disclose information relating to formal charges or disciplinary actions against a past or present city employee if:
        a. The disciplinary action has been completed and all time periods for administrative appeal have expired; and
        b. The formal charges were sustained;
    16. Records maintained by the Division of State Lands and Forestry or the Division of Oil, Gas and Mining that evidence mineral production on government lands;
    17. Final audit reports;
    18. Occupational and professional licenses;
    19. Business licenses; and
    20. A notice of violation, a notice of agency action under Section 63-46b-3 of the Utah Code, or similar records used to initiate proceedings for discipline or sanctions against persons regulated by the City, but not including records that initiate employee discipline.
C. The list of public records in this section is not exhaustive and should not be used to limit accesses to records. (Ord. 93-18 § 9, 1993)

2.64.100 Private records.
A. The following records are private:
    1. Records concerning an individual’s eligibility for unemployment insurance benefits, social services, welfare benefits, or the determination of benefit levels;
    2. Records containing data on individuals describing medical history, diagnosis, condition, treatment, evaluation, or similar medical data;
    3. Records of publicly funded libraries that when examined alone or with other records identify a patron;
    4. Records received or generated in a Senate or House ethics committee concerning any alleged violation of the rules on legislative ethics if the ethics committee meeting was closed to the public;
    5. Records concerning a current or former employee of, or applicant for employment with the City that would disclose that individual’s home address, home telephone number, social security number, insurance coverage, marital status, or payroll deductions.
B. The following records are private if properly classified by the City:
    1. Records concerning a current or former employee of, or applicant for employment with the City, including performance evaluations and personal status information such as race, religion, or disabilities, but not including records that are public under Section 2.64.090 or private under subsection A5 of this section;
    2. Records describing an individual’s finances, except that the following are public:
        a. Records described in Section 2.64.090 A;
        b. Information provided to the City for the purpose of complying with a financial assurance requirement; or
        c. Records that must be disclosed in accordance with another statute;
    3. Records of independent state agencies if the disclosure of those records would conflict with the fiduciary obligations of the agency;
    4. Other records containing data on individuals the disclosure of which constitutes a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy;
    5. Records provided by the United States or by a governmental entity outside the state that are given with the requirement that the records be managed as private records, if the providing entity states in writing that the record would not be subject to public disclosure if retained by it. (Ord. 93-18 § 10, 1993)

2.64.110 Controlled records.
A record is controlled if:
A. The record contains medical, psychiatric, or psychological data about an individual;
B. The City reasonably believes that:
    1. Releasing the information in the record to the subject of the record would be detrimental to the subject’s mental health or to the safety of any individual, or
    2. Releasing the information would constitute a violation of normal professional practice and medical ethics, and
    3. The City has properly classified the record. (Ord. 93-18 § 11, 1993)

2.64.120 Protected records.
The following records are protected if properly classified by the City:
    1. Trade secrets as defined in Section 13-24-2 of Utah Code Annotated if the person submitting the trade secret has provided the City with the information specified in Section 63-2-308 of Utah Code Annotated;
    2. Commercial information or nonindividual financial obtained from a person if:
        a. Disclosure of the information could reasonably be expected to result in unfair competitive injury to the person submitting the information or would impair the ability of the City to obtain necessary information in the future,
        b. The person submitting the information has a greater interest in prohibiting access than the public in obtaining access, and
        c. The person submitting the information has provided the City with the information specified in Section 63-2-308, Utah Code Annotated;
    3. Commercial or financial information acquired or prepared by the City to the extent that a disclosure would lead to financial speculations in currencies, securities, or commodities that will interfere with a planned transaction by the City or cause substantial financial injury to the City or cause substantial financial injury to the City or state economy;
    4. Test questions and answers to be used in future license, certification, registration, employment, or academic examinations;
    5. Records the disclosure of which would impair governmental procurement or give an unfair advantage to any person proposing to enter into a contract or agreement with the City, except that this subsection does not restrict the right of a person to see bids submitted to or by the City after bidding has closed;
    6. Records that would identify real property or the appraisal or estimated value of real or personal property, including intellectual property, under consideration for public acquisition before any rights to the property are acquired unless:
        a. Public interest in obtaining access to the information outweighs the City’s need to acquire the property on the best terms possible,
        b. The information has already been disclosed to persons not employed by or under a duty of confidentiality to the entity,
        c. In the case of records that would identify property, potential sellers of the property described have already learned of the City’s plans to acquire the property,
        d. In the case of records that would identify the appraisal or estimated value of property, the potential sellers have already learned of the City’s estimated value of the property;
    7. Records prepared in contemplation of sale, exchange, lease, rental, or other compensated transaction of real or personal property including intellectual property, which, if disclosed prior to completion of the transaction, would reveal the appraisal or estimated value of the subject property, unless:
        a. The public interest in access outweighs the interests in restricting access, including the City’s interest in maximizing the financial benefit of the transaction, or
        b. When prepared by or on behalf of the City, appraisals or estimates of the value of the subject property have already been disclosed to persons not employed by or under a duty of confidentiality to the City;
    8. Records created or maintained for civil, criminal, or administrative enforcement purposes or audit purposes, or for discipline, licensing, certification, or registration purposes if release of the records:
        a. Reasonably could be expected to interfere with investigations undertaken for enforcement, discipline, licensing, certification, or registration purposes,
        b. Reasonably could be expected to interfere with audits, disciplinary, or enforcement proceedings,
        c. Would create a danger of depriving a person of a right to a fair trial or impartial hearing,
        d. Reasonably could be expected to disclose the identity of a source who is not generally known outside of government and, in the case of a record compiled in the course of an investigation, disclose information furnished by a source not generally known outside of government if disclosure would compromise the source, or
        e. Reasonably could be expected to disclose investigative or audit techniques, procedures, policies, or orders not generally known outside of government if disclosure would interfere with enforcement or audit efforts;
    9. Records the disclosure of which would jeopardize the life or safety of an individual;
    10. Records the disclosure of which would jeopardize the security of governmental property, governmental programs, or governmental record keeping systems from damage, theft, or other appropriation or use contrary to law or public policy;
    11. Records that, if disclosed, would jeopardize the security or safety of a correctional facility, or records relating to incarceration, treatment, probation, or parole, that would interfere with the control and supervision of an offender’s incarceration, treatment, probation or parole;
    12. Records that if disclosed, would reveal recommendations made to the Board of Pardons by an employee of or contractor for the Department of Corrections, the Board of Pardons, or the Department of Human Services that are based on the employee’s or contractor’s supervision, diagnosis, or treatment of any person within the Board’s jurisdiction;
    13. Records and audit workpapers that identify audit, collection, and operational procedures and methods used by the Utah State Tax Commission if disclosure would interfere with audits or collections;
    14. Records of a governmental audit agency relating to an ongoing or planned audit until the final audit is released;
    15. Records prepared by or on behalf of the City solely in anticipation of litigation that are not available under the rules of discovery;
    16. Records disclosing an attorney’s work product, including the mental impressions or legal theories of an attorney or other representative of the City concerning litigation;
    17. Records of communications between the City and an attorney representing, retained or employed by the City if the communications would be privileged as provided in Section 78-24-8, Utah Code Annotated;
    18. Drafts, unless otherwise classified as public;
    19. Records concerning the City’s strategy about collective bargaining or pending litigation;
    20. Records of investigations of loss occurrences and analyses of loss occurrences;
    21. Records, other than personnel evaluations, that contain a personal recommendation concerning an individual if disclosure would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy, or disclosure is not in the public interest;
    22. Records that reveal the location of historic, prehistoric, paleontological, or biological resources that if known would jeopardize the security of those resources or of valuable historic, scientific, educational, or cultural information;
    23. Records of independent state agencies if the disclosure of the records would conflict with the fiduciary obligations of the agency;
    24. Records provided by the United States or by a governmental entity outside the state that are given to the City with a requirement that they be managed as protected records if the providing entity certifies that the record would not be subject to public disclosure if retained by it;
    25. Transcripts, minutes, or reports of the closed portion of a meeting of a public body except as provided in Section 52-4-7 of the Open and Public Meeting Act;
    26. Records that would reveal the contents of settlement negotiations but not including final settlements or empirical data to the extent that they are not otherwise exempt from disclosure;
    27. Memoranda prepared by staff and used in the decision-making process by an administrative law judge, a member of the Board of Pardons, or a member of any other body charged by law with performing a quasi-judicial function;
    28. Records that would reveal negotiations regarding assistance of incentives offered by or requested from the City for the purpose of encouraging a person to expand or locate a business in Utah, but only if disclosure would result in actual economic harm to the person or place the City at a competitive disadvantage, but this section may not be used to restrict access to a record evidencing a final contract; and
    29. Materials to which access must be limited for purposes of securing or maintaining the City’s proprietary protection of intellectual property rights including patents, copyrights, and trade secrets. (Ord. 93-18 § 12, 1993)

2.64.130 Records classification and designation.
A. The City shall:
    1. Evaluate all record series that it uses or creates;
    2. Designate those record series as provided by this chapter;
    3. Report the designation of its record series to the state archives.
B. The City may classify a particular record, record series, or information within a record at any time, but is not required to classify a particular record, record series, or information until access to the record is requested.
C. The City may redesignate a record series or reclassify a record or record series, or information within a record at any time. (Ord. 93-18 § 13, 1993)

2.64.140 Records retention.
The City shall by resolution establish a retention schedule for each record series. The initial retention schedule shall be as set forth in “Exhibit B” attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter and found on file in the office of the City clerk. (Ord. 93-18 § 14, 1993)

2.64.150 Segregation of records.
Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter, if the City receives a request for access to a record that contains both information that the requester is entitled to inspect and information that the requester is not entitled to inspect under this chapter, and, if the information the requester is entitled to inspect is intelligible, the City:
A. Shall allow access to information in the record that the requester is entitled to inspect under this chapter; and
B. May deny access to information in the record if the information is exempt from disclosure to the requester, issuing a notice of denial. (Ord. 93-18 § 15, 1993)

2.64.160 Appeals.
A. 
    1. Any person aggrieved by the City’s access determination under this chapter, including a person not a party to the City’s proceeding, may appeal the determination to the Mayor and City Council by filing a notice of appeal.
    2. If the City claims extraordinary circumstances and specifies the date when the records will be available, and, if the requester believes the extraordinary circumstances do not exist or that the time specified is unreasonable, the requester may appeal the City’s claim of extraordinary circumstances or date for compliance within thirty days after notification of a claim of extraordinary circumstances by the City, despite the lack of a “determination” or its equivalent.
B. 
    1. If the appeal involves a record that is the subject of a business confidentiality claim under Section 63-2-308 of the Utah Code, the City Recorder shall:
        a. Send notice of the requester’s appeal to the business confidentiality claimant within three business days after receiving notice, except that if notice under this section must be given to more than thirty-five persons, it shall be given as soon as reasonably possible;
        b. Send notice of the business confidentiality claim and the schedule for the City Recorder’s determination to the requester within three business days after receiving notice of the requester’s appeal.
    2. The claimant shall have seven business days after notice is sent by the City Recorder to submit further support, for the claim of business confidentiality.
C. 
    1. The Mayor shall make a determination on any appeal within the following period of time:
        a. Within five business days after the Mayor’s receipt of the notice of appeal; or
        b. Within twelve business days after the City sends the requester’s notice of appeal to a person who submitted a claim of business confidentiality.
    2. If the Mayor fails to make a determination within the time specified in subsection C1 of this section, the failure shall be considered the equivalent of an order denying the appeal.
    3. The provisions of this section notwithstanding, the parties participating in the proceeding may, by agreement, extend the time periods specified in this section.
D. The Mayor may, upon consideration and weighing of the various interests and public policies pertinent to the classification and disclosure or nondisclosure, order the disclosure of information properly classified as private under Section 2.64.100 B or protected under Section 2.64.120 if the interests favoring access outweigh the interest favoring restriction of access.
E. The City shall send written notice of the determination of the Mayor to all participants. If the Mayor affirms the denial in whole or in part, the denial shall include a statement that the requester has the right to appeal the denial to the City Council, and the time limits for filing an appeal.
F. The duties of the Mayor under this section may be delegated.
G. The notice of appeal to the City Council must be filed with the City Recorder no later than thirty days after the Mayor has denied the appeal or fails to make a determination within the time specified in subsection C1 of this section.
H. The notice of appeal shall contain the following information:
    1. The petitioner’s name, mailing address, and daytime telephone number; and
    2. The relief sought.
I. The petitioner may file a short statement of facts, reasons, and legal authority in support of the appeal.
J. No later than three days after receiving a notice of appeal, the Recorder shall:
    1. Schedule a hearing for the City Council to discuss the appeal which shall be held no sooner than fifteen days and no later than thirty days from the date of the filing of the appeal;
    2. At the hearing, the City Council shall allow the parties to testify, present evidence, and comment on the issues. The City Council may allow other interested persons to comment on the issues;
    3. No later than three business days after the hearing, the City Council shall issue a signed order either granting the petition in whole or in part or upholding the determination of the City in whole or in part;
    4. The order of the City shall include:
        a. A statement of reasons for the decision, including citations to this chapter or federal regulation that governs disclosure of the record; provided, that the citations do not disclose private, controlled or protected information,
        b. A description of the record or portions of the record to which access was ordered or denied, provided that the description does not disclose private, controlled, or protected information,
        c. A statement that any party to the appeal may appeal the City’s decision to district court, and
        d. A brief summary of the appeal, and a notice that in order to protect its rights on appeal, the party may wish to seek advice from an attorney.
K. A person aggrieved by the City’s classification or designation determination under this chapter, but who is not requesting access to the records, may appeal that determination using the procedures provided in this section. If a nonrequestor is the only appellant, the procedures provided in this section shall apply, except that the determination on the appeal shall be made within thirty days after receiving the notice of appeal. (Ord. 93-18 § 16, 1993)

2.64.170 Judicial review.
Any party to a proceeding before the City Council may petition for judicial review by the district court of the City Council’s order. The petition shall be filed no later than thirty days after the date of the City Council’s order. (Ord. 93-18 § 17, 1993)

2.64.180 Confidential treatment of records for which no exemption applies.
A. A court may, on appeal or in a declaratory or other action, order the confidential treatment of records for which no exemption from disclosure applies if:
    1. There are compelling interest favoring restriction of access to the record; and
    2. The interests favoring restriction of access clearly outweigh the interests favoring access.
B. If the City requests a court to restrict access to a record under this section, the court shall require the City to pay the reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the lead party in opposing the City’s request, if:
    1. The court finds that no statutory or constitutional exemption from disclosure could reasonably apply to the record in question; and
    2. The court denies confidential treatment under this section.
C. This section does not apply to records that are specifically required to be public under Section 2.64.090 or Section 63-2-301 of the Utah Code, except as provided in subsection D of this section.
D. 
    1. Access to drafts and empirical data in drafts may be limited under this section, but the court may consider, in its evaluation of interests favoring restriction of access, only those interests that relate to the underlying information, and not to the deliberative nature of the record.
    2. Access to original data in a computer program may be limited under this section, but the court may consider, in its evaluation of interest favoring restriction of access, only those interests that relate to the underlying information, and not to the status of that data as part of a computer program. (Ord. 93-18 § 18, 1993)

2.64.190 Request to amend a record.
A. 
    1. Subject to subsection G of this section, an individual may contest the accuracy or completeness of any public or private or protected record concerning him by requesting the City to amend the record. However, this section does not affect the right of access to private or protected records.
    2. The request shall contain the following information:
        a. The requester’s name, mailing address and daytime telephone number; and
        b. A brief statement explaining why the City should amend the record.
B. The City shall issue an order either approving or denying the request to amend no later than thirty days after receipt of the request.
C. If the City approves the request, it shall correct all of its records that contain the same incorrect information as soon as practical. A city may not disclose the record until it has amended it.
D. If the City denies the request it shall:
    1. Inform the requester in writing; and
    2. Provide a brief statement giving its reasons for denying the request.
E. 
    1. If the City denies a request to amend a record, the requester may submit a written statement contesting the information in the record.
    2. The City shall:
        a. File the requester’s statement with the disputed record if the record is in a form such that the statement can accompany the record or make the statement accessible if the record is not in a form such that the statement can accompany the record; and
        b. Disclose the requester’s statement along with the information in the record whenever the City discloses the disputed information.
F. The requester may appeal the denial of the request to amend a record pursuant to Section 2.64.160.
G. This section does not apply to records relating to title, real or personal property, medical records, judicial case files, or any other records that the City determines must be maintained in their original form to protect the public interest and to preserve the integrity of the record system. (Ord. 93-18 § 19, 1993)

2.64.200 Rights of individuals on whom data is maintained.
A. 
    1. The City shall file with the state archivist a statement explaining the purposes for which record series designated private or controlled are collected and used by that city.
    2. That statement is a public record.
B. Upon request, the City shall explain to an individual:
    1. The reasons the individual is asked to furnish to the City information that could be classified private or controlled;
    2. The intended uses of the information; and
    3. The consequences for refusing to provide the information.
C. The City may not use private or controlled records for purposes other than those given in the statement filed with the state archivist under subsection A of this section or for purposes other than those for which another governmental entity could use the record under Section 63-2-206 of the Utah Code. (Ord. 93-18 § 20, 1993)

2.64.210 Criminal penalties.
A. 
    1. A public employee or other person who has lawful access to any private, controlled, or protected record under this chapter, and who intentionally discloses or provides a copy of a private, controlled or protected record to any person knowing that such disclosure is prohibited, is guilty of a class B misdemeanor.
    2. It is a defense to prosecution under subsection A of this section that the actor released private, controlled or protected information in the reasonable belief that the disclosure of the information was necessary to expose a violation of law involving government corruption, abuse of office, or misappropriation of public funds or property.
    3. It is a defense to prosecution under subsection A of this section that the record could have lawfully been released to the recipient if it had been properly classified.
B. 
    1. A person who by false pretenses, bribery, or theft, gains access to or obtains a copy of any private, controlled, or protected record to which he is not legally entitled is guilty of a class B misdemeanor.
    2. No person shall be guilty under subsection B1 of this section who receives the record, information, or copy after the fact and without prior knowledge of or participation in the false pretenses, bribery, or theft.
C. A public employee who intentionally refuses to release a record the disclosure of which the employee knows is required by law or by final unappealed order from a city, the records committee, or a court, is guilty of a class B misdemeanor. (Ord. 93-18 § 21, 1993)

Chapter 2.68 RESERVED1
1 Editor’s note: Ord. No. 18-04, adopted April 10, 2018, repealed Chapter 2.68, § 2.68.010, which pertained to the Moab youth center board and derived from Res. 08-88.

Chapter 2.72 RESERVED1
1 Editor’s note: Ord. No. 18-04, adopted April 10, 2018, repealed Chapter 2.72, § 2.72.010, which pertained to the Hollywood Stuntmen’s Hall of Fame board and derived from Res. 09-88.

Chapter 2.76 RELOCATION ASSISTANCE PLAN

Sections:
2.76.010     Purpose.
2.76.020     Replacement of dwelling units.
2.76.030     Relocation assistance.
2.76.040     Displacement strategy.

2.76.010 Purpose.
It is the declared policy of the City to establish and follow the plan described below to minimize the adverse impacts on persons of low and moderate income resulting from acquisition and relocation activities assisted with funds provided under the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, as amended. This plan does not replace but is supplementary to the acquisition and relocation requirements stated in the Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act of 1970, as amended, as well as the Utah Relocation Assistance Act. (Res. 04-90 (part), 1990)

2.76.020 Replacement of dwelling units.
A. The City will replace all occupied and vacant occupiable low/moderate-income dwelling units demolished or converted to a use other than as low/moderate-income housing as a direct result of activities assisted with funds provided under the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, as amended, as described in 24 CFR 570.496a.(b)(1) on a one-for-one basis, unless a written waiver has been received as provided for in 24 CFR 570.496a.(b)(1)(iii).
B. All replacement housing will be provided within three years of the commencement of the demolition or rehabilitation relating to conversion. Before obligating or expending funds that will directly result in such demolition or conversion, the City will make public and submit to the division of community development the following information in writing:
    1. A description of the proposed assisted activity;
    2. The general location on a map and approximate number of dwelling units by size (number of bedrooms) that will be demolished or converted to a use other than as low/moderate-income dwelling units as a direct result of the assisted activity;
    3. A time schedule for the commencement and completion of the demolition or conversion;
    4. The general location on a map and approximate number of dwelling units by size (number of bedrooms) that will be provided as replacement dwelling units;
    5. The source of funding and a time schedule for the provision of replacement dwelling units; and
    6. The basis for concluding that each replacement dwelling unit will remain a low/moderate-income dwelling unit for at least ten years from the date of initial occupancy. (Res. 04-90 § 1, 1990)

2.76.030 Relocation assistance.
The City will provide relocation assistance, as described in 24 CFR 570.496a.(b)(2), to each low/moderate-income household displaced by the demolition of housing or by the conversion of a low/moderate-income dwelling to another use as a direct result of assisted activities. (Res. 04-90 § 2, 1990)

2.76.040 Displacement strategy.
Consistent with the goals and objectives of activities assisted under the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, as amended, the City will take the following steps to minimize the displacement of persons from their homes:
A. Stage the rehabilitation of assisted housing to allow tenants to remain during and after rehabilitation, and the rehabilitation of empty units to allow the shifting of tenants during rehabilitation of occupied units;
B. Provide counseling to assist homeowners and renters to understand the range of assistance options available, utilizing existing housing counseling programs to the greatest extent possible;
C. Give priority in assisted housing units in the neighborhood to area residents facing displacement;
D. Target Section 8 existing program certificates to households being displaced, and recruit area landlords to participate in the program;
E. Provide counseling and referral services to assist displaced homeowners and renters to find alternative housing in the affected neighborhood; and
F. Work with area landlords and real estate brokers to locate vacancies for households facing displacement. (Res. 04-90 § 3, 1990)

Chapter 2.80 MEDICAL REIMBURSEMENT POLICY

Sections:
2.80.010     Adopted.

2.80.010 Adopted.
Moab City adopts the medical reimbursement policy as follows:
A. The administration of Moab City shall determine for each employee, appointive officer or elective officer of Moab City the cost of providing medical insurance for that employee, appointed or elected officer and give that employee, appointed or elected officer the opportunity to participate in the medical insurance program as adopted and modified from time to time by the Moab City Council.
B. Any employee or appointed or elected officer of Moab City who does not wish to participate in the health insurance benefit shall be entitled to receive a medical reimbursement for any out-of-pocket medical expenses which the employee or officer may incur which are not covered by other insurance, in an amount not to exceed what would have been paid by Moab City for that employee or officer’s medical insurance, had the employee or officer opted to participate in the medical insurance benefit.
C. Any employee or officer who wishes to participate in the medical reimbursement program shall submit to Moab City copies of all billing and proof that the medical billing has not been otherwise paid by a third party on sufficient proof, and Moab City shall reimburse the employee, as outlined in subsection B of this section.
D. The maximum amount any officer or employee may receive during any one year shall be equal to the amount Moab City would have paid in insurance premiums for that employee during that year. (Res. 13-93 § 1, 1993)

Chapter 2.84 RESERVED1
1 Editor’s note: Ord. No. 18-04, adopted April 10, 2018, repealed Chapter 2.84, §§ 2.84.010--2.84.040, which pertained to the Moab arts and recreation center advisory board and derived from Ords. 97-29 and 98-18 and Res. 16-96.

Chapter 2.88 RESERVED1
1 Editor’s note: Ord. No. 18-04, adopted April 10, 2018, repealed Chapter 2.88, §§ 2.88.010--2.88.050, which pertained to the Moab hillside review advisory board and derived from Res. 2-97.

Chapter 2.90 MOAB WATER CONSERVATION AND DROUGHT MANAGEMENT ADVISORY BOARD

Sections:
2.90.010     Composition of the Board.
2.90.020     Appointment process.
2.90.030     Terms of office.
2.90.040     Responsibilities of the Moab Water Conservation and Drought Management Advisory Board.

2.90.010 Composition of the Board.
The Moab Water Conservation and Drought Management Advisory Board (the Board) shall consist of seven members, six of whom shall be residents of the City of Moab. One member of the Board may be a resident of the Spanish Valley region. (Ord. 18-04 (part), 2018: Ord. 17-09 (part), 2017)

2.90.020 Appointment process.
A. All board members shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by action of the City Council.
B. City staff will review applications and make recommendations to the Mayor for the first Moab Water Conservation and Drought Management Advisory Board. Thereafter, the Moab Water Conservation and Drought Management Advisory Board will make recommendations to the Mayor regarding the filling of vacancies on the Board. (Ord. 17-09 (part), 2017)

2.90.030 Terms of office.
For the first board appointments, four members shall be appointed for two-year terms, and three members for three-year terms. All subsequent appointments shall be for two-year terms. Board members are subject to reappointment for new terms and there shall be no limit to terms. (Ord. 17-09 (part), 2017)

2.90.040 Responsibilities of the Moab Water Conservation and Drought Management Advisory Board.
A. The Moab Water Conservation and Drought Management Advisory Board, in an advisory capacity, shall:
    1. Adopt bylaws and a mission statement;
    2. Make recommendations to city staff and the City Council regarding implementation of the Moab Water Conservation Plan and updates to the text of the plan;
    3. Provide recommendations to the City staff regarding annual water conservation and drought management program budgets, water-related capital expenditures, and grant applications;
    4. Provide recommendations to the Mayor and City Council regarding appointments to the Board;
    5. Consider and recommend policy or ordinance changes pertaining to water conservation;
    6. Perform strategic planning and annual program evaluations for the Moab water conservation and drought management program; and
    7. Provide technical guidance to city staff on water-related utility planning. (Ord. 17-09 (part), 2017)

Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE

Chapters:
3.04         Fiscal Procedures Generally
3.08         Claims against City
3.12         Sales and Use Tax
3.13         Resort Communities Sales Tax
3.14         Municipal Transient Rooms Tax
3.15         Municipal Roads Sales Tax
3.16         Fund Depositories
3.17         Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax
3.18         Telecommunications License Tax
3.20         Issuance of Credit Cards to City Officials and Employees
3.28         Budgetary Fiscal Policy
3.29         Real Estate Transfer Assessment Agreements

Chapter 3.04 FISCAL PROCEDURES GENERALLY

Sections:
3.04.010     Financial affairs of city to be governed by state law.
3.04.020     Accountability of officers.
3.04.030     Collection of fees--Receipts to be given.
3.04.040     Collection of fees--Records to be kept.
3.04.045     Checks returned to city--Fee.
3.04.050     Collection of fees--Daily payment into treasury.
3.04.055     Finance charges on accounts receivable.
3.04.060     Custody and issuance of blank receipts, certificates, tags and metallic plates.
3.04.070     Voidance of unlawful contracts and authorizations.
3.04.080     Noncompliance-Notification.

3.04.010 Financial affairs of city to be governed by state law.
The City’s financial affairs shall be governed by and operated as provided in the Uniform Municipal Fiscal Procedures Act of the state. (Prior code §8-1)

3.04.020 Accountability of officers.
All elective and appointive officers of the City shall be strictly accountable for account in detail of all fees, commissions, compensations of deputy or assistant in their respective departments. (Prior code §8-2)

3.04.030 Collection of fees--Receipts to be given.
Receipts shall be issued on forms provided by the City Recorder for all fees and money collected by or paid to any officer of the City or his deputy or assistant. The original receipt shall in all cases be given to the person making payment and the duplicate shall at the close of each day’s business, be filed with the City Recorder. (Prior code §8-3)

3.04.040 Collection of fees--Records to be kept.
It shall be the duty of every officer who is authorized to receive any fees for official services of himself or his deputies or assistants, or of any officer or his deputies or assistants who are authorized to make any collections, to keep a cash book in which shall be entered an exact and full account in detail of all fees, commissions, compensations or collections of whatever nature or kind, with the date collected, the name of the payer and the nature of the collection in each case. (Prior code §8-4)

3.04.045 Checks returned to city--Fee.
The Treasurer of the City is authorized and ordered to add the additional sum of twelve dollars to any account owed to the City by any person or corporation who delivers a check to the City for goods or services rendered when such check is returned to the City for insufficient funds. (Res. 02-87, 1987)

3.04.050 Collection of fees--Daily payment into treasury.
The head of each office where fees and money are collected, at the close of each day’s business, shall cover into the City treasury all fees and money collected by his office. (Prior code § 8-5)

3.04.055 Finance charges on accounts receivable.
The finance charges to be charged on all accounts receivable over thirty days old shall be one and one-half percent monthly or eighteen percent annually. These rates shall become effective with the September 1990 utility billing. (Res. 11-90, 1990)

3.04.060 Custody and issuance of blank receipts, certificates, tags and metallic plates.
All blank receipts, permits, certificates of license or other blank forms and tags and metallic plates which are intended to facilitate or place a check upon the collection of the revenue shall be subject to the approval of the City Recorder, and shall be provided by him as directed by the City Council and remain in his custody for issuance as may be required. The City Recorder shall deliver such blank receipts, permits, certificates of license or other blank forms and tags and metallic plates to the proper officers, as may be required, and shall take receipts therefor. All officers shall be accountable to the City Recorder for the blank receipts and other forms and tags and metallic plates. (Prior code § 8-6)

3.04.070 Voidance of unlawful contracts and authorizations.
All contracts, authorizations, allowances, payments and liabilities to pay, made or attempted to be made in violation of this code or any other ordinances of the City shall be absolutely void and shall never be the foundation or basis of a claim against the treasury of the City. The Mayor and all officers of the City are charged with notice of the condition of the treasury and the extent of the claims against the same. (Prior code § 8-9)

3.04.080 Noncompliance-Notification.
It shall be the duty of the City Recorder to notify the City Council of every failure on the part of any officer, deputy or assistant to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 8-13)

Chapter 3.08 CLAIMS AGAINST CITY

Sections:
3.08.010     Presentation.

3.08.010 Presentation.
Every claim against the City for damages or injury alleged to have been caused by the defective, unsafe, dangerous or obstructed condition of any street, alley, crosswalk, sidewalk, culvert or bridge of the City, or from the negligence of the City authorities in respect to any such street, alley, crosswalk, culvert or bridge, within thirty days after the happening of such injury or damage shall be presented to the City Council in writing, signed by the claimant or by some person authorized by the claimant to sign the same, and properly verified, stating the particular time at which the injury happened, designating and describing the particular place in which it occurred, particularly describing the cause and circumstances of such injury and stating the nature and probable extent of such injury and the amount of damages claimed on account of the same. Such notice shall be sufficient in the particularly specified in this section to enable the officers of the City to find the place and cause of such injury from the description thereof given in the notice itself without extraneous inquiry, and no action shall be maintained against the City for damages or injury to person or property unless it appears that the claim for which the action was brought was presented to the City Council as set out in this section, and that the City Council did not within ninety days thereafter audit and allow the same. Every claim against the City, other than claims above mentioned, shall be presented, properly itemized or described and verified as to correctness by the claimant or his agent, to the City Council within one year after the last item of such account or claim accrued, and if such account or claim is not properly or sufficiently itemized, or described or verified, the City Council may require the same to be made more specific as to the itemization or description or to be corrected as to the verification thereof. (Prior code § 8-7)

Chapter 3.12 SALES AND USE TAX1

Sections:
3.12.010     Short title.
3.12.020     Purpose.
3.12.030     Sales tax-Imposition.
3.12.040     Sales tax-Applicability.
3.12.050     Sales tax-Adoption of statutory provisions.
3.12.060     Sales tax-Substitution of terms.
3.12.070     Sales tax-License required.
3.12.080     Sales tax-Exclusions and exemptions.
3.12.090     Violation-Penalty.

3.12.010 Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the “sales and use tax ordinance of the City”. (Ord. 90-04 § 1, 1990)

3.12.020 Purpose.
The 48th Session of the Utah Legislature has authorized the counties and municipalities of the state to enact sales and use tax ordinances imposing a one percent tax.
It is the purpose of this chapter to conform the sales and use tax of the municipality to the requirements of the Sales and Use Tax Act, Chapter 12 of Title 59, Utah Code Annotated, 1953, as currently amended. (Ord. 90-04 § 2, 1990)

3.12.030 Sales tax-Imposition.
A. From and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, there is levied and there shall be collected and paid a tax upon every retail sale of tangible personal property, services and meals made within the municipality at the rate of one percent.
B. An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use, or other consumption in this municipality of tangible personal property from any retailer on or after the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter at the rate of one percent of the sales price of the property. (Ord. 90-04 § 4(a)(1), (2), 1990)

3.12.040 Sales tax-Applicability.
For the purpose of this chapter, all retail sales shall be presumed to have been consummated at the place of business/delivered by the retailer or his agent to and out-of-state destination. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be as determined under the rules and regulations prescribed by and adopted by the State Tax Commission. Public utilities as defined by Title 54, Utah Code Annotated, 1953, shall not be obligated to determine the place or places within any county or municipality where public utilities services are rendered, but the place of sale or the sales tax revenue arising from such service allocable to the City shall be as determined by the State Tax Commission pursuant to an appropriate formula and other rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by it. (Ord. 90-04 § 4(a)(3), 1990)

3.12.050 Sales tax-Adoption of statutory provisions.
Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of the Sales and Use Tax Act, all of the provisions of Chapter 12, Title 59, Utah Code Annotated, 1953, as amended, and in force and effect on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, insofar as they relate to sales taxes, excepting Sections 59-12-101 and 59-12-119 thereof, are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. (Ord. 90-04 § 4(b)(1), 1990)

3.12.060 Sales tax-Substitution of terms.
Wherever, and to the extent that in Chapter 12 of Title 59, Utah Code Annotated, 1953, the state of Utah is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this municipality shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to require substitution of the name of the municipality for the word “state” when that word is used as part of the title of the State Tax Commission, or of the Constitution of Utah, nor shall the name of the municipality be substituted for that of the state in any section when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the municipality or any agency thereof, rather than by or against the State Tax Commission in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter. (Ord. 90-04 § 4(b)(2), 1990)

3.12.070 Sales tax-License required.
If an annual license has been issued to a retailer under Section 59-12-106, Utah Code Annotated, 1953, an additional license shall not be required by reason of Sections 3.12.030 through 3.12.080. (Ord. 90-04 § 4(b)(3), 1990)

3.12.080 Sales tax-Exclusions and exemptions.
There shall be excluded from the purchase price paid or charged by which the tax is measured:
A. The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state on a retailer or consumer;
B. The gross receipts from the sale of or the cost of storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property upon which a sales or use tax has become due by reason of the sale transaction to any other municipality and any county in the state, under the sales or use tax ordinance enacted by the county or municipality in accordance with the Sales and Use Tax Act. (Ord. 90-04 § 4(b)(4)(A), (B), 1990)

3.12.090 Violation-Penalty.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine in an amount less than three-hundred dollars or imprisonment for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 90-04 § 6, 1990)
1Prior ordinance history: Ords. 84-10 and 86-03; prior code §§ 8-14-8-21.

Chapter 3.13 RESORT COMMUNITIES SALES TAX

Sections:
3.13.010     Definitions.
3.13.020     Tax assessment.
3.13.030     Exemptions.
3.13.040     Sales tax license.
3.13.050     Remittances and collection.
3.13.060     Severability.

3.13.010 Definitions.
Except as is expressly stated otherwise, this chapter shall be interpreted consistently with the provisions of the Utah Sales and Use Tax Act. The statutory definitions contained in U.C.A. 59-12-102, as amended, are incorporated by reference. (Ord. 97-21 (part), 1997)

3.13.020 Tax assessment.
In addition to all other sales taxes, there is levied against the purchaser a resort communities sales tax at the rate of one and one-half percent of the gross sales price upon the following types of transactions within the Moab city limits:
A. Retail sales of tangible personal property;
B. Sums paid to common carriers or telecommunications providers for transportation services and intrastate telecommunications, respectively;
C. Meals sold;
D. Admissions fees for movies, theatrical productions, museums, exhibitions, concerts, shows of any type, rodeos, sporting events, amusement events, river runs, jeep tours, boat rides, swimming pools, horseback rides, golf courses, or any similar recreational, cultural, or entertainment oriented activity, however denominated;
E. Laundry and dry cleaning services;
F. Services for the repair, maintenance, or installation of tangible personal property;
G. Leases and rentals of tangible personal property, provided the property is maintained, stored, or used within the City limits;
H. Transient public accommodations; and
I. All other transactions subject to taxation pursuant to U.C.A. Section 59-12-103(1), as amended. (Ord. 97-21 (part), 1997)

3.13.030 Exemptions.
The following transactions are exempt from taxes assessed under this chapter:
A. Sales of a single item where the total purchase price is two thousand five hundred dollars or more;
B. Wholesale transactions in which goods are sold to a person holding a sales tax license and where the goods are held for resale to the ultimate consumer; and
C. All sales specifically exempted pursuant to U.C.A. Section 59-12-104, as amended, including for purposes of illustration only: motor fuels; food sales of less than one dollar from vending machines; sales by religious or charitable institutions; newspaper sales; purchases of food under the federal food stamps program; sales of medicine; and sales of agricultural equipment not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars in value; and
D. All transactions involving the sale, storage, use, or consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of or the cost of which has been subject to a qualifying local sales or use tax enacted by any county other than Grand County, Utah or any other city or town in the state of Utah;
E. The amount of any sales transaction, otherwise subject to this chapter, which represents sales and use taxes paid to the state of Utah pursuant to U.C.A. Section 59-12-103, as amended. (Ord. 97-21 (part), 1997)

3.13.040 Sales tax license.
Every person or entity engaging in sales subject to this chapter shall obtain a sales tax license, as is required by Chapter 3.12 of the Moab Municipal Code and U.C.A. Section 59-12-106. Persons or entities already having a valid sales tax license issued by the Utah State Tax Commission pursuant to those sections need not obtain any additional license. (Ord. 97-21 (part), 1997)

3.13.050 Remittances and collection.
A. The City of Moab shall contract with the Utah State Tax Commission for assessment, administration, and enforcement services for all taxes assessed under this chapter. Sums collected shall be remitted to the City in accordance with that agreement.
B. All persons subject to this chapter shall make remittances in accordance with rules and regulations promulgated by the commission and as is otherwise mandated by state law.
C. The tax enacted under this chapter shall be paid quarterly, on the first day of January, April, July, and October of each calendar year, unless the licensee is required to submit monthly remittances pursuant to state law or regulations promulgated by the commission.
    1. Quarterly remittances shall be regarded as timely, provided all sums are paid within thirty days of quarterly payment due date.
D. Licensees and all vendors or other persons subject to this chapter, including persons acquiring a business or its assets, are liable for all penalties, interest, costs of collection, statutory liens, and related remedies available to the commission for collection of unpaid taxes under the Utah Sales and Use Tax Act, which remedies are incorporated by reference. (Ord. 97-21 (part), 1997)

3.13.060 Severability.
If any provision of this chapter shall be held to be void, unconstitutional, or unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, it shall be severed from the remainder of this chapter, which shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 97-21 (part), 1997)

Chapter 3.14 MUNICIPAL TRANSIENT ROOMS TAX

Sections:
3.14.010     Definitions.
3.14.020     Tax assessment.
3.14.030     Curtailment.
3.14.040     Application of revenues.
3.14.050     Sales tax license.
3.14.060     Remittances and collection.
3.14.070     Severability.

3.14.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:
A. “Public accommodation” means a place providing temporary sleeping accommodations to the public and includes:
    1. A motel;
    2. A hotel;
    3. A motor court or recreational vehicle park;
    4. An inn;
    5. A bed and breakfast establishment;
    6. A condominium;
    7. A campground operated by a nongovernmental entity;
    8. A resort home; and
    9. A transient apartment rental.
B. “Rent” means and includes:
    1. All room charges, exclusive of charges for food and beverages or related items subject to sales taxation;
    2. Fees for the occupancy of a dwelling or site;
    3. Timeshare fees and dues.
C. “Transient” means a person who occupies a public accommodation for thirty consecutive days or less.
D. “Person” means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, or entity of any kind. (Ord. 97-22 (part), 1997)

3.14.020 Tax assessment.
A. There is levied against the purchaser a transient room tax on the rents charged for transient occupancy of public accommodations within Moab City in an amount equal to one and one-half percent of the gross rents charged.
B. The transient room tax levied by this chapter is in addition to all other taxes or fees imposed by the state or the City. (Ord. 97-22 (part), 1997)

3.14.030 Curtailment.
A. The tax imposed by this chapter shall be reduced by the amount of one-half of one percent upon the first occurrence of the following events:
    1. Twenty-five years from the day Moab City enacts the ordinance codified in this chapter; or
    2. The day on which debt service on bonds or other indebtedness issued prior to January 1, 1997, have been paid in full, including lease payments under a lease/purchase option and refunding obligations incurred in connection with said bonded indebtedness or lease/purchase obligations. (Ord. 97-22 (part), 1997)

3.14.040 Application of revenues.
Revenues generated by the tax under this chapter shall be used for general municipal revenue purposes, including the servicing of bonded indebtedness. (Ord. 97-22 (part), 1997)

3.14.050 Sales tax license.
Every person or entity collecting rents from public accommodations subject to this chapter shall obtain a sales tax license, as is required by Chapter 3.12 of the Moab Municipal Code and U.C.A. Section 59-12-106. Persons or entities already having a valid sales tax license issued by the Utah State Tax Commission pursuant to those sections need not obtain any additional license. (Ord. 97-22 (part), 1997)

3.14.060 Remittances and collection.
The City of Moab shall contract with the Utah State Tax Commission for assessment, administration, and enforcement services for all taxes assessed under this chapter. Sums collected shall be remitted to the City in accordance with that agreement.
B. All persons subject to this chapter shall make remittances in accordance with rules and regulations promulgated by the commission and as is otherwise mandated by state law.
C. The tax enacted under this chapter shall be paid quarterly, on the first day of January, April, July, and October of each calendar year, unless the licensee is required to submit monthly remittances pursuant to state law or regulations promulgated by the commission.
    1. Quarterly payments under this chapter are timely, provided all sums owing are paid in full no later than thirty days from the quarterly payment date.
D. Licensees and all vendors or other persons subject to this chapter, including persons acquiring a business or its assets, are liable for all penalties, interest, costs of collection, statutory liens, and related remedies available to the commission for collection of unpaid taxes under the Utah Sales and Use Tax Act, which remedies are incorporated by reference. (Ord. 97-22 (part), 1997)

3.14.070 Severability.
If any provision of this chapter shall be held to be void, unconstitutional, or unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, it shall be severed from the remainder of this chapter, which shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 97-22 (part), 1997)

Chapter 3.15 MUNICIPAL ROADS SALES TAX

Sections:
3.15.010     Definitions.
3.15.020     Tax assessment.
3.15.030     Exemptions.
3.15.040     Sales tax license.
3.15.050     Remittances and collection.
3.15.060     Application of funds.
3.15.070     Severability.

3.15.010 Definitions.
Except as is expressly stated otherwise, this chapter shall be interpreted consistently with the provisions of the Utah Sales and Use Tax Act. The statutory definitions contained in U.C.A. Section 59-12-102, as amended, are incorporated by reference. (Ord. 97-23 (part), 1997)

3.15.020 Tax assessment.
In addition to all other sales taxes, there is levied against the purchaser a municipal road sales tax at the rate of one quarter of one percent of the gross sales price upon the following types of transactions within the Moab city limits:
A. Retail sales of tangible personal property;
B. Sums paid to common carriers or telecommunications providers for transportation services and intrastate telecommunications, respectively;
C. Meals sold;
D. Admissions fees for movies, theatrical productions, museums, exhibitions, concerts, shows of any type, rodeos, sporting events, amusement events, river runs, jeep tours, boat rides, swimming pools, horseback rides, golf courses, or any similar recreational, cultural, or entertainment oriented activity, however denominated;
E. Laundry and dry cleaning services;
F. Services for the repair, maintenance, or installation of tangible personal property;
G. Leases and rentals of tangible personal property, provided the property is maintained, stored, or used within the City limits; and
H. Transient public accommodations; and
I. All other transactions subject to taxation pursuant to U.C.A. Section 59-12-103(1), as amended. (Ord. 97-23 (part), 1997)

3.15.030 Exemptions.
The following transactions are exempt from taxes assessed under this chapter:
Wholesale transactions in which goods are sold to a person holding a sales tax license and where the goods are held for resale to the ultimate consumer. (Ord. 97-23 (part), 1997)

3.15.040 Sales tax license.
Every person or entity engaging in sales subject to this chapter shall obtain a sales tax license, as is required by Chapter 3.12 of the Moab Municipal Code and U.C.A. Section 59-12-106. Persons or entities already having a valid sales tax license issued by the Utah State Tax Commission pursuant to those sections need not obtain any additional license. (Ord. 97-23 (part), 1997)

3.15.050 Remittances and collection.
A. The City of Moab shall contract with the Utah State Tax Commission for assessment, administration, and enforcement services for all taxes assessed under this chapter. Sums collected shall be remitted to the City in accordance with that agreement.
B. All persons subject to this chapter shall make remittances in accordance with rules and regulations promulgated by the commission and as is otherwise mandated by state law.
C. The tax enacted under this chapter shall be paid quarterly, on the first day of January, April, July, and October of each calendar year, unless the licensee is required to submit monthly remittances pursuant to state law or regulations promulgated by the commission.
    1. Quarterly remittances shall be regarded as timely, provided that all sums are paid in full no later than thirty days from the quarterly due date.
D. Licensees and all vendors or other persons subject to this chapter, including persons acquiring a business or its assets, are liable for all penalties, interest, costs of collection, statutory liens, and related remedies available to the commission for collection of unpaid taxes under the Utah Sales and Use Tax Act, which remedies are incorporated by reference. (Ord. 97-23 (part), 1997)

3.15.060 Application of funds.
Funds generated pursuant to this chapter shall be collected and appropriated solely for the maintenance, construction, and repair of municipal public roads, streets, and related infrastructure. (Ord. 97-23 (part), 1997)

3.15.070 Severability.
If any provision of this chapter shall be held to be void, unconstitutional, or unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, it shall be severed from the remainder of this chapter, which shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 97-23 (part), 1997)

Chapter 3.16 FUND DEPOSITORIES

Sections:
3.16.010     Designated.
3.16.020     Appointment of officers.
3.16.030     Authorized signatures.

3.16.010 Designated.
The following are designated depositories for city funds:Zion’s First National Bank
P.O. Box 249
Moab, Utah 84532
First Security Bank of Utah
4 North Main Street
Moab, Utah 84532
Utah Public Treasurer’s Investment Fund
215 State Capitol
S.L.C., Utah 84114
(Res. 19-99 (part), 1999: Res. 5-98 (part), 1998: Res. 2-98 (part), 1998: Res. 6-97 (part), 1997: Res. 07-96 (part), 1996: Res. 03-96 (part), 1996: Res. 01-94 (part), 1994: Res. 05-93 (part), 1993: Res. 02-93 (part), 1993: Res. 17-92 (part), 1992: Res. 26-91 (part), 1991: Res. 08-91 (part), 1991; Res. 02-90 (part), 1990; Res. 02-86 (part), 1986)

3.16.020 Appointment of officers.
At a regular meeting of the Moab City Council of the City, held on the 24th day of August, 1999, at which a quorum was present, the following officers were duly appointed for the ensuing year and until their successors shall be appointed and shall have qualified; to have signature authority for Moab City Corporation at the above mentioned financial institutions which hold city (public) funds:Recorder, Rachel Ellison
Deputy Recorder, Danielle Shumway
Treasurer, Laurie M. Ramstetter
Deputy Treasurer, Jolyne Hoffman
City Councilmember, Kyle Bailey
(Res. 19-99 (part), 1999: Res. 5-98 (part), 1998: Res. 2-98 (part), 1998: Res. 6-97 (part), 1997: Res. 07-96 (part), 1996: Res. 03-96 (part), 1996: Res. 01-94 (part), 1994: Res. 05-93 (part), 1993: Res. 02-93 (part), 1993: Res. 17-92 (part), 1992: Res. 26-91 (part), 1991: Res. 08-91 (part), 1991; Res. 02-90 (part), 1990; Res. 02-86 (part), 1986)

3.16.030 Authorized signatures.
Under the rules of the City, any funds deposited to its credit with Zion’s First National Bank of Moab or First Security Bank of Moab may be withdrawn by the combined signatures of one of the Recorder or Deputy Recorder and any one treasurer or Deputy Treasurer who are authorized to endorse and sign checks, drafts, and orders for payment of money in accordance with signature cards accompanying this authorization. In the absence of either both the Recorder and Deputy Recorder or both the Treasurer or Deputy Treasurer, the above mentioned city Councilmember shall be authorized to endorse and sign checks, drafts, and order for payment of money in accordance with signature cards accompanying this authorization by the combined signatures of one recorder or Deputy Recorder or treasurer or Deputy Treasurer and one city Councilmember. (Res. 19-99 (part), 1999: Res. 5-98 (part), 1998: Res. 2-98 (part), 1998: Res. 6-97 (part), 1997: Res. 07-96 (part), 1996: Res. 03-96 (part), 1996: Res. 01-94 (part), 1994: Res. 05-93 (part), 1993: Res. 02-93 (part), 1993: Res. 17-92 (part), 1992: Res. 26-91 (part), 1991: Res. 08-91 (part), 1991; Res. 02-90 (part), 1990; Res. 02-86 (part), 1986)

Chapter 3.17 MUNICIPAL ENERGY SALES AND USE TAX

Sections:
3.17.010     Definitions.
3.17.020     Municipal energy sales and use tax.
3.17.030     Exemptions.
3.17.040     No effect upon existing franchises-Credit for franchise fees.
3.17.050     Tax collection contract with State Tax Commission.
3.17.060     Incorporation of Part 1, Chapter 12, Title 59, Utah Code Annotated, including amendments.
3.17.070     No additional license to collect the municipal energy sales and use tax required-No additional license or reporting requirements.
3.17.080     Effective date.

3.17.010 Definitions.
A. “Consumer” means a person who acquires taxable energy for any use that is subject to the municipal energy sales and use tax.
B. “Contractual franchise fee” means:
    1. A fee:
        a. Provided for in a franchise agreement; and
        b. That is consideration for the franchise agreement; or
    2. 
        a. A fee similar to subsection (B)(1); or
        b. Any combination of subsections (B)(1) or (B)(2).
C. 
    1. “Delivered value” means the fair market value of the taxable energy delivered for sale or use in the municipality and includes:
        a. The value of the energy itself; and
        b. Any transportation, freight, customer demand charges, services charges or other costs typically incurred in providing taxable energy in usable form to each class of customer in the municipality.
    2. “Delivered value” does not include the amount of a tax paid under Part 1 or Part 2 of Chapter 12, Title 59 of the Utah Code Annotated, as amended.
D. “Energy supplier” means a person supplying taxable energy, except for persons supplying a de minimis amount of taxable energy, if such persons are excluded by rule promulgated by the Utah State Tax Commission.
E. “Franchise agreement” means a franchise or an ordinance, contract or agreement granting a franchise.
F. “Franchise tax” means:
    1. A franchise tax;
    2. A tax similar to a franchise tax; or
    3. Any combination of subsections (F)(1) or (2).
G. “Person” includes any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, this state, any county, city, municipality, district or other local governmental entity of the state or any group or combination acting as a unit.
H. “Sale” means any transfer of title, exchange or barter, conditional or otherwise, in any manner, of taxable energy for a consideration. It includes:
    1. Installment and credit sales;
    2. Any closed transaction constituting a sale; and
    3. Any transaction under which right to acquire, use or consume taxable energy is granted under a lease or contract and the transfer would be taxable if an outright sale were made.
I. “Storage” means any keeping or retention of taxable energy in this City for any purpose except sale in the regular course of business.
J. 
    1. “Use” means the exercise of any right or power over taxable energy incident to the ownership or the leasing of the taxable energy.
    2. “Use” does not include the sale, display, demonstration or trial of the taxable energy in the regular course of business and held for resale.
K. “Taxable energy” means gas and electricity. (Ord. 97-24 (part), 1997)

3.17.020 Municipal energy sales and use tax.
There is levied, subject to the provisions of this chapter, a tax on every sale or use of taxable energy made within the City of Moab equaling three percent of the delivered value of the taxable energy to the consumer. This tax shall be known as the municipal energy sales and use tax.
A. The tax shall be calculated on the delivered value of the taxable energy to the consumer.
B. The tax shall be in addition to any sales or use tax on taxable energy imposed by the City of Moab authorized by Title 59, Chapter 12, Part 2, of the Utah Code Annotated, as amended, The Local Sales and Use Tax Act. (Ord. 97-24 (part), 1997)

3.17.030 Exemptions.
A. No exemptions are granted from the municipal energy sales and use tax except as expressly provided in Utah Code Annotated Section 10-1-305(2)(b), as amended; notwithstanding an exemption granted by Utah Code Annotated Section 59-1-104, as amended.
B. The following are exempt from the municipal energy sales and use tax pursuant to Utah Code Annotated Section 10-1-305(2)(b), as amended:
    1. Sales and use of aviation fuel, motor fuel and special fuels subject to taxation under Title 59, Chapter 13, of the Utah Code Annotated, as amended;
    2. Sales and use of taxable energy that is exempt from taxation under federal law, the United States Constitution or the Utah constitution;
    3. Sales and use of taxable energy purchased or stored for resale;
    4. Sales or use of taxable energy to a person, if the primary use of the taxable energy is for use in compounding or producing taxable energy or a fuel subject to taxation under Title 59, Chapter 13, of the Utah Code Annotated, as amended;
    5. Taxable energy brought into the state by a nonresident for the nonresident’s own personal use or enjoyment while within the state, except taxable energy purchased for use in the state by a nonresident living or working in the state at the time of purchase;
    6. The sale or use of taxable energy for any purpose other than as a fuel or energy; and
    7. The sale of taxable energy for use outside the boundaries of the City of Moab.
C. The sale, storage, use or other consumption of taxable energy is exempt from the municipal energy sales and use tax levied by the City of Moab, provided:
    1. The delivered value of the taxable energy has been subject to a municipal energy sales or use tax levied by another municipality within the state authorized by Title 59, Chapter 12, Part 3, of the Utah Code Annotated, as amended; and
    2. The City of Moab is paid the difference between the tax paid to the other municipality and the tax that would otherwise be due under this chapter if the tax due under this chapter exceeds the tax paid to the other municipality. (Ord. 97-24 (part), 1997)

3.17.040 No effect upon existing franchises-Credit for franchise fees.
A. This chapter shall not alter any existing franchise agreements between the City of Moab and energy suppliers.
B. There is a credit against the tax due from any consumer in the amount of a contractual franchise fee paid if:
    1. The energy supplier pays the contractual franchise fee to the City of Moab pursuant to a franchise agreement in effect on July 1, 1997;
    2. The contractual franchise fee is passed through by the energy supplier to a consumer as a separately itemized charge; and
    3. The energy supplier has accepted the franchise. (Ord. 97-24 (part), 1997)

3.17.050 Tax collection contract with State Tax Commission.
A. On or before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the City of Moab shall contract with the Utah State Tax Commission to perform all functions incident to the administration and collection of the municipal energy sales and use tax in accordance with this chapter. The Mayor, with the approval of the City Council, is hereby authorized to enter into agreements with the Utah State Tax Commission that may be necessary to the continued administration and operation of the municipal energy sales and use tax enacted by this chapter.
B. An energy supplier shall pay the municipal energy sales and use tax revenues collected from consumers directly to the City of Moab monthly if:
    1. The City of Moab is the energy supplier; or
    2. 
        a. The energy supplier estimates that the municipal energy sales and use tax collected annually from its Utah consumers equals one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) or more; and
        b. The energy supplier collects the municipal energy sales and use tax.
C. Any energy supplier paying the municipal energy sales and use tax directly to the City of Moab may deduct any contractual franchise fees collected by the energy supplier qualifying as a credit and remit the net tax less any amount the energy supplier retains as authorized by Utah Code Annotated Section 10-1-307(4), as amended. (Ord. 97-24 (part), 1997)

3.17.060 Incorporation of Part 1, Chapter 12, Title 59, Utah Code Annotated, including amendments.
A. Except as herein provided and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Title 10, Chapter 1, Part 3, Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax Act, as well as this chapter, all of the provisions of Part 1, Chapter 12, Title 59, of the Utah Code Annotated, as amended, in force and effect on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, insofar as they relate to sales and use taxes, excepting Sections 59-12-101 and 59-12-119, as amended, thereof, and excepting the amount of the sales and use taxes levied therein, are adopted and made a part of this resolution as if fully set forth herein.
B. Wherever, and to the extent that in Part 1, Chapter 12, Title 59, Utah Code Annotated, as amended, the state of Utah is named or referred to as the “taxing agency,” the name of “Moab City Corporation” shall be substituted insofar as is necessary for the purposes of that part, as well as Part 3, Chapter 1, Title 10, Utah Code Annotated, as amended. Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to require substitution of the name “Moab City Corporation” for the word “state” when that word is used as part of the title of the Utah State Tax Commission or of the Constitution of Utah or shall the name “Moab City Corporation” be substituted for that of the state in any section when the result of such a substitution would require action to be taken by or against the City of Moab or any agency thereof rather than by or against the Utah State Tax Commission in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter.
C. Any amendments made to Part 1, Chapter 12, Title 59, Utah Code Annotated, as amended, which would be applicable to the City of Moab for the purposes of carrying out this chapter are incorporated herein by reference and shall be effective upon the date that they are effective as a Utah statute. (Ord. 97-24 (part), 1997)

3.17.070 No additional license to collect the municipal energy sales and use tax required-No additional license or reporting requirements.
No additional license to collect or report the municipal energy sales and use tax levied by this chapter is required, provided the energy supplier collecting the tax has a license issued under Utah Code Annotated Section 59-12-106, as amended. (Ord. 97-24 (part), 1997)

3.17.080 Effective date.
This chapter is effective June 30, 1997. The municipal energy sales and use tax shall be levied beginning 12:01 a.m. on January 1, 1998. (Ord. 97-24 (part), 1997)

Chapter 3.18 TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSE TAX

Sections:
3.18.010     Definitions.
3.18.020     Tax on telecommunications services.
3.18.030     Effective date.
3.18.040     Interlocal agreement.
3.18.050     Procedures for taxes erroneously collected.
3.18.060     Right-of-way charges.

3.18.010 Definitions.
The definitions established in U.C.A. Section 10-1-402, as may be amended from time to time, are incorporated into this chapter by reference. (Ord. 05-02 (part), 2005)

3.18.020 Tax on telecommunications services.
The City of Moab levies a telecommunications license tax on the gross receipts from telecommunications services, including mobile telecommunications services, attributable to service provided within the corporate limits of the City of Moab, as same may change from time to time. The tax shall be three percent of the telecommunications provider’s gross receipts attributable to the City of Moab. If the location of a transaction is determined to be other than the City of Moab, then the rate imposed on the gross receipts for telecommunications services shall be determined pursuant to the provisions of U.C.A. Section 10-1-409. (Ord. 05-02 (part), 2005)

3.18.030 Effective date.
The tax established by this chapter shall take effect April 1, 2005 and shall continue until altered or repealed. (Ord. 05-02 (part), 2005)

3.18.040 Interlocal agreement.
On or before the effective date of the tax established by this chapter, the City shall enter into a uniform agreement with the Utah State Tax Commission as provided in U.C.A. Section 10-1-405 for the collection, enforcement, and administration of the tax provided in this chapter. (Ord. 05-02 (part), 2005)

3.18.050 Procedures for taxes erroneously collected.
Telecommunications customers seeking recovery of telecommunications license taxes wrongfully collected may seek a refund from the telecommunications provider in accordance with the procedures outlined in U.C.A. Section 10-1-408. In the event that a customer prevails in any action for a refund pursuant to U.C.A. Section 10-1-408, the City shall refund to the telecommunications provider the amount subject to refund within thirty days of receipt of a written notice establishing the amounts determined to be owing. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to obligate the City to pay interest, costs, legal expenses, or any other incidental costs associated with any action between the customer and the telecommunications provider. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to authorize any right of action by any telecommunications customer against the City with respect to the tax levied under this chapter. (Ord. 05-02 (part), 2005)

3.18.060 Right-of-way charges.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to alter or invalidate any other charges the City may assess for permits, supervision, management, or construction within the public right-of-way by telecommunications providers, public utilities, or others. (Ord. 05-02 (part), 2005)

Chapter 3.20 ISSUANCE OF CREDIT CARDS TO CITY OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES

Sections:
3.20.010     Authority to apply for cards-Bank held harmless.
3.20.020     Cardholder responsible for charges.

3.20.010 Authority to apply for cards-Bank held harmless.
The Mayor and recorder are authorized to apply for and enter into an agreement with First Western National Bank, providing for the issuance of credit cards to city officials and employees as may be designated in a writing delivered to First Western National Bank and signed by the Mayor and the Recorder, and undertaking to indemnify First Western National Bank and hold it harmless for any charges made on those cards by those authorized officials and employees, whether or not the particular charges have been authorized, to the extent permitted by law, and warranting the payment of those charges by the City, if not paid by the individual cardholder. The Mayor and the Recorder are further authorized to submit supplemental writings to First Western National Bank with the names of additional authorized cardholders. (Res. 29-91 (part), 1991)

3.20.020 Cardholder responsible for charges.
This resolution does not authorize any city official or employee to incur expenses for travel on any unofficial business, or any official business for which funds have not been budgeted and travel approved by the appropriate supervisory authority. This resolution does not change the terms of the cardholder agreement, which makes the individual cardholder primarily liable for charges incurred by the use of the credit cards. (Res. 29-91 (part), 1991)

Chapter 3.28 BUDGETARY FISCAL POLICY

Sections:
3.28.010     Departmental proposals--Submission to budget officer--Contents.
3.28.020     Budget officer--Submission of proposed balanced budget to council.
3.28.030     City Council--Submission of proposed balanced budget to public.
3.28.040     State policies and timetables to be followed.

3.28.010 Departmental proposals--Submission to budget officer--Contents.
All departments with budgets or proposed departments without previous budgets shall submit their proposals to the budget officer no later than the first day of March for the succeeding fiscal year. Proposals shall consist of the following:
A. Wages proposed for all employees, as well as the department heads within that department;
B. Quarterly employee evaluation reports;
C. All other line items that make up the proposed total departmental budget;
D. All capital equipment and capital improvements concerning the department; and
E. Any other items considered necessary by the budget officer and/or the City Council. (Ord. 93-21 §1, 1993)

3.28.020 Budget officer--Submission of proposed balanced budget to council.
The budget officer shall submit the proposed balanced budget for the succeeding fiscal year to the City Council no later than the first day of April. (Ord. 93-21 §2, 1993)

3.28.030 City Council--Submission of proposed balanced budget to public.
The proposed balanced budget of the City Council shall be submitted to the public for their inspection no later than the first day of June. (Ord. 93-21 §3, 1993)

3.28.040 State policies and timetables to be followed.
All fiscal policies and timetables governing the adoption of the budget set forth by the state shall be followed and therefore be a part of this policy and not in conflict. (Ord. 93-21 §4, 1993)

Chapter 3.29 REAL ESTATE TRANSFER ASSESSMENT AGREEMENTS

Sections:
3.29.010     Real estate transfer assessment defined.
3.29.020     Authorization to enter into agreements.
3.29.030     Collection and use of funds.
3.29.040     Use as condition for development approval prohibited.
3.29.050     Judicial review.

3.29.010 Real estate transfer assessment defined.
As used in this chapter, a real estate transfer assessment (“RETA”) shall be defined as any fee or charge levied upon the sale or transfer of a parcel of real property, or any interest in real property, by a homeowner’s association or similar declarant acting pursuant to a recorded declaration of covenants, conditions, or restrictions, which fee is paid to the City pursuant to an agreement providing for application of the funds to specified public purposes. (Ord. 06-12 (part), 2006)

3.29.020 Authorization to enter into agreements.
The City may enter into RETA agreements consistent with the provisions of this chapter upon such terms as the City Council deems appropriate, in its sole discretion. (Ord. 06-12 (part), 2006)

3.29.030 Collection and use of funds.
RETA funds shall be collected by the declarant or association governing a covenant declaration, which party shall be solely responsible for the administration and enforcement of the RETA. All funds remitted to the City shall be utilized for public purposes consistent with the specific terms of any RETA agreement, which purposes may include, but shall not be limited to, acquisition or maintenance of parks, trails, or other recreational facilities; the repair or upgrading of existing public facilities; the development or acquisition of affordable housing; or other public purposes. (Ord. 06-12 (part), 2006)

3.29.040 Use as condition for development approval prohibited.
A RETA shall not be required by the City as a condition for obtaining any land use approval. (Ord. 06-12 (part), 2006)

3.29.050 Judicial review.
A judicial challenge to the legality of any RETA shall be brought no later than thirty days from the date any affected person pays the charge in dispute, and not thereafter. (Ord. 06-12 (part), 2006)

Title 4 SPECIAL EVENT AND STREET PERFORMER PERMITS

Chapters:
4.01         Purpose
4.02         Definitions
4.03         Special Event Permits Required--Application and Review Procedure
4.07         Serving Alcohol at Special Events
4.09         Concurrent Event Applications
4.11         Special Event Application Denials, Revocations, and Appeals
4.12         Street Performers
4.13         Fees
4.15         Sales Tax Collection by Applicant or Vendors
4.17         Civil or Criminal Enforcement
4.19         Special Event Permit Renewal

Chapter 4.01 PURPOSE

Sections:
4.01.010     Purpose.

4.01.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this title is to establish clear procedures through which a proposed special event or street performance may be permitted within the City of Moab. Special events are an integral component of the economy and sense of identity of Moab. Special events frequently impact businesses, neighborhoods, and normal day-to-day municipal functions, which is why the City sets forth specific procedures and requirements to mitigate those impacts while ensuring a safe and successful event or street performance. (Ord. 18-15 § 3, 2018)

Chapter 4.02 DEFINITIONS

Sections:
4.02.010     Definitions.

4.02.010 Definitions.
The following definitions apply to this title:
“Applicant” means the person, persons, or entity submitting an application under this chapter and who is responsible for the conduct of the event. The applicant signs the special event permit application and all other documents relevant to the event. The applicant is legally responsible for compliance with all terms of an issued permit.
“Charge” shall be defined as requiring someone to pay a fee or to set, negotiate or establish a fee for a performance. Seeking voluntary contributions through passing around a hat, leaving an open instrument case or other receptacle, or soliciting donations after a performance is not defined as a charge.
“Debriefing” means a meeting held by the Special Events Review Committee (SERC) within thirty business days of the close of the event. Attendance/participation of the applicant at this meeting is mandatory.
“Fees” means all charges assessed by the City of Moab for permitting, staffing, equipment use/rental, property use/rental, setup, cleanup, inspections, public labor charges, or public equipment rental charges assessed to a special event and established within the event permitting process. See Chapter 4.15.
“Mass gatherings” are defined by Rule 392-400 of the Utah Administrative Code. Applicants must contact the Southeastern Utah District Health Department for information about mass gathering permits and food handling permits to the extent otherwise required by Utah law.
“Nonprofit organization” means an organization that qualifies for tax-exempt status according to the U.S. Treasury under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, which is created and operated to benefit the public interest and which includes a charitable, educational, scientific, religious, recreational, or artistic purpose.
“Performance” shall be defined to include, but not be limited to, the following activities: playing music, singing, dancing, pantomiming, puppeteering, juggling, fire-spinning, reciting, etc. Performance does not include providing personal services.
“Permittee” means the applicant holding a valid permit under this chapter.
“Private event” means an event which is:
    1. Closed to the general public;
    2. Held entirely on private property for which such events are a permitted use under Title 17, or City property for which a permit has been obtained;
    3. Does not require installation of temporary water, power, cooking, sanitation, or waste management facilities; and
    4. Does not adversely impact City personnel, services, or facilities.
Private events shall not in any case be defined to include any event to which the public is invited, whether by advertisement or otherwise, or events where an admission fee is charged.
Private events are not regulated by this chapter except where specifically noted; however, the Moab Police Department may take enforcement action in the event of a nuisance, breach of the peace, noise violation, or the like.
“Public event” shall be defined to mean any gathering which is open to all persons, which is advertised as open to the general public, or which is open to all persons who purchase admission.
“Special event” means a sporting, cultural, entertainment, commercial, or similar gathering, whether held for profit or on a nonprofit basis, occurring for a limited or fixed duration, not to exceed fifteen consecutive days, and which is likely to attract a large number of participants or spectators. By way of illustration, and not of limitation, special events subject to this chapter include: concerts, fairs, rallies, athletic events, or temporary sales events. Special events are further defined as follows:
    1. Level I Event.  Events expected to be attended by not more than two hundred people per day and which include one or more of the following:
        a. Partial or rolling street closure of City rights-of-way, including streets, sidewalks, and/or pathways;
        b. Vendor sales or concessions;
        c. Amplified sound; or
        d. An entrance fee or ticket charge for the event.
    2. Level II Event. Events expected to be attended by more than two hundred people per day and which may include one or more of the following:
        a. Full public street closure of City rights-of-way;
        b. Vendor sales or concessions;
        c. Amplified sound; or
        d. An entrance fee or ticket charge for the event.
“Special Events Coordinator” means the City employee who administers the provisions of this chapter.
“Special Events Review Committee (SERC)” means a committee made up of representatives from City departments including, but not limited to, police, parks, public works, and representatives from the Southeastern Utah Health Department, Moab Valley Fire Protection District, and a County special events representative. The Special Events Coordinator or his/her designee shall be the chair of this Committee.
“Speech event” means an activity conducted primarily for the expression of political, social, religious, cultural, or other constitutionally protected speech. Speech events may include rallies, picketing, protesting, marching, demonstrating, or debating matters of public concern on any City street or other property. Speech events do not include events held in furtherance of a business or commercial purpose.
“Street closure” means the deliberate blockage of any public street or City owned parking facility to prohibit the flow of traffic or access of vehicles.
“Street performer” shall be defined as an individual or group who performs in a public area or a private outdoor area adjacent to a public street or sidewalk for the purpose of providing public entertainment.
“Substantial change” means changes to an existing special event that cause the need for a different review level or cause the need for review by the City Council. These changes include, but are not limited to: increased need for street closures; increased need for police support; a change in duration; an increase in anticipated attendance; or the addition of vendor sales or concessions.
“Vendor” means a person selling food, beverages, souvenirs, or other merchandise at a special event. The term “vendor” does not include the sale of memberships in an organization which is the special event applicant.
“Venue” means the location or locations where a special event is held, including all ingress/egress routes, parking, and necessary facilities for the event. (Ord. 18-15 § 3, 2018)

Chapter 4.03 SPECIAL EVENT PERMITS REQUIRED--APPLICATION AND REVIEW PROCEDURE

Sections:
4.03.010     Permits required.
4.03.020     Permit exceptions.
4.03.030     Application and review procedure.

4.03.010 Permits required.
Any person wishing to hold a special event shall first obtain a permit under this chapter. It is unlawful for any person to hold a special event without obtaining a special event permit. All permits issued pursuant to this chapter are nontransferable and expire on the date specified. (Ord. 18-15 § 3, 2018)

4.03.020 Permit exceptions.
A. The following activities are exempt from this chapter:
    1. Funeral processions by a licensed mortuary;
    2. Activities lawfully conducted by a governmental agency on property or in facilities owned by that same agency;
    3. Filming activities authorized by another type of permit;
    4. Private events; or
    5. Speech events that do not meet the definitions of a Level I or Level II event. (Ord. 18-15 § 3, 2018)

4.03.030 Application and review procedure.
A. All requests for a special event permit shall be made on a special event application prescribed by the City. The applicant shall submit the permit fee with the completed application. Application materials are available at City Hall and online at the City of Moab website, and must be completed and submitted to the Special Events Coordinator according to the guidelines below unless otherwise approved by the Special Events Coordinator upon a showing of good cause:
    1. Not less than ninety days prior to the scheduled opening of any Level I or Level II event; or
    2. Not less than seven days prior to a speech event.
    3. Level II events may apply no earlier than one year prior to the requested date of the event.
B. All event applications will be reviewed to determine if the applicant has provided sufficient plans (including proof of financial responsibility and other licenses), equipment, personnel, and facilities to provide for the safe and orderly conduct of the event without imposing an unreasonable burden on public services, other businesses, or adjacent residents. Depending on the type and size of the event, the Special Events Coordinator may require the applicant to submit additional documentation prior to review by SERC, which may include but is not limited to:
    1. Proof of financial responsibility, which may include damage deposit(s), a performance bond, and/or liability insurance sufficient to cover anticipated risks;
    2. A transportation and traffic control plan showing parking, ingress/egress routes, pedestrian access, and emergency access;
    3. A staffing and security plan, which shall identify and describe numbers and types of security personnel, emergency medical services (EMS) and/or fire personnel, other staff, support facilities, and the like;
    4. A facilities plan showing power, lighting, public address, stage, restrooms, waste disposal, water facilities, vending, and other facilities needed for the event;
    5. Proof that the applicant has obtained (or will obtain by the date of the event) any other applicable governmental permits or licenses needed for the event, including, but not limited to: sales tax licenses, alcohol licenses, access permits, and/or food service permits from the Southeastern Utah Health Department;
    6. If applicable, a statement of authorization from the special event sponsor identifying all vendors intending to conduct business on the premises of the special event; and
    7. Any other information deemed necessary by staff for review of the event.
C. Upon receipt of a complete special event permit application and the permit fee, the Special Events Coordinator shall schedule the application for review by the SERC. The SERC shall review and shall have the authority to administratively approve, approve with conditions, or deny the following applications:
    1. Level I applications and renewals; and
    2. Level II applications for renewals with no substantial changes from the previous year’s event.
D. Where an application is not subject to approval by the SERC, it shall review the matter and provide an advisory recommendation to the City Council.
E. The City Council shall review and approve, approve with conditions, or deny the following applications:
    1. Applications for new Level II events; as used herein, a “new Level II event” shall mean any Level II event being proposed for the first time;
    2. An event renewal of a Level I event that now qualifies as a Level II event;
    3. Level II event permit renewals where material elements of the event have substantially changed from the previous application; and
    4. A Level II event which was not renewed for a period exceeding one year.
F. The Special Events Coordinator shall promptly notify the applicant of the SERC recommendation to Council and of the date the application will be scheduled before the City Council. The application shall be heard at a duly noticed public meeting. The City Council shall review the application for compliance with the standards set forth in this chapter.
G. Conditions required as part of the approval of an event permit may include, but are not limited to:
    1. Restrictions on duration or hours of operation;
    2. Restrictions on total attendance;
    3. Limitations on vending or alcohol sales;
    4. Limitations on parking, participant transportation, ingress/egress;
    5. Limitations as to noise, dust, glare, or sound amplification;
    6. Security, EMS, or other public safety measures;
    7. Insurance, damage deposits, or other financial guarantees; and
    8. Other measures which may reasonably provide for public health, safety, and welfare in connection with an event.
H. For purposes of this chapter, a special event permit is not deemed granted until the Special Events Coordinator certifies in writing that all conditions of approval required prior to the event date have been satisfied.
I. A special event permit issued under this chapter is specific to the permittee, and may not be assigned. Any purported assignment shall result in the permit being deemed void. (Ord. 18-15 § 3, 2018)

Chapter 4.07 SERVING ALCOHOL AT SPECIAL EVENTS

Sections:
4.07.020     Alcohol at public spaces.
4.07.030     Application.
4.07.040     Operational restrictions.

4.07.020 Alcohol at public spaces.
A. Public Events at City Owned Facilities. The serving, consumption, and sale of alcoholic beverages at public events held at City owned facilities, including parks, public streets, and sidewalks, may be permitted by the City Manager on a case-by-case basis as part of the special event permitting process.
    1. Serving of alcohol shall be limited to the hours of ten a.m. until nine p.m. during the event.
    2. Areas designated for the serving of alcoholic beverages must be located at least one hundred feet away from designated playgrounds, the skate park, and similar facilities.
B. Private Events at the MARC. City staff is authorized to approve private events at the MARC where alcohol may be served.
    1. Sponsors of private events at the MARC must:
        a. Pay the applicable rental fee, as established from time to time by the City Council, and execute a public facility use agreement indemnifying and holding the City harmless from all liability associated with the serving and consumption of alcohol at the event; and
        b. Comply with applicable laws governing the consumption and distribution of alcohol.
    2. All events at the MARC, public or private, shall be concluded by eleven p.m.
C. Public Events at County Owned Facilities. The serving, consumption, and sale of alcoholic beverages to the public at facilities owned by Grand County within the City may be permitted by the City Manager, provided each of the following conditions are met:
    1. The event sponsor obtains approval from Grand County;
    2. The event sponsor obtains the applicable State of Utah single event permit or temporary special event beer permit after receiving the City’s written local consent, and abides by all terms and conditions of the State of Utah permit;
    3. The event sponsor obtains the applicable City of Moab alcohol licenses; and
    4. The event sponsor obtains the applicable special event license.
D. The applicable decision maker for any event authorized under this section shall be authorized to attach such other and additional terms and conditions upon the use and occupancy of public facilities as may be deemed necessary and appropriate, depending upon the nature of the event planned. These additional terms may include, but shall not be limited to:
    1. Special limitations as to hours of operation;
    2. Limits on the occupancy or total numbers of guests;
    3. Security requirements;
    4. Parking limitations;
    5. Limits on the areas to be occupied by the event; and
    6. Any conditions reasonably related to the safety of event participants, and the safety and peace of the general public. (Ord. 18-15 § 3, 2018)

4.07.030 Application.
Applicants who desire to serve alcohol at a special event must obtain written local consent from the City Manager and a State license under the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.
Concurrent with the application for local consent to serve alcohol at a special event, the applicant shall apply for a special event license, as provided under the City Code, all of which may be processed together by the City.
A. Contents of Application for Local Consent. In addition to the application requirements set forth in Section 5.20.200, an application for local consent for a special event with alcohol shall include the following:
    1. The times, dates, location, nature and a description of the event;
    2. A description or scaled floor plan designating:
        a. The sites from which the applicant proposes that alcoholic beverages be sold or served, including all dispensing points. Dispensing points include storage areas, booths, tables, bars and other areas set apart for the sale of alcoholic beverages; and
        b. The areas in which the applicant proposes that alcoholic beverages be allowed to be consumed;
    3. A statement of the purpose of the association or entity conducting the event;
    4. A signed consent form authorizing law enforcement officers or City code enforcement officials an unrestricted right to enter the premises during the event for purposes of monitoring compliance with all license terms and City codes; and
    5. An application fee, which sum shall be refundable in the event that the local consent is not granted.
B. Application Fee, Denial of Local Consent, or Conditions Attached to Local Consent. 
    1. Application fees for local consent for a special event serving alcohol shall be established by the City Council from time to time.
    2. The City Manager shall review an application for local consent to serve alcohol at a special event, and may approve the application as submitted, deny the application, or approve the application subject to conditions. Those conditions may include, but are not limited to:
        a. Restrictions upon the dates of operation, hours of operation or location;
        b. Parking, traffic control, security, sanitary facilities or similar public safety conditions; and/or
        c. Insurance, liability protection, or similar financial guarantees.
    3. The City reserves the right to revoke local consent at any time, even after the applicant has received a license to serve alcohol from the State of Utah. (Ord. 18-15 § 3, 2018)

4.07.040 Operational restrictions.
A. All persons involved in the sale or serving of alcoholic beverages at the event shall do so only under the supervision and direction of the licensee. The licensee shall be solely responsible for compliance with all applicable terms of the license, City ordinances, and the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.
B. No beer or other alcoholic beverage shall be brought by persons other than the licensee onto the premises of the event.
C. Alcohol purchased for the event may not be stored in any place other than that described in the application for local consent and designated on the State permit.
D. Alcohol purchased for the event may not be sold or served in any place other than the sites described in the application for local consent and designated on the State permit.
E. Alcohol purchased for the event may not be consumed in any area other than that described in the application for local consent and designated on the State permit.
F. Local consent for serving alcohol at a special event is not transferable, whether to another person or another location.
G. Local consent shall be approved for a specific event scheduled on a date or dates certain and shall be valid for a period not to exceed five consecutive days.
H. No more than two consents for special events with alcohol shall be granted in any calendar year to any applicant.
I. No sale of beer shall exceed a sixteen-ounce serving.
J. Minors shall not be permitted to serve or dispense alcoholic beverages, nor shall they be permitted to consume or purchase alcoholic beverages at the event.
K. Alcoholic beverages shall be sold on a per serving basis; “all you can drink” or similar events where beer is served without limitation upon paying a fixed price are prohibited.
L. Licensees shall properly train all event personnel on all operational restrictions, and shall assure that alcoholic beverages are not served to obviously intoxicated persons.
M. The licensee shall provide adequate event security, given the nature of the event and the expected number of event patrons.
N. No event sponsor or other person shall charge an admission fee or otherwise charge a price for alcoholic beverages served and consumed in any public place, except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter and Chapter 5.20. Violation of this subsection is a strict liability offense and shall be punishable as a Class C misdemeanor. (Ord. 18-15 § 3, 2018)

Chapter 4.09 CONCURRENT EVENT APPLICATIONS

Sections:
4.09.010     Concurrent event applications.

4.09.010 Concurrent event applications.
Complete applications will be reviewed in the order that they are received. If it is found that another event has already been approved for the dates requested in a pending application, the applicant will be notified and given the opportunity to change the event dates so as not to overlap with any other event. If no date change is selected, the decision to allow multiple events on the same dates will be made by the SERC or the City Council, as applicable. The determination will be based upon the following considerations:
A. Whether the events will adversely impact one another or create unreasonable burdens on the public health, safety, or welfare;
B. The geographic separation of the events;
C. The proposed time and duration of the special events;
D. Anticipated attendance volumes;
E. The demands upon public safety personnel, equipment, and/or transportation services; and
F. Anticipated traffic and parking impacts of the events. (Ord. 18-15 § 3, 2018)

Chapter 4.11 SPECIAL EVENT APPLICATION DENIALS, REVOCATIONS, AND APPEALS

Sections:
4.11.020     Special event application denial.
4.11.030     Permit revocation.
4.11.040     Appeal procedure.

4.11.020 Special event application denial.
A. The SERC or City Council, as applicable, may deny a special event application whenever the following apply:
    1. Any grounds stated in Section 5.04.040;
    2. The event presents significant or unacceptable adverse impacts upon the community, other businesses, or residents, which cannot reasonably be mitigated;
    3. The event will pose an unreasonable burden on police, fire, EMS, public roads, or other essential public services so as to compromise services to other City residents;
    4. The event will substantially interfere with any other event for which a permit has already been granted or with the provision of City services in support of other such events;
    5. The applicant fails to provide the required documentation with the application or provides false or misleading statements in the application or supporting materials;
    6. The applicant demonstrates an inability or unwillingness to conduct the event in conformity with the permit or the provisions of this chapter, or past events sponsored by the applicant or permittee have not been carried out in conformity with approved permits or this chapter;
    7. The applicant has not obtained necessary licenses or permits from other governmental agencies required for the operation of the event; or
    8. The applicant has not provided necessary proof of financial responsibility. (Ord. 18-15 § 3, 2018)

4.11.030 Permit revocation.
A. A permit issued under this chapter may be revoked for any of the following reasons:
    1. Failure by the permittee to comply with City permit conditions, other permit or license conditions, or the provisions of this chapter;
    2. Failure by the permittee to comply with other City ordinances or Utah laws;
    3. Any violations of the Utah Beverage Control Act;
    4. False, inaccurate, or misleading statements by the applicant or permittee in the application for a permit under this chapter, or in any supporting documentation; or
    5. A serious breach of the peace, riot, or significant unlawful activity occurring within or adjacent to the event venue and/or involving event participants, the permittee, its agents, or employees.
B. The City shall deliver written notice of revocation to the permittee for the causes identified in subsections (A)(1) through (A)(4) of this section. The permittee may appeal any such revocation as provided under this chapter.
C. Any City enforcement officer may enter the premises of any event permitted under this section at any time to determine compliance with all applicable laws and conditions. Any law enforcement officer who reasonably believes that an event is out of compliance with applicable laws and conditions shall have the authority to curtail or terminate the event. (Ord. 18-15 § 3, 2018)

4.11.040 Appeal procedure.
A. Any special event applicant adversely affected by a permitting decision under this chapter may appeal as provided in this section.
B. Appeals of decisions by the Special Events Coordinator, SERC, or the City Council shall be appealed to the appeal authority by delivering written notice to the City no later than seven calendar days from the date of the decision or order which is the subject of the appeal. The appeal authority shall promptly hold a hearing, and any appeal authority decision shall be final.
C. In any appeal proceeding, the appeal authority shall only overturn the decision that is the subject of the appeal if it is found to be arbitrary, capricious, or unlawful. (Ord. 18-15 § 3, 2018)

Chapter 4.12 STREET PERFORMERS

Sections:
4.12.020     Rules and regulations.
4.12.030     Performance permit--Application.
4.12.040     Permit--Issuance.
4.12.050     Grounds for denial.
4.12.060     Permit--Display.
4.12.070     Permit--Nontransferable.

4.12.020 Rules and regulations.
A. No street performer may perform or solicit contributions for a performance:
    1. Within ten feet of any street corner or marked pedestrian crosswalk.
    2. Within ten feet of the outer edge of any entrance to any business, including but not limited to doors, vestibules, driveways, outdoor dining area entries and emergency exits during the hours that any business on the premises is conducting business, without express written permission from the affected business or business.
B. A street performer may not block or obstruct the free movement of pedestrians. If a sufficient crowd gathers to observe a performer such that a passage of the public through a public area is blocked or obstructed, a police officer or other City official may disperse that portion of the crowd that is blocking or obstructing passage of the public.
C. A street performer who performs for a charge shall obtain an appropriate business license as provided for in Moab Municipal Code.
D. No street performer may litter his or her performance site.
E. No street performer shall place any object on a public sidewalk which causes less than a four-foot contiguous sidewalk width to be kept clear for pedestrian passage.
F. No street performer shall perform on any public sidewalk with more instruments, props, equipment or other items than the performer can reasonably transport or remove at one time.
G. No street performer shall perform in contravention to the allowable noise levels established by Chapter 17.74.
H. No street performer shall block or obstruct a curb cut.
I. No street performer shall connect or maintain an electrical cord to an adjacent building or to a City power source, except as part of an approved use of a public park.
J. Street performers utilizing outdoor private property must obtain written permission from the property owner to engage in a performance.
K. Any street performer meeting one or more of the following conditions shall obtain a performance permit as provided for in this chapter prior to engaging in a performance:
    1. The performance involves more than two performers, unless said performance is in an established public park, subject to the reservation requirements and use regulations of the park.
    2. The performance involves the use or construction of any stage, platform or similar structure for use during any performance.
    3. The performance involves the use of amplified music or sound.
    4. The performance involves any advertising off the premises of the performance, including flyers, posters and signs.
    5. The performance involves an admission charge.
    6. The performance involves the use of knives, swords, torches, axes, saws, fire, whips, lassos, drones or other potentially dangerous objects or involves acrobatics, tumbling, unicycling, break dancing, stilts, trampolines, pogo sticks, karate, human pyramids, or other potentially dangerous activity. (Ord. 18-15 § 3, 2018)

4.12.030 Performance permit--Application.
A street performer requiring a permit must complete and file with the City a performance permit application on a form approved by the City. A street performance with multiple performers need only obtain one permit. The applicant must provide the following information:
A. The names, addresses and contact information for all individuals performing under the permit.
B. If a group is performing under a permit, a designation of the individual(s) who will be responsible for compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
C. A detailed description of the nature of the act to be performed, including props, music, structures used, and any advertising methods.
D. The proposed location and time, dates, and duration of the performance(s).
E. If within ten feet of or on private property, a statement of authorization from the affected property owner(s). (Ord. 18-15 § 3, 2018)

4.12.040 Permit--Issuance.
Upon review of a performance permit under this chapter, the City Manager will determine if the application is satisfactory. The City Manager may consider the health, safety and welfare of the public and the performer(s) when determining if the application is satisfactory. The City Manager may place conditions on the issuance of the permit relative to the time, location and manner of the performance. After the City Manager’s approval, the City Treasurer will issue a performance permit showing the number of the permit, the date of issuance, the nature of the performance, the location(s) of the performance, the dates and times of the performance(s), and the name or names of the person(s) authorized to carry on same. (Ord. 18-15 § 3, 2018)

4.12.050 Grounds for denial.
A performance permit may be denied if the proposed performance is deemed to be a significant threat to public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 18-15 § 3, 2018)

4.12.060 Permit--Display.
The permit issued under this chapter shall be kept on or about the persons authorized to perform under the permit. (Ord. 18-15 § 3, 2018)

4.12.070 Permit--Nontransferable.
Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter is not transferable by the permittee. (Ord. 18-15 § 3, 2018)

Chapter 4.13 FEES

Sections:
4.13.020     Permit fees.
4.13.030     Service fees.
4.13.040     Deposit.
4.13.050     Waiver of fees.

4.13.020 Permit fees.
A. All fees associated with special events and street performers shall be set according to the fee schedule established by the City Council.
B. If applicable, a park rental fee is due with the permit application. (Ord. 18-15 § 3, 2018)

4.13.030 Service fees.
The City may require payment of a City service fee to cover the cost for additional City services arising from an event. Additional City services include, but are not limited to, labor costs for City personnel, rental costs for the use of City equipment, and other direct costs for the use of City facilities and/or City utilities. The City service fee shall be estimated on a case-by-case basis, and shall be paid in full at the time of application. Additional charges may be assessed to the permittee after the event has ended. (Ord. 18-15 § 3, 2018)

4.13.040 Deposit.
The City may require any applicant to post a cash deposit or other security approved by the City Attorney to cover all estimated contingent costs prior to the issuance of a Level II special event permit, as a guarantee against fees, damages, cleanup, or loss to public property. The City may retain any such deposit to cover applicable fees, damages, cleanup costs, or repairs to public property or facilities. The unexpended balance of any deposit shall be promptly returned to the applicant no later than thirty days from the conclusion of the event. (Ord. 18-15 § 3, 2018)

4.13.050 Waiver of fees.
The City may waive fees related to special events only in the case of an application for a speech event. (Ord. 18-15 § 3, 2018)

Chapter 4.15 SALES TAX COLLECTION BY APPLICANT OR VENDORS

Sections:
4.15.010     Sales tax collection by applicant or vendors.

4.15.010 Sales tax collection by applicant or vendors.
Unless exempted by Utah law, an applicant for a special event that includes vendor sales or concessions shall either:
A. Provide proof that all vendors have a Utah State sales tax identification number and agree to be responsible for direct remittance of all sales tax proceeds from the event to the State; or
B. Provide proof that the applicant has a valid Utah State sales tax identification number and that it will require all vendors to execute a sales tax remittance agreement whereby the vendor delivers sales tax proceeds to the applicant for remittance to the State under the applicant’s sales tax identification number.
The City shall be authorized to audit the applicant or otherwise verify that all sales tax remittances are paid. (Ord. 18-15 § 3, 2018)

Chapter 4.17 CIVIL OR CRIMINAL ENFORCEMENT

Sections:
4.17.010     Civil or criminal enforcement.

4.17.010 Civil or criminal enforcement.
A knowing violation of this chapter or any permit issued under this chapter by the applicant or permittee may be punishable, at the election of the City, as a Class B misdemeanor, as defined under the Moab Municipal Code or Utah statutes.
Alternately, the City may proceed to obtain civil injunctive or declaratory relief to halt or abate any violation of this chapter or any permit issued under this chapter. Proof of a violation shall be sufficient to obtain an injunction, which shall be issued without the requirement of bond. In addition to any other relief, in any civil enforcement action the City may recover its reasonable attorney fees and court costs against the applicant, permittee, or other person who may be in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 18-15 § 3, 2018)

Chapter 4.19 SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT RENEWAL

Sections:
4.19.010     Special event permit renewal.

4.19.010 Special event permit renewal.
Permittees who successfully complete a special event under the provisions of this chapter and who wish to have the event on an annual or periodic basis can request renewal during the debriefing meeting. Permittees who do not attend the debriefing meeting will not be given priority for renewal.
If a positive recommendation is given by the SERC, the permittee’s dates for the next event will be reserved and the application for renewal may be submitted.
Event levels for renewals will be determined through the renewal process based on evidence of attendance and the needs of the event.
An application for renewal may be subject to denial if the event resulted in significant negative impacts, violations of the permit, or other violations as documented by the SERC. A person denied a renewal may appeal that decision as provided by Section 4.11.040. (Ord. 18-15 § 3, 2018)

Title 5 BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS

Chapters:
5.04         Business Licenses Generally
5.08         Reserved
5.09         Reserved
5.14         Reserved
5.20         Alcoholic Beverages
5.21         Regulating the Retail Sale of Tobacco Products
5.28         Reserved
5.32         Pawnbrokers
5.60         Franchises
5.64         Vendor, Peddler, Solicitor, and Miscellaneous Merchant Business Licenses
5.67         Nightly Rental Licenses
5.70         Reserved
5.80         Home Occupation Licenses

Chapter 5.04 BUSINESS LICENSES GENERALLY

Sections:
5.04.010     Business license required.
5.04.015     License compliance.
5.04.020     Business license fee.
5.04.030     Application.
5.04.040     Grounds for license denial.
5.04.050     Appeal of license denial.
5.04.060     License term, renewal, display, change of address.
5.04.070     Assignment prohibited, application upon transfer.
5.04.080     License revocation.
5.04.090     Revocation procedure, right to cure.
5.04.100     Collection action.
5.04.110     Name change.

5.04.010 Business license required.
A. No person shall engage in or carry on any business, trade, profession, or enterprise within the City of Moab without first obtaining a business license as required by this chapter.
    1. Persons doing business within the City of Moab who possess a valid Grand County business license shall be exempt from further licensure by the City for the business, provided Grand County shall continue to similarly exempt City licensees doing business in Grand County from further licensure; and provided, that a copy of such County license is provided to the City by the licensee.
B. The term “business” shall be defined as the making, offering, buying, or selling of goods or services in exchange for consideration, payment, or other value. The term “business” shall not be defined to include:
    1. The acts of employees in performing services for employers;
    2. Occasional or incidental sales by City or county residents which are not conducted as part of a person’s regular trade or profession. Such activity shall not exceed three days per year, except as otherwise provided for in this chapter; or
    3. Sales of farm produce where such sales are conducted by persons who produce such items and the sales are conducted on private property. “Farm produce” shall be defined to mean fresh fruit, vegetables, herbs, or grains.
C. Violation of this section may be punishable to the extent permitted by the Utah Code, and/or by civil action to enjoin or abate the violation. Proof of a violation of this section shall be sufficient to obtain an injunction. In the event of civil enforcement, the City may recover its reasonable attorney fees and court costs against the violator. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.04.015 License compliance.
No license shall be issued by an official or employee vested with the duty and authority to issue licenses that would not be in conformance with the provisions of this title. Any license so issued shall be null and void. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.04.020 Business license fee.
A. From time to time the City Council will adopt an ordinance updating business license fees for businesses operating within the City limits. Fees shall be categorized for each class of business.
B. Fees shall be calculated, to the extent possible, to proportionately recoup costs for City services, regulatory costs, and staff time. Additional fees over the base business license fee are authorized for particular businesses generating disproportionate impacts upon City services.
    1. “City services” subject to consideration in establishing business license fees shall include basic costs for City administration in addition to specific costs incurred by the City for public utilities, police protection, fire and public safety, storm water control, traffic control, parking, transportation, beautification, and snow removal.
    2. “Disproportionate impacts” shall be defined as businesses generating demands for services in excess of the per business statistical average of demand for services of all businesses within the City.
    3. City staff is authorized to periodically review business classifications, the license fee rates in relation to actual costs, any changes in the relative demands for City services by businesses, and to make recommendations to the City Council for changes or adjustments to the fee structure. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018; Ord. 11-04, 2011)

5.04.030 Application.
A. Persons wishing to obtain a business license shall submit an application with the City Treasurer’s office containing the following:
    1. The name and address of the applicant, telephone number, trade name, and type of business entity of the applicant;
    2. The business address;
    3. A description of the type of business;
    4. The Utah State Tax Commission’s sales tax license number of the applicant (if applicable) within thirty days of application; and
    5. Any other information deemed necessary by the Treasurer’s Office to process the application, including, but without limitation, information concerning municipal code compliance, zoning compliance for the business address, parking compliance, hours of operation, health code compliance, building code compliance, fire code compliance, business name as registered with the Utah State Tax Commission, access requirements, and any other State, federal, or City licensure requirements.
B. A business license application shall be executed by the applicant or its authorized agent, who shall certify that all statements contained in the application are true and correct to the best of the applicant’s knowledge, information, and belief.
C. An application is complete when the application form and all supplemental information required by the City are provided by the applicant, the document is signed, and the applicable business license fee is paid to the City.
D. A completed application shall be approved or denied within ten business days of submittal. Where an application does not meet all approval criteria, but the applicant can demonstrate the ability to comply within a reasonable period of time, the Treasurer may conditionally approve the license subject to compliance with specified conditions within a specified time period.
E. Applicants who request cancellation of a license application prior to approval of said license shall be refunded fifty percent of the license fee. No refunds shall be granted after the license has been approved. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.04.040 Grounds for license denial.
A. An application for a business license may be denied for any of the following grounds:
    1. False, inaccurate, or misleading statements by the applicant in the application for a business license or in any supporting documents;
    2. Municipal code violations, including, but without limitation, violations of zoning, sign, building, health, or fire code provisions by the applicant or the property owner of the proposed place of business which are not corrected within the allotted time period following issuance of notice to the owner and/or applicant;
    3. The expiration, revocation, or denial of any federal, State, or City permits or licenses necessary for the legal operation of the business;
    4. Failure by the applicant or the property owner to pay water, sewer, solid waste collection, or other City charges, fees, fines, or assessments owing;
    5. Failure by the applicant to obtain or maintain a State sales tax license (if applicable); or
    6. The use contemplated by the proposed business is not consistent with the zone in which the proposed business is to be located.
B. If a license is denied the applicant shall be entitled to a refund of the license fee, which shall be refunded within five business days. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.04.050 Appeal of license denial.
An applicant denied a business license of any type shall be given written notice of the action from the City Treasurer. An aggrieved applicant may appeal a license denial to the City Manager by filing a written notice of appeal within five business days of the notice of decision. Failure to timely request an appeal shall result in waiver of the appeal right. The City Manager shall hear the appeal no later than fifteen business days from the date of the appeal notice. The City Manager may sustain the denial, grant the license, or grant the license subject to conditions. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.04.060 License term, renewal, display, change of address.
A. Licenses granted under this section are valid from July 1st to June 30th of the following year and are renewable annually on or before June 30th. The fee for any license issued after January 1st of each year shall be prorated to fifty percent of the applicable annual fee.
B. Licenses shall be renewed automatically upon payment of the license fee on or before July 1st of each year, provided there has been no change in the nature or classification of the business; and provided further, that there are no outstanding municipal code violations or unpaid City charges, fees, fines, or assessments.
    1. Licensees having outstanding code violations, unpaid charges, fees, fines, or unremitted sales taxes are not subject to renewal until said violations are abated and/or fees paid. Persons conducting business after expiration of their license are subject to the remedies and penalties described in Section 5.04.010(C).
C. Renewal license fees that are not paid within thirty days of the renewal date are subject to a fifteen percent late charge in addition to the total fee payable. Failure to pay all applicable license fees, together with late fees by August 15th of each year, shall result in automatic cancellation of the license.
D. Every license issued under this chapter shall be displayed in a visible location upon the licensed premises.
E. Licensees who wish to change business locations are required to apply for a business change of address prior to conducting business at the new location. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.04.070 Assignment prohibited, application upon transfer.
A. No license issued under this chapter may be assigned or transferred to any person or entity not named therein; nor shall any license authorize any person other than the named licensee to do business at the licensed premises or any other location.
B. Upon the sale, conveyance, or transfer of a business or substantially all of the licensee’s interest in a business, the new owner or transferee shall, within ten business days of completion of the conveyance or sale, apply for a business license. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.04.080 License revocation.
The following shall be grounds for business license revocation:
A. False, inaccurate, or misleading statements made by the applicant in the application for a business license or in any supporting documentation;
B. Municipal code violations, including, but without limitation, zoning, sign, building, health, or fire code provisions by the licensee or the property owner of the business location which are not corrected within the allotted time period under Section 5.04.090, following issuance of notice of violation to the owner and/or licensee;
C. The expiration, revocation, or denial of any federal, State, or City licenses or permits necessary for the legal operation of the business;
D. Failure by the licensee or the property owner to pay water, sewer, solid waste collection, or other City charges, fees, fines, or assessments owing;
E. Failure by the licensee to obtain or maintain a sales tax license, failure to collect or remit sales tax, or violations of the sales tax law, if applicable;
F. The use of the licensed premises for any unlawful purpose or enterprise or the maintenance of a public nuisance, as defined by Utah law; or
G. Any violation of the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Act. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.04.090 Revocation procedure, right to cure.
A. Prior to revocation, the City Treasurer shall issue a written notice of violation, which notice shall describe the nature of the violation, and permit the licensee a period of not less than ten business days in which to correct or abate the violation. The abatement period may be extended by action of the City Manager upon a showing of good cause. The notice shall also inform the licensee that the license will be revoked not less than ten business days from the date of notice if violation is not corrected within the ten-day period.
B. The notice shall be personally served or delivered by certified mail to the last known address of the licensee. The licensee shall be entitled to request a hearing by delivering a written request to the City any time prior to the effective date of the license revocation, as stated in the notice of violation. Failure to timely request a hearing shall be a waiver of the right to a hearing. Timely request for a hearing shall result in the revocation being stayed until completion of the hearing.
C. Hearings shall be conducted informally and shall be presided over by the City Manager. The licensee and the City Treasurer shall be permitted to offer any evidence or testimony in support of each position. Should the testimony, documents, or other evidence establish a violation, the license shall be revoked.
D. Following an informal hearing before the City Manager, a person aggrieved by any revocation may appeal the decision by delivering written notice of same within ten business days of the notice of decision. Timely notice of appeal will result in stay of the revocation pending the appeal hearing. Any appeal shall be heard by the City Council no later than twenty-one business days from the delivery of notice of appeal. The Council may sustain or overturn the decision.
E. Exhaustion of administrative remedies shall be a jurisdictional prerequisite to seeking judicial review.
F. Any person violating a revocation decision shall be subject to the remedies and penalties as described in Section 5.04.010(C). (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.04.100 Collection action.
The City may file a civil action against any business licensee or former licensee for any type or class of license to collect any unpaid business license fees, together with all applicable charges for water, sewer, solid waste collection, and any other charges, fees, assessments or penalties chargeable to the business, together with reasonable costs of collection, including attorney fees and court costs. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.04.110 Name change.
The licensee shall not change the name of the business establishment until the licensee provides written notice to the City Treasurer ten days prior to the name change, and pays the name change fee. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

Chapter 5.08 RESERVED
1 Editor’s note: Ord. No. 18-15, adopted September 25, 2018, repealed Chapter 5.08, §§ 5.08.010--5.08.090, which pertained to transient merchants and derived from Ord. No. 03-05.
(Ord. 03-05 (part), 2003)

Chapter 5.09 RESERVED
1 Editor’s note: Ord. No. 18-15, adopted September 25, 2018, repealed Chapter 5.09, §§ 5.09.010--5.09.110, which pertained to special event permits and derived from Ord. No. 17-17.
(Ord. 17-17, 2017)

Chapter 5.14 RESERVED
1 Editor’s note: Ord. No. 18-15, adopted September 25, 2018, repealed Chapter 5.14, §§ 5.14.010--5.14.140, which pertained to local vendors, peddlers and solicitors and derived from Ord. No. 03-05.
(Ord. 03-05 (part), 2003)

Chapter 5.20 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES1

Sections:
Article I.  Definitions
    5.20.010     Scope.
    5.20.020     Alcoholic beverages.
    5.20.030     Beer.
    5.20.031     Beer retailer.
    5.20.032     Beer wholesaler.
    5.20.035     Community location.
    5.20.040     Licensed premises.
    5.20.050     Liquor.
    5.20.060     Nuisance.
    5.20.070     Place of business.
    5.20.075     Premises.
    5.20.080     Restaurant.
    5.20.100     Sell or offer for sale.
Article II. Licenses and Local Consent
    5.20.115     Alcoholic beverage sales regulated.
    5.20.120     Wholesale sale of beer.
    5.20.130     Retail sale of alcoholic beverages.
    5.20.140     Purchase of alcoholic beverages for resale.
    5.20.150     Retail alcohol license classification and local consent--Generally.
    5.20.200     Application--Generally.
    5.20.210     Application--Police Department referral.
    5.20.220     Application--Health Department referral.
    5.20.230     Expiration.
    5.20.240     Forfeiture.
    5.20.250     Fees.
    5.20.270     Refusal.
    5.20.280     Revocation.
    5.20.290     Suspension.
    5.20.300     Sublease, transfer or assignment prohibited.
    5.20.310     Operation to conform with law.
    5.20.325     Violation--Penalty.
Article III. General Regulations
    5.20.340     Sale to intoxicated person prohibited.
    5.20.345     Unlawful to permit intoxicated persons on licensed premises.
    5.20.350     Supplying to minors prohibited.
    5.20.355     Possession of alcoholic beverages prohibited to minors--Exception.
    5.20.360     Consumption of alcohol in public places.
    5.20.370     Alcohol at City sponsored public events.
    5.20.380     Nuisance prohibited.
    5.20.410     Adulterated alcoholic beverage.
    5.20.420     Consumption prohibited in unlicensed premises.
    5.20.430     Supply to person whose license is suspended or revoked.
    5.20.440     Supply to prohibited persons.
Prior legislation: Prior code Sections 3-1-1 through 3-1-11, 3-2-1 through 3-2-19, 3-3-1 through 3-3-23, 3-4-1 through 3-4-11 and Ords. 11-80, 84-04, 85-09, 87-03, 91-02, 94-14, 99-03, 99-09, 01-01, 03-05, 03-10, 10-10, 11-80, 12-12, 17-34 and 18-05.

Article I. Definitions

5.20.010 Scope.
The words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the meaning specified in the State of Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Act unless a different meaning is clearly evident or specified. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.20.020 Alcoholic beverages.
“Alcoholic beverages” means and includes “beer” and “liquor” as they are defined herein. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.20.030 Beer.
“Beer,” “light beer,” “malt liquor,” or “malt beverages” means all products that contain at least one-half of one percent alcohol by volume, but not more than four percent alcohol by volume or three and two-tenths percent by weight, and are obtained by fermentation, infusion, or decoction of any malted grain. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.20.031 Beer retailer.
“Beer retailer” means any person engaged in the sale or distribution of beer to the consumer. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.20.032 Beer wholesaler.
“Beer wholesaler” means any person other than a brewer or retailer engaged in importation for sale or in the sale of beer in wholesale or jobbing quantities. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.20.035 Community location.
“Community location” means:
A. A public or private school;
B. A place of worship;
C. A public library;
D. A public playground; or
E. A public park. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.20.040 Licensed premises.
“Licensed premises” means any room, house, building, structure or place occupied by any person licensed to sell or to allow the consumption of alcoholic beverages on such premises under this title. Multiple beer or liquor dispensing facilities located in one building and owned or leased by one licensed applicant shall be deemed to be only one licensed premises; provided, that each dispensing point must be designated and the appropriate fee(s) paid and the license prominently displayed at each dispensing point. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.20.050 Liquor.
“Liquor” means alcohol, or any alcoholic, spirituous, fermented, malt or other liquid or a combination of liquids, a part of which is spirituous, or fermented, and all other drinks or drinkable liquids, containing at least one-half of one percent alcohol by volume. “Liquor” includes wine and heavy beer, which is defined as beer that contains more than four percent of alcohol by volume. “Liquor” shall not include “beer” as defined in Section 5.20.030. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.20.060 Nuisance.
“Nuisance” means any room, house, building, structure, place or licensed premises, where:
A. Alcoholic beverages are manufactured, sold, kept, bartered, stored, given away or used contrary to the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act or this chapter, or where persons resort for drinking alcoholic beverages contrary to the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act of Utah or this chapter; or
B. Intoxicated persons are permitted to loiter about, or profanity, indecent, immoral, loud or boisterous language or immoral or lewd conduct is permitted, or carried on; or
C. Persons under the age of twenty-one are permitted to purchase or drink alcoholic beverages; or
D. Laws or ordinances are violated by a licensee or its agents or patrons with the consent or knowledge of licensee upon such premises which tend to affect the public health, peace or morals; or
E. Any sign is displayed which is obnoxious, gaudy, blatant or offensive. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.20.070 Place of business.
A. “Place of business,” as used in connection with the issuance of an alcoholic beverage sales license, shall be deemed to include cafes, restaurants, public dining rooms, cafeterias, taverns, cabarets and any other place where the general public is invited or admitted for business purposes, and shall also be deemed to include private clubs, corporations and associations operating under charter or otherwise wherein only members and their guests are invited. Occupied hotel and motel rooms that are not open to the public shall not be deemed to be places of business as herein defined.
B. A “place of business” shall not be defined to include City owned facilities, including parks, where such facility is used and occupied pursuant to a special event use license and alcoholic beverages are served in accordance with the license and all applicable City regulations, codes, and State statutes. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.20.075 Premises.
“Premises” means any building, enclosure, room, equipment or other designated areas used in connection with the sale, storage, service, manufacture, distribution or consumption of alcoholic products, unless otherwise defined in this chapter or in the rules adopted by the Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.20.080 Restaurant.
“Restaurant” means any business establishment where a variety of foods are prepared and complete meals are served to the general public, located on a premises having adequate culinary fixtures for food preparation and dining accommodations, and that is engaged primarily in serving meals to the general public. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.20.100 Sell or offer for sale.
“Sell” or “offer for sale” means a transaction, exchange, or barter whereby, for consideration, an alcoholic product is either directly or indirectly transferred, solicited, ordered, delivered for value, or by a means or under a pretext is promised or obtained, whether done by a person as a principal, proprietor, agent, or as staff, unless otherwise defined in U.C.A. Title 32B, the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

Article II. Licenses and Local Consent

5.20.115 Alcoholic beverage sales regulated.
The City of Moab regulates the sales and commercial serving of alcoholic beverages in accordance with all applicable sections of Utah Code Annotated, Title 32B, unless a provision of this chapter specifies a distinct procedure or parameter. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.20.120 Wholesale sale of beer.
It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of selling beer at wholesale within the limits of the City without first obtaining a license therefor from the Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission of Utah. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.20.130 Retail sale of alcoholic beverages.
It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of retail sales of alcoholic beverages within the corporate limits of the City without first having procured a license from the Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission of Utah. A separate State license shall be required for each place of sale and the license itself shall identify the specific premises covered thereby and such license shall at all times be conspicuously displayed in the place to which it shall refer or for which it shall be issued. All licensees shall comply with the provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act of Utah and the regulations of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission and this chapter. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.20.140 Purchase of alcoholic beverages for resale.
It is unlawful for any licensee to purchase or acquire or to have or possess for the purpose of sale or distribution any alcoholic beverages except that which he or she shall have lawfully purchased from a brewer, wholesaler, or retail outlet licensed under the provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act of Utah. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.20.150 Retail alcohol license classification and local consent--Generally.
A. Any person who, at the time of applying for a business license, intends to operate a restaurant, bar, or special event where alcoholic beverages are sold for on-premises consumption shall disclose that information on the application under this title.
B. As provided by State statute, all potential licensees shall obtain written local consent from the City Manager before applying for an alcohol license from the State of Utah. Applicants subject to this section shall obtain and maintain a current valid alcoholic beverage license from the State of Utah, and shall comply with the procedures and standards contained in this title and in the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.
C. Retail licenses shall be classified in accordance with the categories enumerated in the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, and shall carry the privileges and responsibilities hereinafter set forth in this chapter and in Utah State law.
D. Nothing in this section or in this chapter shall be construed to supersede or waive any provision of the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, or to permit the distribution of alcoholic beverages other than as provided in the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.
E. Issuance of a business license under this title shall not constitute “local consent” as defined by U.C.A. Title 32B of the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Act unless the applicant discloses its intent to serve alcoholic beverages and the application is processed in accordance with this section. Business licensees who later wish to obtain an alcoholic beverage license shall obtain the necessary local consent and alcoholic beverage license, as provided by City Code and State law. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.20.200 Application--Generally.
All applications for local consent or licenses for renewal or reissuance of local consent or licenses and for transfer of local consent or licenses authorized by this chapter shall be verified and filed with the City Manager, who, after determination of local consent, shall file the same with the City Treasurer. The application shall state the applicant’s name in full and must indicate compliance with the requirements specified in the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act. If the applicant is a copartnership, the names and addresses of all partners and, if a corporation, the names and addresses of all officers and directors must be stated. If the business is to be operated by a person other than the applicant, such operator must join in the application and file the same information required of an applicant. It shall be grounds for revocation of the local consent or license for any business required to be licensed by this chapter to be operated by any person who has not filed his or her operator’s information at the time or renewal for the license, or, if operation is assumed during the license period, at least ten days prior to assuming operation of the business.
The application and operator’s information must be subscribed by the applicant and operator who shall state under oath that the information contained therein is true.
The City shall adhere to the State of Utah’s requirements regarding the proximity between community locations and establishments selling or serving alcohol as codified in U.C.A. 32B-1-202. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.20.210 Application--Police Department referral.
The application for such local consent or license, together with such information and certificate as are required by the City Manager to be attached thereto, shall be referred to the City Chief of Police for inspection and report. The Chief of Police shall, as soon as possible after receiving such application, make a report to the City Manager relative to the granting or denying of such application. Upon receipt of the report, the City Manager shall act upon the application as it shall deem fair, just and proper in regard to granting or denying the same. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.20.220 Application--Health Department referral.
All applications for local consent filed in accordance with this chapter shall be referred to the Health Department, who shall inspect the premises to be licensed to assure sanitary compliance with the laws of the State, the ordinances of the City and the rules and regulations of the Health Department. If the premises and all equipment used in the storage, distribution, or sale of alcohol fulfill all such sanitary requirements, the Health Department shall issue a permit to the licensee, a copy of which shall be attached to the application for local consent. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.20.230 Expiration.
If the grantee of local consent to sell or serve alcohol is no longer currently and actively operating a business to sell alcohol, such local consent shall expire within ninety days of the cessation of the grantee’s alcohol sales. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.20.240 Forfeiture.
If any licensee, licensed to do business under the provisions of this chapter, sells his or her place of business, together with the entire assets of the business, the local consent granted by the City shall expire and be forfeited. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.20.250 Fees.
Fees for applications for local consent shall be adopted by City Council. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.20.270 Refusal.
The City Manager may, with or without a hearing at its discretion, when in its opinion it is necessary for the protection of public peace or morals, refuse to grant any license or local consent applied for, at any time and in no such case need any cause be stated. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.20.280 Revocation.
Licenses or local consent may be suspended or revoked by the City Manager for the violation on the licensed premises of any provision of this chapter or of any other applicable ordinance or law relating to alcoholic beverages, or if the licensed premises is used for the commission of any illegal act or activity by any person, or if the person to whom the State license was issued no longer possesses the qualifications required by this chapter and the statutes of the State. The City reserves the right to revoke local consent at any time, even after an alcohol license has been granted by the State of Utah. Upon the revocation of local consent, such licensee must immediately cease selling or serving alcohol. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.20.290 Suspension.
All licenses or local consent issued pursuant to this chapter may be suspended by the City Manager without a prior hearing. Immediately following any suspension order issued without a prior hearing, notice shall be given such licensee, advising of the licensee’s right to a prompt hearing, to be held within seventy-two hours of the suspension, and listing the cause or causes for such suspension. If a cause for the suspension is established at the hearing, the suspension order may be continued for up to one year in duration. However, no license or local consent shall be revoked or suspended beyond the initial hearing without first establishing cause thereof, nor shall any license be revoked without first giving the licensee an opportunity for a hearing on the causes specified for revocation. It is unlawful for any person to sell alcoholic beverages at licensed premises during the period of suspension of a license or local consent. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.20.300 Sublease, transfer or assignment prohibited.
No license or local consent may be transferred, assigned, or subleased in any manner, whether to another person or business entity, or to another location. Any violations of this section shall be grounds for revocation of the license or local consent, or refusal to renew or issue the license or local consent. Any fees paid by the licensee to the City for local consent or a license shall be forfeited to the City. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.20.310 Operation to conform with law.
The licensee shall be responsible for the operation of the business in conformance with City ordinances, and it shall be grounds for revocation of the license or local consent if a violation of such ordinance occurs through an act of a licensee, operator, employee, agent, or by a person who is allowed to perform for patrons of the licensee’s business, whether or not such person is paid by the licensee for such performance. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.20.325 Violation--Penalty.
Any person who shall engage in the business of retail selling of alcoholic beverages within the corporate limits of the City without having an appropriate State license therefor, or whose license has been revoked, suspended or canceled, or who shall violate any of the terms, clauses or conditions of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

Article III. General Regulations

5.20.340 Sale to intoxicated person prohibited.
It is unlawful and constitutes an offense of strict liability for any person to sell an alcoholic beverage to any intoxicated person or to any person under the influence of a controlled substance. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.20.345 Unlawful to permit intoxicated persons on licensed premises.
It is unlawful and constitutes an offense of strict liability for any person licensed to sell alcoholic beverages or for any of his or her agents or employees to allow intoxicated persons to enter or remain in any licensed premises. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.20.350 Supplying to minors prohibited.
It is unlawful for alcoholic beverages to be given, sold or otherwise supplied to any person under the age of twenty-one years, but this shall not apply to the supplying of liquor to such person for medicinal purposes only by the parent or guardian of such person or to the administering of liquor to such person by a physician in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and U.C.A. Title 32B. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.20.355 Possession of alcoholic beverages prohibited to minors--Exception.
It is unlawful and constitutes an offense of strict liability for any person under the age of twenty-one to purchase, accept or have in his or her possession an alcoholic beverage, including beer or intoxicating liquor; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to the acceptance of alcoholic beverages by such person for medicinal purposes supplied only by the parent or guardian of such person or the administering of such alcoholic beverage by a physician in accordance with the law; provided further, that the provision of this section prohibiting possession of beer shall not apply to persons under twenty-one years of age who are bona fide employees in an off-premises beer retail establishment while in the discharge of their employment therein or thereabouts. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.20.360 Consumption of alcohol in public places.
No person shall consume, serve, or distribute alcoholic beverages in a public street, sidewalk, alley, building, park, or facility, except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. Violation of this section is a strict liability offense punishable as a Class C misdemeanor. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.20.370 Alcohol at City sponsored public events.
The City may hold public events where alcohol is served. Where the City does so, it shall contract with a separate alcohol vendor, who shall procure the necessary alcohol event license and the liability insurance as required by Title 4. The alcohol vendor shall be the event sponsor for purposes of all alcohol-related compliance under this section. If the City holds the event, it has discretion to waive or modify the other requirements of Title 4. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.20.380 Nuisance prohibited.
It is unlawful and constitutes an offense of strict liability for any person to keep or maintain a nuisance as the same is defined in this chapter. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.20.410 Adulterated alcoholic beverage.
It is unlawful for any person to mix or permit or cause to be mixed with any alcoholic beverage offered for sale, sold or supplied by him or her as a beverage any drug or any form of methylic alcohol or any crude, unrectified or impure form of ethylic alcohol or any other deleterious substance or liquid. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.20.420 Consumption prohibited in unlicensed premises.
It is unlawful for any person to consume liquor in an unlicensed place of business as provided herein. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.20.430 Supply to person whose license is suspended or revoked.
It is unlawful for any person to procure or supply or assist directly or indirectly in procuring or supplying liquor for or to any persons whose license is suspended, cancelled, or revoked. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.20.440 Supply to prohibited persons.
It is unlawful, except in the case of liquor supplied upon the prescription of a physician, or administered by a physician or dentist, or health care facility in accordance with State statute, for any person to procure for, sell, or give any alcohol to an insane or interdicted person, nor directly or indirectly assist in procuring or supplying any liquor to any such person. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)
1For State Alcoholic Beverage Act, see U.C.A. Title 32B.

Chapter 5.21 REGULATING THE RETAIL SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS

Sections:
5.21.010     Tobacco product sales regulated.

5.21.010 Tobacco product sales regulated.
The City of Moab shall regulate the retail sale of tobacco products in accordance with all applicable, enacted sections of Utah Code Annotated. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018; Ord. 14-03, 2014)

Chapter 5.28 RESERVED
1 Editor’s note: Ord. No. 11-11, adopted April 12, 2011, repealed Chapter 5.28, §§ 5.28.010--5.28.070, which pertained to cabarets and derived from prior code §§ 6-9--6-15.

Chapter 5.32 PAWNBROKERS

Sections:
5.32.010     Definitions.
5.32.020     Records to be kept--Availability to peace officers.
5.32.030     Reserved.
5.32.040     Articles kept--Term.
5.32.050     Reserved.
5.32.060     License--Revocation.

5.32.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings below respectively ascribed to them:
A. “Pawnbroker” means a person engaged in, conducting, managing, or carrying on the business of pawnbroking, or the business of loaning money for himself or for any other person, receiving as security for the repayment thereof pawns or pledges of personal property, or the business of purchasing personal property and reselling or agreeing to resell such article to customers or merchants, their personal representatives or their assignees at prices agreed upon at or before the time of such purchase, whether such business is the principal or sole business so carried on, or is merely incidental to or in connection with a branch or department of some other business.
B. “Pawnshop” means any room, store or place in which pawnbroking is engaged in, carried on or conducted. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018; prior code § 18-1)

5.32.020 Records to be kept--Availability to peace officers.
Pawnbrokers shall keep records containing a description of all articles received by them, the amounts paid therefor or advanced thereon, a general description of the person from whom received, together with his or her name and address and the date of the transaction. Such records shall at all reasonable times be accessible to any peace officer who demands an inspection thereof, and any further information regarding such transactions that the peace officer may require shall be given by pawnbrokers to the best of their ability. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018; prior code § 18-2)

5.32.030 Reserved.
(Prior code § 18-3)

5.32.040 Articles kept--Term.
No pawnbroker shall deface, alter, change, destroy, conceal, give away, sell or dispose of any goods, wares, merchandise or article before and until one week after the pawnbroker has acquired the article. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018; prior code § 18-4)

5.32.050 Reserved.
(Prior code § 18-5)

5.32.060 License--Revocation.
Any license of a pawnbroker may be revoked by the City Manager for any violation of this chapter. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018; prior code § 18-6)

Chapter 5.60 FRANCHISES

Sections:
5.60.010     Application--Fee.
5.60.020     Assignability.
5.60.030     Forfeiture of rights upon unlawful assignment.

5.60.010 Application--Fee.
Whenever applications shall be made to the City Council for a franchise or grant of special privileges, or for an extension or renewal of any existing franchise or grant of special privileges, the applicant shall furnish to the City Recorder, for the use of the City Council, twelve copies of the proposed resolution or ordinance, and pay into the City Treasury a fee of twenty-five dollars. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018; prior code § 2-66)

5.60.020 Assignability.
All franchises and grants of special privileges shall be nonassignable without the express permission of the City Council, whether such limitation is set forth in the body of the franchise or grant or not. All assignments of franchises and special grants shall be in writing, and a copy thereof filed in the City Recorder’s Office before any such assignment or transfer will be recognized by the City. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018; prior code § 2-67)

5.60.030 Forfeiture of rights upon unlawful assignment.
Any attempted assignment or transfer of a franchise or special privilege not made in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall operate as a forfeiture of all the rights of the grantee therein given. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018; prior code § 2-68)

Chapter 5.64 VENDOR, PEDDLER, SOLICITOR, AND MISCELLANEOUS MERCHANT BUSINESS LICENSES

Sections:
5.64.010     Definitions.
5.64.020     Licenses--Required.
5.64.030     Exemptions.
5.64.040     License fees.
5.64.050     General operating standards.
5.64.060     Specific operating standards.
5.64.070     Prohibited practices.
5.64.080     Application.
5.64.085     License renewal--Criminal convictions.
5.64.090     Licenses--Issuance.
5.64.100     Modification of display apparatus, vehicle or structure.
5.64.110     Grounds for denial.
5.64.120     Appeal of denial.
5.64.130     License--Display.
5.64.140     License--Fees.
5.64.150     License--Nontransferable.
5.64.160     License revocation--Grounds.
5.64.170     License revocation--Notice, right to cure, procedure.
5.64.180     License--Term and renewal.
5.64.190     Agent for service of process.

5.64.010 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter:
A. “Accoutrements” means additional items added for flavoring such as, but not limited to, seasonings, mustard, ketchup, and mayonnaise.
B. “Cart” means a small mobile cart or wagon that occupies a temporary location on a sidewalk or private property and is a human-propelled wheeled vehicle that may contain food or other items for sale.
C. “Display apparatus” means a nonpermanent structure such as a table, stand, wagon, tray, cart, canopy, tents with three sides open, or other displays for the sale of goods, merchandise, food, wares, or services. Teepees shall be allowed if seventy-five percent of the sides are open and the interior is visible, from outside the teepee, to at least seven vertical feet from the ground.
D. “Farm produce” means fresh fruit, vegetables, herbs, eggs, or grains.
E. “Miscellaneous merchant” means any licensee conducting business that does not meet the criteria of a peddler, solicitor, or vendor as defined in this chapter.
F. “Month” means a period of thirty consecutive days regardless of the calendar month.
G. “Nonmotorized trail system” means a paved or unpaved government-constructed trail or path that is intended solely for pedestrian, bicycle, or equestrian use.
H. “Peddler” means any person who goes from house to house or business to business, carrying food, goods, wares, or merchandise and selling or offering the same for sale. Peddlers seek out customers and are only stopped while engaged in a business transaction. They are not stopped or parked waiting for customers to come to them.
“Peddler” shall not include persons going door to door requesting contributions or offering goods for sale for fundraising purposes, by volunteer representatives of qualified charitable organizations or schools. A qualified charitable organization is a nonprofit organization that qualifies for tax-exempt status according to the U.S. Treasury under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code.
I. “School-sponsored event” means an activity or sale that generates money that is collected or paid to the school district or individual public school. The event must be overseen or sponsored by the school district, an individual public or private school, or a school group or club.
J. “Solicitor” means any person who goes from house to house or business to business, not carrying goods, wares, or merchandise, but taking orders for future delivery of goods, wares, merchandise, subscriptions, or services. A solicitor may also conduct sales by means of telephone solicitation, direct mail, email, distributing fliers, or internet offers.
“Solicitor” shall not include persons going door to door requesting contributions or offering goods for sale for fundraising purposes, by volunteer representatives of qualified charitable organizations or schools, nor shall it include persons carrying out petitioning activity or serving political candidates or causes. A qualified charitable organization is a nonprofit organization that qualifies for tax-exempt status according to the U.S. Treasury under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code.
K. “Stationary mobile cart” means a cart having functional wheels and an axle that occupies one temporary location for a specified period of time.
L. “Vehicle” means a motorized vehicle used for displaying, storing or transporting of articles offered for sale by a vendor, peddler or solicitor and is currently licensed and registered by the Department of Motor Vehicles.
M. “Vendor” means any person, firm, or corporation engaged in the business of selling food, goods, services, wares, or merchandise from a vehicle, trailer, cart, human-powered cycle, backpack, basket, or other display apparatus within the City, and who, in furtherance of such purpose, leases, uses, or occupies any street, sidewalk, or private property. The term “vendor” includes:
    1. Street vendors;
    2. Sidewalk vendors; and
    3. Private property vendors.
N. “Vendor, food” means any street vendor, sidewalk vendor, or private property vendor that sells foodstuffs, edibles, beverages, ice cream, confectionery, or other edible products upon any public street, road, alley, curb or sidewalk, or on private property.
O. “Vendor, limited” means a vendor that legally engages in business within City limits for a specified period of time not to exceed twenty-nine days.
P. “Vendor, long-term” means a vendor that legally engages in business within City limits for a renewable term of one to twelve months.
Q. “Vendor, private property” means any business that exhibits, displays, offers for sale or sells any food, beverages, goods, wares, or merchandise from a cart, fixed cart, stationary mobile cart, display apparatus, trailer, or vehicle located in a described location on private property. Merchandise may be displayed on display apparatus, as defined above.
R. “Vendor, sidewalk” means a vendor that sells or offers for sale from temporary locations for limited durations on any public sidewalk (excluding City parks and Mill Creek Parkway) any goods, wares, merchandise, services, food, or beverages from a cart or by foot from a pack, basket or similar container, or handheld display.
S. “Vendor, street” means a vendor that travels by vehicle, human-powered cycle, or other street-legal conveyance on public or private streets and who carries, conveys, or transports food, beverages, goods, wares, or merchandise and offers them for sale. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018; Ord. 13-17 (part), 2013)

5.64.020 Licenses--Required.
A. All vendors, peddlers, and solicitors, and anyone using vending display apparatus to engage in business within the City, shall first obtain a business license as required by Chapter 5.04.
B. Each individual peddler or solicitor going door to door, or the company that employs them, must obtain a business license in his, her, or its name. Each individual peddler or solicitor must obtain a background check prior to conducting business in a residential area.
C. Applicant shall apply to the City Treasurer’s Office and shall submit all information and fees required by Chapter 5.04 and Sections 5.64.040 and 5.64.080 for the specific type of vendor, peddler, or solicitor license. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018; Ord. 13-17 (part), 2013)

5.64.030 Exemptions.
A. This chapter shall not apply to school and City recreation sponsored sales or events, or to City contracted sales or events.
B. Vendors who conduct sales at a special event as defined in Title 4 are exempt from the provisions of this chapter, provided the responsible organization which holds the special event permit lists the vendor on an approved vendor list and the organization satisfies all City license and sales tax requirements as specified in Title 4.
C. Vendors who conduct sales at a convention or meeting where products or services are offered to registered members or guests and where the meeting or venue is not open to the general public shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
D. This chapter shall not apply to sales of farm produce, as defined above, where such sales are conducted by persons who grow such items and sales are conducted on private property.
E. Temporary displays by a permanent business, as described in Section 5.64.060(E), are exempt from obtaining a separate license for the temporary display; however, they must adhere to the requirements outlined in Section 5.64.060(E). (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018; Ord. 13-17 (part), 2013)

5.64.040 License fees.
License fees shall be determined by the Moab City Council. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018; Ord. 13-17 (part), 2013)

5.64.050 General operating standards.
A. The following requirements shall be met by all vendors:
    1. Code Compliance. Display apparatus, vehicles, and structures must meet all applicable building, health, and fire codes for the intended use. Display apparatus, vehicles, and structures require approval by the City Treasurer and locations of display apparatus, vehicles, and structures are limited to commercial zones unless otherwise permitted by the subsequent provisions of this chapter.
    2. Illegal Camping. It is illegal for any vendor to camp on the selling site, in accordance with Chapter 8.20 and Section 10.04.230.
    3. Refuse and Recycling. Vendors are strongly encouraged to recycle. Vendors shall provide their own refuse/recycling containers and in no case shall City street receptacles be used for on-site vendor refuse and recycling.
        a. All refuse and recycling containers shall be removed and securely stored at the close of each business day.
        b. Every container shall have a cover.
        c. Pickup of refuse/recyclables shall be made through a refuse service provider or through the host property owner. Written permission from the property owner or proof of other arrangements must be submitted with the application. The City, at its discretion, may require applicants to obtain commercial refuse disposal service.
        d. Food vendors involved in special events shall utilize the special event refuse plan.
        e. Food vendors with seating areas shall have refuse and recycling containers emptied at the close of each business day.
        f. Food vendors shall comply with all applicable requirements for the collection and disposal of grease.
    4. Area Maintenance. All vendors shall maintain the permitted area, the display apparatus, and the immediate area within thirty feet surrounding the permitted area in a neat, clean, and hazard-free condition.
    5. Signs. All signage shall be painted on or attached to the display apparatus, cart, or vehicle, and a drawing to scale or photograph of the proposed signage shall be included in the application. Signs on display apparatus shall not appear on devices that extend above the display apparatus except on umbrellas and canvas covers. Umbrella and cover signage shall relate only to the product being sold or the name of the business. Public poles, picnic tables, and trash receptacles shall not be used to display signs. Separate freestanding signs are prohibited.
    6. Business Access. Vendor license applicants shall demonstrate that there is sufficient access, parking and maneuvering space available at the site on which the vendor will operate. Suitable, safe access by pedestrians shall be provided and no structure shall obstruct access to or from parking areas or sidewalks.
    7. Hours of Operation. The hours of operation shall be limited to seven a.m. to ten p.m.
    8. Employee Restroom Facilities. Restroom services for employees shall be provided by a written agreement between the property owner and the vendor. The written agreement must be submitted with the application to the City Treasurer.
    9. Noise Level. Noise levels shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 17.74.
    10. Animals. No live animals shall be attached to any vending vehicle, cart, stand, or display.
    11. Number of Parking Spaces. Parking shall be provided by a written agreement between the property owner and the vendor or transient merchant. Said written agreement must be submitted with the application to the City Treasurer. One parking space per each temporary commercial structure shall be designated on the host property and shall be located so as not to reduce the number of parking spaces required for the permanent business.
        a. A parking exception may be granted by the City Manager if the applicant can adequately demonstrate that on-street parking is available, sufficient parking is provided elsewhere or customers largely walk up or would use short-term parking.
        b. In no case shall the vending apparatus occupy parking spaces that reduce the amount of required parking for the host business.
    12. Tents. The use of fully enclosed tents as apparatus is prohibited. A tent structure may be erected that is open on at least three sides.
    13. Proximity to Special Event. Any vending apparatus that sets up within one hundred linear feet in a straight line of a special event shall ask permission from the event and appear on the special event list of vendors.
    14. Zoning Compliance. No license shall be granted for a vendor unless allowed as a land use in the underlying zone(s) in which it operates except for vendors selling frozen food products.
    15. Location. Except for sidewalk vendors, ice cream trucks/cycles, and vendors moving to the designated food court at the corner of 100 North and 100 West, all other vendors must get prior written approval for each location they intend to occupy.
    16. Vehicles. All vehicles must be insured and registered with the Utah Department of Motor Vehicles. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018; Ord. 13-17 (part), 2013)

5.64.060 Specific operating standards.
A. Food Vendors. With the exception of vendors or peddlers selling frozen food in residential areas, all other food vendors shall follow the standards listed below:
    1. Location. Business shall be conducted in commercial zones. The vehicle, structure, or display apparatus shall not block ingress or egress of any loading, parking, or emergency access areas of the property or reduce required parking.
    2. Structures. 
        a. Food vending apparatus, structures, and vehicles shall comply with all State of Utah health requirements.
        b. Food vending apparatus must be constructed of durable materials, and be designed with smooth impervious surfaces for easy cleaning.
        c. Carts shall be of sufficient lightweight construction that can be moved from place to place by one adult person without any auxiliary power.
        d. The total area occupied by a display apparatus or pushcart, together with the operator and any trash receptacle, cooler or chair, shall not exceed thirty-six square feet of space.
        e. Sidewalk vendor carts shall not exceed the dimensions of three feet wide, eight feet long, and eight feet high.
        f. Vehicles or structures serving food shall not exceed the dimensions of eight feet wide, twenty-five feet long, and ten feet high. If the proposed vehicle or structure is more than twenty-five feet long, the applicant must obtain written approval for this exception from the City Manager.
        g. Umbrellas or canopies shall be a minimum of seven feet above the sidewalk if they extend beyond the edge of the cart or vehicle.
        h. Seating may be provided to include a table and up to six seats. Seating areas shall be located near the display apparatus, structure, or vehicle and shall not exceed forty square feet in area.
B. Street Vendors. Street vendors using motorized vehicles shall follow the standards listed below:
    1. Location. A street vendor may operate on public or private streets. Street vendors shall not conduct business on State highways.
        a. Street vending vehicles shall not stop to conduct business in intersections or within crosswalks so that vehicular and pedestrian traffic will remain unhindered.
        b. Street vending vehicles selling frozen products from vehicles may operate in residential areas; provided, that the vehicle continues to travel through neighborhoods with stops only to conduct sales. The vehicle must generally remain mobile and in no case shall the vehicle be parked longer than ten minutes in a single location for sales.
        c. Street food vending apparatus must be designed as a single, self-contained unit, able to operate without the use of detached tables and counters, or require additional refrigeration facilities at the place of operation.
    2. Size of Vehicle. Vehicles shall not exceed the dimensions of eight feet wide, twenty-five feet long, and ten feet high. If the proposed vehicle or structure is more than twenty-five feet long, the applicant must obtain written approval for this exception from the City Manager.
C. Sidewalk Vendors. Sidewalk vendors using human-propelled carts or cycles, packs, baskets, or handheld displays shall follow the display apparatus standards listed below:
    1. Location. A sidewalk vendor may operate on the sidewalk in the public right-of-way with written permission from the City.
        a. No license shall be approved for locations on City nonmotorized trail systems.
        b. Sidewalk vending apparatus shall not locate on corners or at intersections where it may cause line of sight issues for pedestrians or motorists. Carts shall be located so the flow of pedestrians is not impeded and be positioned along the route at the curbside of the sidewalk.
        c. Sidewalk vending apparatus shall not locate within ten feet of any doorway to an existing business.
        d. A minimum five feet of open sidewalk space for the passage of pedestrians shall be maintained at all times.
    2. Carts. 
        a. Sidewalk vendor carts shall not exceed the dimensions of three feet wide, eight feet long, and eight feet high.
        b. The area occupied by the cart, together with the operator and any trash receptacle, ice cooler or chair, shall not exceed thirty-five square feet of adjacent sidewalk space.
        c. The structures shall be moved on air-filled rubber tires and be of sufficiently lightweight construction that they can be moved from place to place by one adult person without auxiliary power.
        d. The device or cart shall not be motorized so as to move on its own power.
        e. Hard casters for wheels are prohibited.
D. Private Property Vendors. 
    1. Location. All display apparatus shall be located on private property and in commercial zones.
    2. Structures/Vehicles/Display Apparatus. 
        a. Dimensions. No display apparatus shall exceed the dimensions of one hundred twenty square feet.
        b. Construction. All display apparatus shall be constructed in a sturdy manner so that there is no risk to the public of having the display apparatus collapse or break.
        c. Umbrellas Permitted. An umbrella or awning may be attached to the display apparatus or vehicle so as to shelter the vendor or customers.
            i. Umbrellas or canopies shall provide a minimum of seven feet of head room above the ground.
            ii. Umbrellas or canopies shall not exceed one hundred twenty square feet in area.
        d. All accoutrements must be contained in a three-foot by five-foot area adjacent to the display apparatus, structure, or vehicle.
        e. Display apparatus that cannot be adequately secured during off-business times shall be removed from the property at the end of each working day.
        f. Vehicles or structures shall not exceed the dimensions of eight feet wide by twenty-five feet long and ten feet in height. If the proposed vehicle or structure is more than twenty-five feet long, the applicant must obtain written approval for this exception from the City Manager.
        g. Seating may be provided to include a table and up to seven seats.
        h. Private property vendors must meet all applicable zoning, building, health, and fire codes for the intended use.
E. Temporary Display--Permanent Business. A structure or display apparatus outside a permanent business shall not exceed twenty percent of the permanent business building’s area. Apparatus must meet all applicable zoning, building, health, and fire codes for the intended use. Structures are limited to commercial zones and do not require a separate vendor license if they comply with the following:
    1. Existing businesses may place racks, tables, tents, canopies, awnings, or outside displays of merchandise, food, or beverages at their permanent place of business if such displays are less than two hundred square feet in size.
    2. Where located along public sidewalks, such displays shall be located as close as possible to the main business building.
    3. A minimum clear sidewalk width of five feet shall be maintained for pedestrian traffic to pass.
    4. All merchandise displays shall be removed at the end of each business day and stored indoors.
    5. Any display or temporary structure shall not reduce the number of parking spaces for the permanent business and shall not obstruct ingress or egress to the business.
    6. Temporary displays at a permanent business must be approved by the Zoning Administrator for compliance with zoning, required parking spaces, and sign codes on a form provided by the City Treasurer. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018; Ord. 13-17 (part), 2013)

5.64.070 Prohibited practices.
A. It is unlawful for any vendor, transient merchant, peddler or solicitor to conduct business in such a manner as to impede or inconvenience any public use area, including, but not limited to, streets, alleys, sidewalks, and public rights-of-way.
B. It is unlawful for any vendor, transient merchant, peddler or solicitor to:
    1. Persist or remain on private property after the owner or occupant has directed the vendor, peddler, or solicitor to leave;
    2. Initiate telephone, mail, or in-person contact with a customer or prospective customer after that person has provided notice to the vendor, peddler, or solicitor requesting that all such contact shall cease;
    3. Engage in business between ten p.m. and seven a.m.;
    4. Engage in a pattern of contacts, whether in person, by telephone, or via mail or computer, which, viewed in terms of their frequency, duration, or content, are likely to be offensive, annoying, or disturbing to the recipient;
    5. Yell, sing, call out, or play recorded audio to passersby to interest them in the merchandise of the vendor, peddler or solicitor. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018; Ord. 13-17 (part), 2013)

5.64.080 Application.
A. Only complete applications will be accepted. Applications shall be submitted on a form provided by the City Treasurer and shall require the applicant to furnish the following items and information:
    1. Name, business name, address, email, telephone number, driver’s license number, and type of business entity of the vendor, peddler or solicitor.
    2. If applicable, the name, address, email, and telephone number of the company who employs or is represented by the vendor, transient merchant, peddler, or solicitor.
    3. Identification of the site or sites where the vendor, peddler, or solicitor will operate.
    4. Signed agreement with property owner that employees may use adjacent restroom facilities.
    5. All applicable license fees shall be paid in full at the time of application. License fees shall be refundable only under the terms and conditions stated in Section 5.04.030(E) or 5.04.040(B). (Refer to the City’s fee schedule for annual license fees.)
    6. A certificate of insurance is required for anyone operating on City property or in the rights-of-way.
    7. A description of the display apparatus, structure, vehicle, cycle, or cart, if applicable, including photographs and/or scale drawings with construction plans and specifications of any vending apparatus to be used in the business for which the license application is filed. Include proof of insurance, the license plate number and current registration of motor vehicles, if any. The description/drawings shall show:
        a. Dimensions of the structure, display apparatus, vehicle, cycle, or cart, and all attached signage. Include drawings or photographs of the proposed signage.
        b. Site plan showing:
            i. The complete perimeter of the property with dimensions.
            ii. All existing structures and dimensions.
            iii. All distances from buildings and property lines.
            iv. Locations of all drives, parking areas, loading areas, and sign locations on the property.
            v. Landscaped areas with dimensions.
            vi. All easements impacting the property.
            vii. All parking for the host property and highlighting the parking for the vendor business.
    8. Identification of the length of time and/or specific dates during which the applicant proposes that such business be conducted, together with the proposed hours of operations.
    9. All vendors, peddlers, and solicitors proposing operation in residential zones must provide a complete record of the applicant with respect to any disqualifying criminal conviction, plea of no contest, disqualifying pending criminal charge, or plea currently being held in abeyance, or a statement by the applicant that no such conviction or pending charge exists, attested to by the applicant, in addition to obtaining a comprehensive, criminal background check. See Section 5.64.110(B) regarding disqualifying criminal convictions for residential zones.
    10. All peddlers and solicitors, whether operating in commercial or residential zones, must provide a complete record of the applicant with respect to any disqualifying criminal conviction, plea of no contest, disqualifying pending criminal charge, or plea currently being held in abeyance, or a statement by the applicant that no such conviction or pending charge exists, attested to by the applicant. See Section 5.64.110(C) regarding disqualifying criminal convictions for peddlers and solicitors.
    11. Except for food trucks as defined by U.C.A. 11-56-102, written evidence of compliance from the Zoning Administrator that the use is allowed in the zone in which the applicant proposes to operate.
    12. Proof of a Utah State sales tax identification number in the applicant’s name or business name, if applicable, and compliance with all other applicable State and federal requirements for the particular business for which a license is requested.
    13. A description of the type of goods, wares, services or merchandise to be sold or offered for sale.
    14. Except for food trucks as defined by U.C.A. 11-56-102, a written statement of authorization from the property owner(s) of the location(s) where the applicant intends to conduct business.
    15. Payment of the applicable license fee, at the time of submittal of the application.
    16. An inspection report from the Southeastern Utah Health District, dated not more than ten days prior to the date of application, if applicant proposes to handle or offer food or beverages for sale.
    17. A refuse and recycling plan explaining how refuse and recycling disposal will be dealt with on site, including written permission from the host property owner to use the host’s refuse removal service, if applicable.
    18. A written agreement between the private property owner and the vendor regarding parking, unless an exception is granted pursuant to Section 5.64.050(A)(11)(a).
B. By signing the application, the applicant verifies that the condition, location, parking requirements and use of the structure, vehicle, cycle, cart, or display apparatus will comply with all City ordinances and other applicable codes. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018; Ord. 13-17 (part), 2013)

5.64.085 License renewal--Criminal convictions.
A. Before each license renewal, all vendors, peddlers, and solicitors operating in residential zones must provide an updated background check, completed within thirty days of the date of renewal. See Section 5.64.110 regarding disqualifying criminal convictions.
B. If a license subject to the requirements of this chapter expires and is not renewed, that license is automatically cancelled, and the licensee must apply for a new license, including obtaining a current criminal background check, if proposing operation in residential areas. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.64.090 Licenses--Issuance.
The City Treasurer shall review the application for completeness for licenses under this chapter. If approved, the City Treasurer will issue a vendor, peddler, or solicitor license, showing:
A. The number of the license;
B. The date of issuance;
C. The nature of the business authorized to be conducted;
D. The license fee paid;
E. The location(s) of the business;
F. The license term; and
G. The company name(s) of the person(s) authorized to conduct business. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018; Ord. 13-17 (part), 2013)

5.64.100 Modification of display apparatus, vehicle or structure.
If the licensee, during any time of operation, wishes to modify the display apparatus, vehicle, or structure in a way that varies from the drawing or photo submitted at the time of application, the licensee must obtain prior approval from the City Treasurer. Failure to obtain prior approval for modification of any display apparatus, vehicle, or structure, or any failure to provide a complete list of items to be offered for sale, is a violation of the license. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018; Ord. 13-17 (part), 2013)

5.64.110 Grounds for denial.
A. A vendor, peddler, or solicitor license may be denied by the City Treasurer based upon any of the criteria in Section 5.04.040. In addition, the City Treasurer may base denial, in whole or in part, upon the existence of site-specific impacts of the proposed license which render it incompatible with neighboring uses, or a history of past violations or complaints.
B. Residential Zones. For applicants proposing operation in residential zones, grounds for denial will include findings from a criminal background check, or from the attestation of a criminal record by the applicant, that include any of the following. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification pursuant to this chapter.
    1. Listing of the person on the sex offender registry or that the applicant is subject to an extended supervision order under the Serious Sex Offender Monitoring Act, at any time in the past;
    2. Offenses against the Sex Offender Registration Act or the Serious Sex Offender Monitoring Act, at any time in the past;
    3. An applicant has been convicted of, pled no contest to, has a pending charge, or has a current plea in abeyance for a crime involving:
        a. The sale, distribution, or display of material harmful to minors; sexual performance by minors; contributing to the delinquency of a minor; possession of child pornography; lewdness; obscenity; indecent exposure; public indecency; any crime involving sexual abuse or exploitation of a minor; sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault; rape; rape of a minor; object rape; object rape of a minor; forcible sodomy; sodomy on a minor; forcible sexual abuse; kidnapping; harboring a runaway minor; manslaughter; murder; or any attempt, conspiracy, or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses or offenses involving similar elements from any jurisdiction, regardless of the exact title of the offense, at any time in the past; or
        b. Any felony not listed in subsection (B)(3)(a) of this section; arson; assault; robbery; burglary; theft; fraud; conversion; violations of consumer protection statutes; deceit; misrepresentation; false statements; dishonesty; extortion; larceny; forgery; false or bogus checks; prostitution; exploitation of prostitution; promotion of prostitution; solicitation of sex acts; sex acts for hire; compelling prostitution; aiding prostitution; incest; any crime of violence not involving a sex act; driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs; criminal contempt; or any attempt, conspiracy, or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses or offenses involving similar elements from any jurisdiction, regardless of the exact title of the offense, for which:
            i. Less than two years have elapsed from the date of conviction, if the conviction is a misdemeanor, or less than five years if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanors within the five years; or
            ii. Less than five years have elapsed from the date of conviction if the offense is a felony;
    4. Sale and/or delivery of drugs, or any violation under the Utah Controlled Substances Act or substantially similar State or federal statute if the conviction was within the past five years;
    5. A history of consumer complaints against the applicant establishing unfair or dishonest trade practices, sales of shoddy, defective, or dangerous goods, or the like; or
    6. Any crime that, when considered by the Chief of Police, with the activities of a vendor, peddler, or solicitor, indicates that the best interests of the public are not served by granting the applicant a license.
C. Peddlers and Solicitors. For applicants proposing peddling and soliciting in commercial and/or residential zones, grounds for denial will include findings from a criminal background check, or from the attestation of a criminal record by the applicant, that include any of the following:
    1. An applicant has been convicted of, pled no contest to, has a pending charge, or has a current plea in abeyance for a crime involving: fraud; deceit; misrepresentation; false statements; dishonesty; extortion; larceny; forgery; false or bogus checks; kidnapping; perjury; burglary; robbery; theft; conversion; violation of consumer protection statutes; or any attempt, conspiracy, or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses or offenses involving similar elements from any jurisdiction, regardless of the exact title of the offense, for which:
        a. Less than two years have elapsed from the date of conviction, if the conviction is a misdemeanor, or less than five years if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanors within the five years; or
        b. Less than five years have elapsed from the date of conviction if the offense is a felony.
    2. A history of consumer complaints against the applicant establishing unfair or dishonest trade practices, sales of shoddy, defective, or dangerous goods, or the like.
    3. Any crime that, when considered by the Chief of Police, with the activities of a peddler or solicitor, indicates that the best interests of the public are not served by granting the applicant a license.
The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018; Ord. 13-17 (part), 2013)

5.64.120 Appeal of denial.
An applicant denied a vendor, peddler, or solicitor license by the City Treasurer may appeal that decision through the procedures outlined in Section 5.04.050. Exhaustion of administrative remedies and timely appeal shall be a jurisdictional prerequisite to judicial review. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018; Ord. 13-17 (part), 2013)

5.64.130 License--Display.
A. Vendors. The vendor license issued under this chapter shall be posted conspicuously in the place or places of business named therein.
B. Peddlers and Solicitors. Every licensed peddler and solicitor shall possess and display upon demand a copy of their business license. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018; Ord. 13-17 (part), 2013)

5.64.140 License--Fees.
Vendor, peddler, and solicitor license fees shall be established pursuant to the procedures and criteria established in Section 5.04.020 and this chapter. The license fees imposed by this chapter shall be in addition to any other fees applicable to the particular business use imposed by the provisions of this code. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018; Ord. 13-17 (part), 2013)

5.64.150 License--Nontransferable.
Any license issued pursuant to this chapter is not transferable by the licensee. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018; Ord. 13-17 (part), 2013)

5.64.160 License revocation--Grounds.
Licenses under this chapter may be revoked by the City Manager for any of the causes specified in Section 5.04.080, in addition to the following:
A. Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in connection with the selling of goods, wares, or merchandise, or made on the application for a license or in the attestation to the licensee’s criminal record;
B. Any violation of the general or specific operating standards;
C. Operation of the business licensed under this chapter in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of the public; or
D. Any criminal conviction, plea of no contest, pending charge, or plea in abeyance of any disqualifying crime enumerated in Section 5.64.110. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018; Ord. 13-17 (part), 2013)

5.64.170 License revocation--Notice, right to cure, procedure.
Notice of and the procedure for curing a revocation of a license issued under this chapter shall be pursuant to the procedures and requirements specified in Section 5.04.090. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018; Ord. 13-17 (part), 2013)

5.64.180 License--Term and renewal.
All licenses issued under this chapter shall expire one year from the date of issuance, unless a prior date is specified. Licensees wishing to renew their license at the end of the specified term shall submit a renewal form and license fee at least thirty days prior to expiration. All renewals shall be reviewed for approval criteria by the City Treasurer. Licenses are renewable under the terms stated in Section 5.04.060. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018; Ord. 13-17 (part), 2013)

5.64.190 Agent for service of process.
A. A condition upon the issuance of any peddler or solicitor license is the irrevocable consent by the licensee to the nomination of the City Recorder as its agent for service of process for any claims derived from the licensee’s business activities within the City. Additionally, the licensee stipulates to venue in the courts of Grand County, Utah, for any action involving its business activities in the City.
B. Should the City Recorder be served with process for any licensed peddler or solicitor, a complete copy of the summons and complaint shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the licensee’s business address, as contained in the City records. The City Recorder shall then notify the City Manager of the impending action and the nature of the complaint. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

Chapter 5.67 NIGHTLY RENTAL LICENSES

Sections:
5.67.010     Definitions.
5.67.020     Licenses--Required.
5.67.025     License fee.
5.67.030     Application.
5.67.040     Renewal--Term.
5.67.050     Grounds for denial.
5.67.060     Appeal of denial.
5.67.065     Assignment prohibited, application upon transfer.
5.67.070     License revocation, grounds.
5.67.080     Revocation procedure, right to cure.
5.67.090     Penalties.
5.67.100     General operating standards.

5.67.010 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter:
A. “Agent” means any legally authorized entity acting on behalf of a property owner, including but not limited to a property manager, a property management company, an executor of the owner’s estate, or other legal fiduciary.
B. “Nightly rental,” also called “short-term rental,” means:
    1. The use, occupancy, rent or lease, for direct or indirect remuneration, of a structure or any portion thereof, constructed for single household or multi-household occupancy, or of any other residential property, or residential property within a commercial building, for a term of thirty consecutive days or less.
    2. The commercial use, by any person, of residential property, or residential property within a commercial building, for hostel, hotel, inn, lodging, motel, resort or other transient lodging uses, where the term of occupancy, possession or tenancy of the property is for a term of thirty consecutive days or less.
    3. For the purposes of this section, “remuneration” means compensation, money, rent, or other bargained-for consideration given in return for occupancy, possession or use of real property.
    4. For purposes of this section, “nightly rentals” shall include bed and breakfasts. (Ord. 19-11 § 1 (part), 2019: Ord. 19-08 § 1 (part), 2019: Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.67.020 Licenses--Required.
A. No person shall operate or engage in any nightly rental activity within the City of Moab without first obtaining and maintaining a valid nightly rental business license as required by Chapter 5.04.
B. Each owner of property within the City of Moab that is being used as a nightly rental must obtain a nightly rental license. An owner may allow his or her agent to apply for and obtain the nightly rental license; however, the license shall be in the property owner’s name, and filed under the property owner’s name in the City license records.
C. An individual owner who owns multiple nightly rental properties must obtain a separate license for each nightly rental property, and may list up to four nightly rental property locations on one license application. A nightly rental business license fee will be assessed for each property location. Sales tax for each location must be reported and remitted to the Utah State Tax Commission as per current state regulations and requirements. Property managers and property management companies may not include multiple nightly rental properties in one license.
D. If an owner of a nightly rental is using a D.B.A., that D.B.A. must be registered with the Utah Department of Commerce.
E. The owner shall be the licensee, but the property manager or local representative, if applicable, shall be deemed the responsible party for purposes of operating standards and management standards. (Ord. 19-11 § 1 (part), 2019: Ord. 19-08 § 1 (part), 2019: Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.67.025 License fee.
From time to time, the City Council may establish license fees for nightly rentals operating within the City limits. Fees shall be based on the total number of bedrooms in each nightly rental. (Ord. 19-11 § 1 (part), 2019: Ord. 19-08 § 1 (part), 2019: Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.67.030 Application.
A. The application for a nightly rental license shall include all of the items outlined in Section 5.04.030. Sales tax registration, reporting and remittance for each location must be in accordance with current Utah State Tax Commission regulations and requirements.
B. The applicant must show that the facility meets minimum performance standards as specified below in general operating standards.
C. An inspection by the Building Inspector, Fire Chief and Health Department shall be required prior to issuance of a license and as often as necessary for enforcement of this chapter. The plans and the property itself must be approved by the Building Inspector, Fire Chief and Health Department prior to issuance of a license. (Ord. 19-11 § 1 (part), 2019: Ord. 19-08 § 1 (part), 2019: Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.67.040 Renewal--Term.
The license for a nightly rental property shall be renewed annually on July 1st, if all the conditions required at the time of the initial approval remain unchanged. (Ord. 19-11 § 1 (part), 2019: Ord. 19-08 § 1 (part), 2019: Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.67.050 Grounds for denial.
An application for a nightly rental license may be denied for any of the grounds listed in Section 5.04.040, or for a failure to fulfill any of the application requirements. (Ord. 19-11 § 1 (part), 2019: Ord. 19-08 § 1 (part), 2019: Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.67.060 Appeal of denial.
An appeal of a denial of a nightly rental business license shall follow the appeals procedure specified in Section 5.04.050. (Ord. 19-11 § 1 (part), 2019: Ord. 19-08 § 1 (part), 2019: Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.67.065 Assignment prohibited, application upon transfer.
A. No license issued under this chapter may be assigned or transferred to any person or entity not named therein; nor shall any license be assigned or transferred to another nightly rental property, whether owned by the named licensee or by another person or business entity.
B. Upon the sale, conveyance, or transfer of a nightly rental property, the new owner or transferee shall, within ten business days of completion of the conveyance or sale, apply for a new nightly rental license, if he/she intends to operate a nightly rental on the premises. (Ord. 19-11 § 1 (part), 2019: Ord. 19-08 § 1 (part), 2019: Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.67.070 License revocation, grounds.
A nightly rental license may be revoked for any of the grounds listed in Section 5.04.080, or for a violation of any of the operating standards or management standards set forth below. (Ord. 19-11 § 1 (part), 2019: Ord. 19-08 § 1 (part), 2019: Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.67.080 Revocation procedure, right to cure.
The revocation procedure and appeal process shall follow the procedures outlined in Section 5.04.090. (Ord. 19-11 § 1 (part), 2019: Ord. 19-08 § 1 (part), 2019: Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.67.090 Penalties.
A. Any owner and/or property manager of a dwelling within the City of Moab who allows or permits occupation of said dwelling as a nightly rental, as defined herein, without having first obtained a business license in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor. The fine for a Class A misdemeanor shall be imposed for each day that the violation continued or continues to be committed.
B. Any other violation of this chapter may be punishable, at the election of the City, as a Class A misdemeanor, as defined under the Utah Code, or by civil action to enjoin or abate the violation. The fine for a Class A misdemeanor shall be imposed for each day that the violation continued or continues to be committed. Proof of a violation of this section shall be sufficient to obtain an injunction. In the event of civil enforcement, the City may recover its reasonable attorney fees and court costs against the violator. (Ord. 19-11 § 1 (part), 2019: Ord. 19-08 § 1 (part), 2019: Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.67.100 General operating standards.
Nightly rentals may be allowed where the applicant can show evidence of compliance with the standards and procedures outlined below, and where there is minimal impact on adjacent properties and neighborhoods.
A. No license shall be granted for a nightly rental operation unless allowed as a land use in the underlying zoning district(s) in which it operates.
B. The nightly rental must meet all applicable building, health and fire codes for the intended use.
C. A maximum stay at a nightly rental by an individual or particular group shall not exceed thirty consecutive days.
D. Maximum occupancy of any nightly rental shall be ten persons at any one time. If, however, the property has a fire sprinkler system or other fire suppression system acceptable to the Moab Fire Chief, and the owner obtains written approval from the Fire Chief, a greater maximum occupancy may be approved by the City Treasurer.
E. Each sleeping room must be equipped with smoke and CO (carbon monoxide) detectors.
F. All nightly rental owners or property managers must collect and pay the applicable State transient room tax, State sales tax, City resort communities sales tax, City municipal transient rooms tax, and pay the City business license fee.
G. Water and sewer impact fees for nightly rentals shall be calculated pursuant to Chapter 13.25.
H. Water and sewer rates for nightly rentals shall be calculated according to the rate formulas contained in Chapter 13.24.
I. The owner or property manager shall provide information on current or past occupants to police, emergency, or City personnel as requested. The owner or property manager shall respond to complaints and concerns within one hour of any phone call or other notification. Failure of the owner or property manager to respond in a timely manner may result in a violation and possible fines to the owner and/or property manager, or revocation of the nightly rental license. (Ord. 19-11 § 1 (part), 2019: Ord. 19-08 § 1 (part), 2019: Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

Chapter 5.70 RESERVED
1 Editor’s note: Ord. No. 18-15, adopted September 25, 2018, repealed Chapter 5.70, §§ 5.70.010--5.70.080, which pertained to street performers and derived from Ord. No. 03-05.
(Ord. 03-05 (part), 2003)

Chapter 5.80 HOME OCCUPATION LICENSES

Sections:
5.80.010     Purpose and definitions.
5.80.020     Home occupation licenses.
5.80.030     Application, renewal, and denial.
5.80.040     Fees.
5.80.050     General operating standards.
5.80.060     Prohibited home occupations and uses.
5.80.070     Enforcement and revocation.

5.80.010 Purpose and definitions.
A. Purpose. This chapter is established to provide an opportunity for home occupations as an accessory use when they are compatible with the neighborhoods in which they are located. The intent is to safeguard the peace, quiet, and domestic tranquility within all residential neighborhoods, and to protect residents from the adverse effects of commercial uses that may create a significant impact on a neighborhood.
B. Definitions. 
    1. A “home occupation” is any use, occupation or activity, conducted entirely within a dwelling and/or accessory building, which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes and does not change the residential character of the dwelling or the surrounding neighborhood.
    2. A home occupation may be allowed as an accessory use to a dwelling in the A-2, RA-1, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and MH/RV-1 zones.
    3. A “home occupation” shall not be construed to mean an employee working in his or her home in the service of an employer whose principal place of business is licensed at another location.
    4. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, a home occupation license is not required for:
        a. A business that is operated only occasionally by an individual who is under eighteen years of age;
        b. Garage and yard sales, provided there are no more than two garage or yard sales at a residence per calendar year; or
        c. Sales of farm produce, such as fresh fruit, vegetables, herbs, eggs, or grains, where such sales are conducted by persons who grow such items and sales are conducted on private property. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.80.020 Home occupation licenses.
A. Business License Required. Prior to commencing the home occupation, the applicant shall apply for and maintain for the duration of the enterprise a business license, as specified in Chapter 5.04, from the City Manager.
B. If the holder of the license relocates to another site, a new home occupation license is required. If a property changes ownership and it is desired by the new owner to continue the same home occupation, a new license is required.
C. The license is not transferable to any individual or company other than the licensee.
D. Any substantial change in the nature of the business use shall require the existing licensee to apply for and obtain a new home occupation license specific to the new business use or expansion.
E. Businesses that conduct off-site sales (e.g., processing orders by mail, telephone or internet through a home office) must apply for a home occupation license as established in this section. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018; Ord. 16-05 § 2 (part), 2016: Ord. 14-02 § 1, 2014; Ord. 08-07 (part), 2008. Formerly 5.80.010)

5.80.030 Application, renewal, and denial.
A. The application shall contain the following information: name of applicant, address of home occupation, proposed activity, and a statement of assurance that the applicant shall comply with the requirements of this section. The City Manager may require other information from the applicant, based on the nature of the business proposed.
B. If the applicant is not the owner of the building or lot on which the request for a home occupation is located, the application must include a notarized letter signed by the owner agreeing to the proposed home occupation.
C. Before receiving a license, the home occupation applicant shall submit written evidence of administrative approval from the Zoning Administrator regarding parking, access, and traffic, and that the use is appropriate in the zoning district in which the applicant proposes to operate.
D. Following approval of the application and the other documents, a home occupation license, including any written terms conditional to its approval, shall be issued by the City to the applicant.
E. All home occupation licenses shall be valid for one year and may be renewed annually, provided there have been no reported violations, complaints or detrimental characteristics which may, in the opinion of the City Manager, require termination of the home occupation.
F. The home occupation license may be denied for any of the grounds listed in Section 5.04.040. An applicant denied a business license shall be given written notice of the action by the City Treasurer.
G. Appeals of license denials must be submitted under the procedures outlined in Section 5.04.050. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.80.040 Fees.
A. Fees shall be determined from time to time by the City Council.
B. A home occupation is exempt from the business license fee unless the combined off-site impact of the business, together with the primary residential use, is anticipated to or is shown to materially exceed the off-site impact of the primary residential use alone. The Code Compliance Officer, or other City employee as designated by the City Manager, shall determine the anticipation or existence of such impacts.
C. The following home occupations have been determined to have a combined off-site impact that materially exceeds the off-site impact of the primary residential use alone. These home occupations shall meet all requirements of this chapter by obtaining a license and paying the necessary fee:
    1. In-home child or adult care businesses;
    2. Preschools;
    3. Businesses that require or attract more than five vehicle trips per day, including but not limited to package delivery, client or customer visits, and employee trips;
    4. Any business that is required to have a fire inspection due to possible hazardous storage or activities;
    5. Any home or property that requires any modification requiring a building permit to accommodate the business operations;
    6. Any home occupation that creates a demand for City services, utility services, or community facilities, or that creates unusual amounts of waste, in excess of those services usually and customarily provided for residential uses;
    7. Any home occupation where the combined off-site impact of the home occupation and the primary residential use materially exceeds the off-site impact of the primary residential use alone as determined by the City at its discretion after having inspected the home occupation in response to complaints from surrounding property owners. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

5.80.050 General operating standards.
A. All home occupations must comply with the following standards and qualifications:
    1. Code Compliance. There shall be complete conformity with fire, building, plumbing, electrical and all other City, county, State and federal codes.
    2. Area. The home occupation activity shall be conducted entirely within the home of the applicant or an enclosed garage if said structure is located on the premises of the applicant. The total permissible square footage to be used for the home occupation shall not exceed twenty-five percent of the total ground floor square footage of the house, or one room, whichever is greater. Where an accessory building or a screened rear yard is used, no more than twenty-five percent of the total ground floor square footage of the house or six hundred square feet in area, whichever is less, shall be devoted to the home occupation.
    3. Yard. No home businesses are allowed to operate outside of an enclosed structure, unless otherwise approved by the City Manager for outside activities. The home occupation shall not involve the use of any yard space for storage or display of supplies, inventory, or equipment, unless specifically stored within trailers or accessory structures. Any screened area or accessory structure used for the home occupation must be located in either the side or rear yard areas.
    4. Internal or external alterations shall not be made to the dwelling or yard area that will change its residential character or the character of the neighborhood.
    5. A home occupation shall not involve the installation of machinery or additional equipment other than that customary to normal household operations.
    6. Signs. A person who engages in a home occupation shall not use advertisements, signs, window displays, or displays on or off the premises; provided, however, that this shall not be construed to regulate signage attached to vehicles.
    7. Customers and Clients. A home occupation shall not involve or result in the presence of more than two customers or clients on the premises at one time.
    8. Noise. A home occupation shall not generate loud or raucous noise, or utilize mechanical, electrical or other equipment or items that produce noise, electrical or magnetic interference, vibration, heat, glare, smoke, dust, odor or other nuisance outside the residential building.
    9. Equipment and Explosives. A home occupation shall not involve the visible storage of equipment or materials, or the presence of highly explosive or combustible equipment.
    10. Employees. At the discretion of staff and based upon site-specific considerations, home occupations may be permitted up to two employees who are not residents of the primary dwelling.
    11. Vehicles and Traffic. 
        a. A home occupation shall not generate more traffic than the typical or average dwelling unit in a residential zone, with the exception of child day cares and preschools.
        b. The home occupation shall not involve the use of commercial vehicles, other than a taxi, a shuttle, or a standard delivery vehicle for delivery of materials to or from the premises. Each licensee is permitted to use and park on the licensed premises one commercial vehicle that has a rated capacity not to exceed one ton.
        c. No heavy equipment, heavy machinery, or vehicle having a gross weight of two thousand pounds (one ton) or more may be stored outside a residence in connection with a home occupation.
        d. Parking spaces shall be provided for the dwelling and the home occupation in accordance with the specifications in Section 17.09.220, Off-street parking and loading--Number of spaces. The licensee shall provide developed off-street parking for the commercial vehicle used in the business and all employee vehicles. This provision excludes stops made by delivery vehicles.
        e. The home occupation shall not occupy any area required to satisfy off-street parking requirements.
        f. One trailer may be used in association with the home occupation, provided it meets the following criteria:
            i. An open or enclosed trailer with a body length of twenty feet or less, excluding the tongue;
            ii. Materials/equipment shall not be stored outside of the trailer;
            iii. The trailer shall be parked in the side or rear yard, on an off-street parking area, or garaged on the property, and shall not be parked on the street in front of the house. If the home is located on a corner lot, the trailer shall not be stored on the side street of the house unless it is out of the required front yard setback. If the topography of the lot prohibits the parking of the trailer on the side or rear yard, the trailer must be stored off site; and
            iv. The trailer must be well maintained, and must not present negative impacts for adjacent neighbors, including but not limited to: odors, dust, parking location, or driving visibility on the street.
B. Businesses that engage in some form of manufacturing or production shall be reviewed on a case-by-case basis for compatibility with adjacent properties and the neighborhood.
C. The City may place additional restrictions on a home occupation relating to hours of operation, parking, traffic or other matters as it deems necessary to mitigate impacts on the neighborhood and the City in general.
D. The City retains the right to inspect any and all premises licensed for home occupation during reasonable hours to determine compliance with the provisions of this title. (Ord. 18-15, 2018)

5.80.060 Prohibited home occupations and uses.
A. The following business uses and activities are not incidental to or compatible with residential activities, and are therefore prohibited as home occupations:
    1. Automotive and other vehicle repair or service (body or mechanical), storage, painting or upholstery, or the repair, reconditioning, servicing, or manufacture of any internal combustion or diesel engines, or of any motor vehicle, including automobiles, trucks, ATVs, or boats, but excluding small engines such as lawnmowers;
    2. Boutiques, sample sales, or craft shows;
    3. Contractors’ storage yards;
    4. Exercise or dance studios (not including one-on-one personal trainers);
    5. Junk, dismantling, salvage or scrap yards;
    6. Kennel or veterinary clinic;
    7. Medical or health clinic;
    8. Mortuary, crematorium, columbarium, or mausoleum;
    9. Nursing home;
    10. Restaurant;
    11. Retail sales of products to the public (except for off-site sales (e.g., processing orders by mail, telephone or internet through a home office, where there is no stock-in-trade on the site));
    12. Sexually oriented businesses or adult entertainment activities;
    13. Welding, ironworks, or machine shop operations;
    14. Any uses which employ machinery or equipment that emits sound (e.g., saws, drills, musical instruments) that is detectable beyond the property;
    15. Any uses which require explosives or highly combustible or toxic materials, or uses which change the fire safety of the premises, or uses which employ the storage of flammable, explosive, chemical, or hazardous materials beyond those normally associated with a residential use;
    16. Any uses which create electrical, magnetic, radio, or television interference, dust, fumes, gas, glare, excess light, noise, odor, smoke, toxic/hazardous materials, vibration, or other hazards or nuisances as determined by the City Manager;
    17. Any other uses the City Manager determines to be similar to those listed above, or which substantially and unreasonably interfere with the use and enjoyment of adjacent or nearby property or interferes with public peace and comfort.
B. It shall be a violation of this chapter if an existing home occupation licensee commits or practices any of the prohibited uses outlined above in the course of the licensee’s home business activity. (Ord. 18-15, 2018)

5.80.070 Enforcement and revocation.
A. Any person aggrieved by a violation or apparent violation of the provisions of this section may file a written complaint with the City’s Code Compliance Officer, who shall investigate such complaint and take the appropriate action to have the violation penalized or removed, if such violation is found to exist.
B. Failure to meet any of the standards or rules contained in this chapter, or a violation of any part of this chapter, or a refusal or failure to abate any violation by the licensee, shall be unlawful and grounds for immediate revocation of the license.
C. Enforcement. 
    1. Prior to instituting any revocation or enforcement action for violations of the license or this code, the City shall deliver written notice of the violation to the licensee. The licensee shall have a period of not less than thirty days in which to abate or correct the violation, which period may be extended by the City Manager, upon a showing of good cause by the licensee.
    2. Any violation not corrected within the abatement period may be subject to, at the option of the City, administrative, civil, and criminal enforcement. The City may commence a civil action to enjoin or abate any violation of this section. In any civil enforcement action, the City shall be entitled to obtain injunctive relief upon a showing of violation(s) of this section or the applicable home occupation license. The court may also assess civil penalties to the extent permitted by the Utah Code. The City shall be entitled to recover its reasonable attorney fees and court costs in any action in which a violation of this section is established.
    3. Persons operating a business subject to this section without the required home occupation license, or in violation of Chapter 5.04, are subject to all remedies and penalties specified in this section.
    4. Any license or approval granted, in whole or in part, as a result of false, inaccurate or misleading information supplied by the applicant or its agent shall confer no vested right upon the applicant, and may be subject to revocation following delivery of written notice to the applicant explaining the basis for the action. Any aggrieved party may appeal such revocation to the appeal authority by delivering notice of appeal within ten days of the notice of revocation.
    5. Exhaustion of administrative remedies shall be a jurisdictional prerequisite to seeking judicial review. (Ord. 18-15 § 2, 2018)

Title 6 ANIMALS

Chapters:
6.04         Animal Control

Chapter 6.04 ANIMAL CONTROL

Sections:
6.04.010     Definitions.
6.04.020     Obstructing animal control and animal shelter activities.
6.04.030     Licensing of dogs and cats.
6.04.040     Dog and cat licensing--Certification.
6.04.050     Dog and cat licensing--Receipt and tag.
6.04.060     Annual license--Fees for unneutered and unspayed dogs and cats.
6.04.070     Lifetime license--Fees for neutered or spayed dogs and cats.
6.04.080     Tag--Duty of owner or caretaker to attach.
6.04.090     Licensed cats permitted to roam.
6.04.100     Cats not spayed or neutered restricted to owners’ property.
6.04.110     Tag--Removal by person other than owner or caretaker unlawful.
6.04.120     Tag--Replacement.
6.04.130     Change of ownership of dog or cat.
6.04.140     Limit of number of dogs or cats kept on premises.
6.04.150     Records to be kept.
6.04.160     Animal quarters pens and runs.
6.04.170     Rabies--Vaccination required.
6.04.180     Rabies--Vaccination tag.
6.04.190     Rabies--Quarantine.
6.04.200     Rabies--Examination of biting animal required.
6.04.210     Rabies--Police authority.
6.04.220     Impoundment--Animal control officer authority.
6.04.230     Impoundment--Registration.
6.04.240     Impoundment--Notice.
6.04.250     Impoundment--Release of animal without tag.
6.04.260     Impoundment of registered animal running at large that has not been spayed or neutered.
6.04.270     Impoundment--Release terms.
6.04.280     Impoundment--Fees.
6.04.290     Disposal--Release.
6.04.300     Disposal--Euthanasia.
6.04.310     Dogs running at large--Authority to apprehend.
6.04.320     Dogs or cats in public places--Prohibited.
6.04.330     Dogs or cats in public places--Prohibited--Exception for written permission.
6.04.340     Female dogs or cats in heat--Confined.
6.04.350     Dogs in public places--Maximum length of leash--Exception.
6.04.360     Dog fights.
6.04.370     Dangerous dogs--Prohibited.
6.04.380     Fierce or dangerous dogs--Euthanizing.
6.04.390     Abandonment unlawful.
6.04.400     Abandoning diseased animals.
6.04.410     Livestock running at large prohibited.
6.04.420     Leading or running at large of wild animals prohibited.
6.04.430     Conveyance of livestock through city.
6.04.440     Cruelty to animals a class B misdemeanor.
6.04.450     Killing or injuring animals with vehicle.
6.04.460     Sanitation of pet shops.
6.04.470     Premises confining animals.
6.04.480     Barns and stables.
6.04.490     Removal of dead animals.
6.04.500     Poisoning animals.
6.04.510     Nuisance dogs.
6.04.520     Animals grazing on public property.
6.04.530     Animals running at large.
6.04.540     Guard dog--Permit--Required.
6.04.550     Guard dog--Confinement provisions.
6.04.560     Guard dog--Seizure and impoundment upon violation of Sections 6.04.560 through 6.04.580.
6.04.570     Police officer--Authority.
6.04.580     Police officer--Assistance.
6.04.590     Violation--Penalty.

6.04.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:
“Animal control officer” means a law enforcement officer charged with the responsibility of enforcing this chapter and all applicable state animal control laws and regulations.
“Animal shelter manager” means a city employee charged with the responsibility of overseeing the operation of the City animal shelter.
“Caretaker” means a person providing shelter or food or otherwise caring for a dog or cat.
“Cat” means any animal of the species Felis catus.
“City” means the City of Moab, Utah.
“Dangerous dog” means a dog with a known propensity for or history of unprovoked attacks against or intimidation of people or animals, as determined by the animal control officer.
“Dog” means any animal of the species Canis familiaris.
“Guard dog” means a dog specifically used to protect property and to guard against or watch for unwanted people or animals.
“Owner” means a person having financial or property interest in a dog or cat and providing shelter or food or otherwise caring for the animal.
“Pen” or “run” means an enclosed area where an animal or animals are kept.
“Running at large” means being off the premises of the owner or caretaker and not under the control of the owner or caretaker or a member of his or her immediate household by leash or other means of physical control.
“Service or assistant dogs” means any guide dog, signal dog, or other dog individually trained to provide aid or assistance to individuals with disabilities or special health needs as defined in Utah State Code Section 62A-5B-102.
“State” means the state of Utah.
“Vaccinations” means the standard series of inoculations given to dogs or cats to prevent the spread of disease. (Ord. 19-13 § 21 (part), 2019; Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

6.04.020 Obstructing animal control and animal shelter activities.
No person shall remove any animal from the custody of the animal control officer or the animal shelter manager or out of the animal shelter by stealth or by force. No person shall interrupt or hinder the animal control officer or animal shelter manager in the discharge of their duties. (Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

6.04.030 Licensing of dogs and cats.
Every dog or cat owner or caretaker within city limits shall license every dog and cat they own or care for over the age of six months, and shall pay to the City applicable license fees as set by resolution. (Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

6.04.040 Dog and cat licensing--Certification.
The owner or caretaker of a dog or cat shall state at the time the application for a license is made the owner’s name and address, and the sex, breed, and color of the dog or cat for which such application is being made. The owner or caretaker shall also present a certificate from a licensed veterinarian stating that the dog or cat has been vaccinated for the prevention of rabies, and such certificate must give the last date of vaccination and the number of the vaccination tag issued by the veterinarian at the time of the vaccination. (Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

6.04.050 Dog and cat licensing--Receipt and tag.
It is the duty of the dog or cat owner or caretaker to attach to the dog or cat the metallic license tag issued upon payment of the applicable license fee. Proof of current rabies vaccination for each dog or cat shall be provided to the City before a license tag is issued.
A. In the case of annual licensing, the license receipt and metallic license tag shall be valid and enforced during the calendar year for which it is issued, and until the first day of January of the next succeeding year.
B. In the case of lifetime licensing as contained in Section 6.04.070, the license tag shall be valid and enforced for the life of the dog or cat. (Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

6.04.060 Annual license--Fees for unneutered and unspayed dogs and cats.
The fee for an annual license under this chapter for an unneutered male dog or cat, or for an unspayed female dog or cat shall be set by resolution. No registration tag will be issued for a sum less than the full annual fee, except, however, the license fee may be waived for in-service or assistant dogs. Proof of current rabies vaccination for each dog or cat shall be provided to the City before an annual license is renewed. (Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

6.04.070 Lifetime license--Fees for neutered or spayed dogs and cats.
There shall be no fee for a lifetime license under this chapter, provided that the following requirements are met:
A. Male dogs or cats have been neutered.
B. Female dogs or cats have been spayed.
C. Proof of rabies vaccination has been provided to the City upon initial licensing and prior to the thirty-first day of December of each year. Failure to provide proof of current rabies vaccination shall result in revocation of the lifetime license.
D. The owner or caretaker of a dog or cat holding a lifetime license shall notify the City of a change of address or ownership within thirty days.
E. For animals less than six months of age, proof of spay or neuter must be submitted within six months of licensing date. (Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

6.04.080 Tag--Duty of owner or caretaker to attach.
A. It is the duty of the owner or caretaker of any dog or cat to provide a suitable collar for each dog or cat. Each pet’s license tag shall be attached to the collar and must be worn at all times when off the premises of the owner or caretaker.
B. In place of a collar and tag, an owner or caretaker of a cat may have the license number tattooed in the cat’s ear.
C. Proper licensing may also be accomplished through the use of implanted microchips or other means as approved by the animal control officer. (Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

6.04.090 Licensed cats permitted to roam.
Properly licensed cats that have been spayed or neutered and are current on rabies vaccinations shall be permitted to roam. (Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

6.04.100 Cats not spayed or neutered restricted to owners’ property.
Cats that are not spayed or neutered must remain on the owner’s or caretaker’s property under physical control and shall be prevented by the owner or caretaker from leaving the property. (Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

6.04.110 Tag--Removal by person other than owner or caretaker unlawful.
It is unlawful for any person other than the owner or caretaker to remove the license tag from any dog or cat. (Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

6.04.120 Tag--Replacement.
Any owner of a licensed dog or cat whose license tag has been lost shall secure a replacement tag by paying a fee established by resolution. (Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

6.04.130 Change of ownership of dog or cat.
Whenever the ownership of a dog or cat changes, the new owner shall notify the City and pay a sum established by resolution, whereupon the City shall change the record accordingly for such dog or cat. (Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

6.04.140 Limit of number of dogs or cats kept on premises.
No more than two dogs over the age of six months may be licensed to be kept at any dwelling. No more than three cats over the age of six months shall be kept at any dwelling. (Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

6.04.150 Records to be kept.
The City shall maintain a complete registry of all licensed dogs and cats, describing the same by name of owner, address, name, breed and number on the license tag. (Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

6.04.160 Animal quarters pens and runs.
All animal quarters, pens, runs and other structures or locations in which dogs, cats or other household pets are kept shall be kept in a clean, sanitary and healthy manner. All such areas shall be maintained as necessary to prevent odor or health and sanitation problems. The owner or occupant of any premises permitting such conditions who does not abate unhealthy or unsanitary conditions in these areas within three days of notification by the animal control officer shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

6.04.170 Rabies--Vaccination required.
It is unlawful for any owner or caretaker to keep a dog or cat over the age of six months within city limits unless the dog or cat has been vaccinated for rabies by a licensed veterinarian, and the period of immunization specified by the veterinarian has not expired. The owner or caretaker of the dog or cat shall possess a certificate from the veterinarian showing the date of the last vaccination and the number of the vaccination tag issued by the veterinarian at the time of vaccination. (Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

6.04.180 Rabies--Vaccination tag.
Every owner or keeper of any dog or cat shall attach the animal’s vaccination tag to the collar of the dog or cat, to be worn at all times by the animal. Alternative means of displaying the vaccination information such as through the use of implanted microchips may be approved by the animal control officer. (Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

6.04.190 Rabies--Quarantine.
A. Any animal that bites or exposes a person or another animal to the possibility of contracting rabies shall be impounded and quarantined for a period of ten days. The owner or caretaker of the animal shall be liable for the cost of impoundment and quarantine.
    1. If the animal has a current rabies vaccination, the animal control officer may allow the animal to be quarantined at the residence of the owner or caretaker. Any animal so quarantined shall be contained solely on the property of the owner or caretaker and shall have no contact with other animals.
B. The animal shall be examined immediately after it has bitten anyone and again at the end of the ten-day period. If at the end of the ten days, an animal control officer is convinced that the animal is free from rabies, the animal shall be released from quarantine.
C. If the animal dies in the meanwhile, the animal control officer, the animal shelter manager or a duly appointed agent shall notify proper public health officials and shall follow the requirements of state law. The owner of the animal shall be financially liable for the cost of any examinations or investigations that may result.
D. Anyone with knowledge that an animal has bitten a person or has exposed the person to the possibility of contracting rabies shall immediately notify the animal control officer. (Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

6.04.200 Rabies--Examination of biting animal required.
A. An impounded animal shall be observed and shall be examined by a veterinarian.
B. It is unlawful for the owner or caretaker of any animal that has bitten a person or animal or has exposed a person or animal to the possibility of contracting rabies to fail, refuse or neglect to allow, or in any way prevent, an examination of such animal by a licensed veterinarian upon the request of an animal control officer, the animal shelter manager, a police officer, the City Manager, or an official of the district health department, or to fail, refuse or neglect to allow, or in any way prevent, such animal from being impounded or quarantined. (Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

6.04.210 Rabies--Police authority.
Animal control officers and police officers who reasonably suspect an animal is infected with rabies may dispose of the animal in accordance with Utah Administrative Code Rule R386-702. It shall be the duty of any person owning or exercising control over such animal to surrender the animal to any police officer or animal control officer upon demand. (Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

6.04.220 Impoundment--Animal control officer authority.
A. The animal control officer shall have the authority to apprehend and impound any dog found running at large within the City limits.
B. Any person apprehending any dog running at large on his property may deliver the dog to the animal control officer for impoundment.
C. At the discretion of the animal control officer, such dogs may be returned to the owner or caretaker if the dog is properly licensed as outlined in Section 6.04.060.
D. The animal control officer shall have the authority to impound any cat running at large without a license tag or ear tattoo or other form of license identification approved by the animal control officer. (Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

6.04.230 Impoundment--Registration.
The animal control officer, animal shelter manager or a duly appointed agent shall immediately upon impounding any dog or cat make a complete registry entry, detailing the breed, color and sex of such animal and whether properly licensed, if known. If the dog or cat is properly licensed, the animal control officer, animal shelter manager or a duly appointed agent shall enter the name and address of the owner and the number of the license tag. If known and if bearing a vaccination tag, the number of such tag shall be recorded. (Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

6.04.240 Impoundment--Notice.
When any properly licensed dog or cat shall be impounded pursuant to this chapter, the animal control officer, animal shelter manager or a duly appointed agent shall give notice in person or by mail or telephone to the owner of such properly registered animal, and shall provide the reason for the impoundment. Written or oral notice given to the owner or caretaker or to any member of his or her household over the age of fourteen years shall be considered adequate notice. (Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

6.04.250 Impoundment--Release of animal without tag.
A. Any properly licensed dog or cat impounded or taken up for being at large without a license tag or equivalent identification such as an implanted microchip may be redeemed by the owner or caretaker of the animal upon payment to the City of impoundment fees as set by resolution. A dog or cat without a license tag or equivalent identification such as implanted microchip that has not been spayed or neutered shall not be released from impoundment.
B. Impoundment fees and costs and applicable fines may be applied to the cost of spaying or neutering the dog or cat. (Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

6.04.260 Impoundment of registered animal running at large that has not been spayed or neutered.
In the case of a properly registered dog or cat impounded or taken up for being at large that has not been spayed or neutered and has been impounded or taken up for being at large two times within any consecutive twelve-month period, the owner or caretaker of said dog or cat shall be subject to a spay or neuter deposit prior to the release of the animal. Said deposit fee shall be refunded if the dog or cat owner or caretaker presents proof of spay or neuter within thirty days of release. (Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

6.04.270 Impoundment--Release terms.
All releases of animals from the animal shelter shall be governed by the “City of Moab Animal Shelter Policies and Procedures Manual.” (Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

6.04.280 Impoundment--Fees.
Any person redeeming an impounded dog or cat shall pay a fee established by resolution. (Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

6.04.290 Disposal--Release.
Disposal of all animals at the animal shelter shall be governed by the “City of Moab Animal Shelter Policies and Procedures Manual.” (Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

6.04.300 Disposal--Euthanasia.
Disposal by euthanasia of any animal at the animal shelter shall be governed by the “City of Moab Animal Shelter Policies and Procedures Manual.” (Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

6.04.310 Dogs running at large--Authority to apprehend.
A. It is unlawful for the owner or caretaker of any dog to permit a dog to run at large at any time within city limits.
B. The animal control officer shall have the authority to apprehend and impound any dog found running at large within city limits.
C. The animal control officer shall have the authority to enter and go upon the premises of an owner or caretaker of a dog in pursuit of that dog when found running at large. (Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

6.04.320 Dogs or cats in public places--Prohibited.
No dogs or cats shall be permitted on the premises of any church, public hall, library, public garage, gas station, restaurant, other eating establishment, office, store (excluding a pet shop), market, or school grounds during the times that such places are open and doing business, as per the provisions of the applicable health codes. An exception to this provision shall be made in the case of a service or assistant dog in service to a person with a disability exercising his or her right to access public facilities under the provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act and Utah Code Sections 62A-5b-102 through 62A-5b-106. (Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

6.04.330 Dogs or cats in public places--Prohibited--Exception for written permission.
No dogs, cats or other animals shall be permitted, even though on leash, to be on or upon the premises of any church, public hall, school premises or grounds, including city parks, except upon written permission of the authority exercising control over such property. An exception to this provision shall be made in the case of a service or assistant dog in service to a person with a disability exercising his or her right to access public facilities under the provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act and Utah Code Sections 62A-5b-102 through 62A-5b-106. (Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

6.04.340 Female dogs or cats in heat--Confined.
A female dog or cat in heat shall be confined in a manner that prevents the dog or cat from coming in contact with other dogs or cats except for planned breeding. (Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

6.04.350 Dogs in public places--Maximum length of leash--Exception.
Leash length shall be sufficient to provide control over the dog. Nonretractable leashes shall be no greater than eight feet in length. This provision shall not apply to in-service or assistant dogs or dogs assigned to law enforcement officers as part of the law enforcement officers’ official duties. (Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

6.04.360 Dog fights.
It is unlawful for any person within the limits of the City to in any manner whatever encourage or urge dogs or any other animals or fowl to fight or urge them on after they commence to fight. It is unlawful for any person within the limits of the City to place or collect wagers on any form of animal fighting. (Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

6.04.370 Dangerous dogs--Prohibited.
A. It shall be illegal to harbor or keep a dangerous dog within city limits.
B. The animal control officer shall have the authority to declare a dog as dangerous, following a determination that the dog has a propensity for or a history of unprovoked physical attacks on persons or animals, or if the animal has a propensity for or a history of unprovoked physical intimidation of persons or animals.
C. Following the determination that a dog is dangerous, the animal control officer shall issue a citation to the owner or caretaker of the dog informing the owner or caretaker that the dog must be euthanized or removed from city limits within five days.
D. If, following the five-day notice period, the dangerous dog is found within city limits, the animal control officer and law enforcement officers shall have the authority to impound the dog, and the animal control officer, animal shelter manager or duly authorized agent shall have the authority to have the dog euthanized.
E. The owner or caretaker of the dog declared as dangerous must appeal to the appropriate court the decision to euthanize the dog within the five-day notice period. Notification of successful appeal must be presented to the City within the five-day notice period.
F. If, during or following the five-day notice period, the dangerous dog is found running at large within city limits, the animal control officer and law enforcement officers shall have the authority to have the dog euthanized.
G. In the discharge of their duties regarding dangerous dogs, the animal control officer and law enforcement officers shall be authorized to enter the premises and property of the owner or caretaker of a dog determined to be dangerous in order to impound the dog. (Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

6.04.380 Fierce or dangerous dogs--Euthanizing.
The animal control officer and law enforcement officers shall have the authority to euthanize or kill, or cause to be euthanized or killed, any dog found running at large that, in the judgment of the officers, poses a threat to the health and safety of persons or animals, or poses a threat to property. (Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

6.04.390 Abandonment unlawful.
It is unlawful for any person to abandon any animal or turn the same out at large within the limits of the City. (Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

6.04.400 Abandoning diseased animals.
It is unlawful for any person to abandon or turn out at large any sick, diseased, injured or disabled animal. Such animal shall be euthanized by a veterinarian or other qualified individual approved by the animal control officer or the animal shelter manager. Animal control officers and police officer shall have the authority to kill or euthanize and dispose of any animals found running at large within city limits that are incapacitated by sickness, disease, injury or other disability, or that present a threat to the health and safety of persons and animals or present a threat to property. (Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

6.04.410 Livestock running at large prohibited.
No person shall permit any cattle, horses, mules, swine, sheep or goats or other livestock to run at large within the City. (Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

6.04.420 Leading or running at large of wild animals prohibited.
No person shall permit any wild or other dangerous animal to run at large, nor lead any such animal over any public road or on any public place within city limits. (Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

6.04.430 Conveyance of livestock through city.
All livestock shall be conveyed in motor vehicles within the City and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive any domestic animal or livestock through or upon any public thoroughfare of the City without a permit issued by the City. (Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

6.04.440 Cruelty to animals a class B misdemeanor.
Every person who, within the limits of the City, is cruel to animals in any of the following ways, is guilty of a class A misdemeanor:
A. By overloading, overdriving, overworking, cruelly beating, torturing, tormenting, mutilating or cruelly killing any animal or causing or knowingly allowing the same to be done;
B. By cruelly working any old, maimed, infirm, sick or disabled animal, or causing or knowingly allowing the same to be done;
C. By failing as owner or caretaker to provide an animal with proper food, drink and shelter or other essential care;
D. By abandoning or turning out at large any animal;
E. By carrying or driving, or causing to be carried, driven or kept, any animal in an unnecessarily cruel manner;
F. By carrying or driving, or causing to be carried or driven, any animal bound or tied by its legs or bound down by the neck, so that it cannot freely stand in an upright position while being transported;
G. By leaving an animal unattended in a vehicle when the conditions in that vehicle would constitute a health hazard to the animal. Animal control officers and police officers shall have the authority to open the vehicle and remove said animals if in the judgment of the officer the animal is in imminent danger. In such cases, the officer and the City shall not be responsible for any damage done to the vehicle through the efforts to remove the animal. (Ord. 09-12, 2009; Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

6.04.450 Killing or injuring animals with vehicle.
No person shall willfully injure, beat, abuse or run down any animal with a vehicle. Any person who kills or injures an animal while driving a vehicle shall stop at the scene of the accident and render such assistance as practicable, shall make a reasonable effort to locate and identify himself to the owner of or any person having custody of the animal, and shall report the accident immediately to the animal control officer or law enforcement officers. (Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

6.04.460 Sanitation of pet shops.
Any person operating a pet shop shall keep the premises in a clean and sanitary condition at all times. Pet shops shall be subject to inspection by authorized state or district health department personnel. (Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

6.04.470 Premises confining animals.
Premises where animals are confined shall be shall be maintained in a neat and sanitary condition. (Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

6.04.480 Barns and stables.
A. No manure or barn cleanings shall be stacked or caused or permitted to be stacked or piled within two hundred feet of any dwelling, unless stored in a closed bin covered to prevent pest and insect infestation.
B. No owner, lessee or occupant shall keep in an unsanitary condition or improperly ventilated any barn or stable.
C. Except for household pets, no animal shall be kept or maintained closer than one hundred feet from a dwelling other than the dwelling of an owner or caretaker of the animal. No barn, pen or corral shall be kept or maintained closer than one hundred feet to any street. (Ord. 09-01 (part), 2009; Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

6.04.490 Removal of dead animals.
It is unlawful for the owner of any animal or fowl that dies within city limits to fail to remove the carcass of such animal from city limits within ten hours after its death. (Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

6.04.500 Poisoning animals.
It is unlawful for a person to throw or deposit poisoned meat or any poison or harmful substance in any street, alley, marketplace or public place, or on any private premises, in the City for the purpose of destroying or injuring any animal. This provision does not apply to efforts to exterminate insects and rodents. In the case of efforts to exterminate insects and rodents, distribution of poisons shall be controlled to prevent consumption of or contact with the poison by any persons or animals other than those targeted for extermination. (Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

6.04.510 Nuisance dogs.
A. The animal control officer shall have the authority to deem a dog as a nuisance. A dog shall be deemed a nuisance if it:
    1. Barks or makes disturbing noises in an excessive, continuous or untimely fashion;
    2. Defecates on public property or on private property without the prior permission of the property owner and the animal’s owner or caretaker fails to dispose of the feces in an appropriate manner;
    3. Bites, injures, threatens or intimidates persons or animals passing by;
    4. Chases pedestrians, bicycles or motor vehicles;
    5. Trespasses on public or private property and causes damage; or
    6. Creates an offensive or dangerous situation for persons or animals or poses a threat to property.
B. Owners and caretakers of nuisance dogs shall be responsible to control their dogs in a manner that leads to the cessation of the nuisance behavior.
C. The animal control officer shall be authorized to impound the nuisance dog if the owner or caretaker of the dog fails to control the dog in a manner that eliminates the nuisance behavior or fails to remove the dog from within city limits within three days from the time the owner or caretaker receives a written citation from an animal control officer or law enforcement officer.
D. If the owner or caretaker of the dog is not present when the animal control officer deems the dog as a nuisance, the animal control officer shall have the authority to summarily impound the dog.
E. The owner or caretaker of an impounded dog shall be notified according to the provisions of Section 6.04.220. (Ord. 11-14, 2011; Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

6.04.520 Animals grazing on public property.
The owner or caretaker of any animal shall not allow the animal to graze on public property, or to be staked out on public property. (Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

6.04.530 Animals running at large.
Except for the provisions of Section 6.04.090 (Licensed cats permitted to roam), the owner or caretaker of any animal shall not allow the animal to run at large within city limits or to trespass on public property or private property without the prior approval of the property owner. Except for the provisions of Section 6.04.090 (Licensed cats permitted to roam), the animal control officer and law enforcement officer shall have the authority to impound any animal found to be running at large within city limits. (Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

6.04.540 Guard dog--Permit--Required.
No person shall keep any guard dog for the purpose of guarding or protecting real or personal property in the City without first obtaining a permit from the City and paying a fee established by resolution. The permit shall list the location at which the dog is to be kept, and shall be nontransferable to any other location. Guard dog permits shall expire after one year from the date of issuance. (Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

6.04.550 Guard dog--Confinement provisions.
No person shall keep any guard dog for the purposes of guarding or protecting real or personal property unless such dog is securely confined within a building or enclosure. Owners of properties utilizing guard dogs shall have adequate safeguards to prevent the entry onto the property by children and accidental or unintentional entry onto the property by any persons. Properties utilizing guard dogs shall declare the potential danger at each entrance, door and gate, and shall have warning signs posted at intervals of no more than one hundred feet along all fences surrounding the property or buildings. (Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

6.04.560 Guard dog--Seizure and impoundment upon violation of Sections 6.04.560 through 6.04.580.
It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or association utilize a guard dog without following the procedures outlined in this section and Sections 6.04.570 and 6.04.580, and the animal control officer shall be authorized under these circumstances to impound the dog. (Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

6.04.570 Police officer--Authority.
It is lawful for any police officer of the City to do or perform any act or duty required, authorized or permitted to the animal control officer. (Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

6.04.580 Police officer--Assistance.
It is lawful for the animal control officer, in the performance of his or her duties, to call for and accept the assistance of any law enforcement officer. (Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

6.04.590 Violation--Penalty.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter, whether by act of commission or act of omission, unless otherwise specified, shall be guilty of an infraction, and upon conviction thereof, shall be liable to punishment by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars. (Ord. 07-12 (part), 2007)

Title 7 (RESERVED)

Title 8 HEALTH AND SAFETY

Chapters:
8.04         Solid Waste
8.08         Nuisances
8.12         Fireworks
8.16         Miscellaneous Sanitary Regulations
8.20         Overnight Camping

Chapter 8.04 SOLID WASTE

Sections:
Article I.  Solid Waste Collection
    8.04.010     Definitions.
    8.04.020     Mandatory collection.
    8.04.030     Rates and charges.
    8.04.040     Automated collection and point of collection.
    8.04.050     Collection schedule; time of placement.
    8.04.060     Rules and regulations.
Article II. Health and Safety
    8.04.065     Distribution of disposable plastic bags prohibited.
    8.04.070     Accumulations and disposal on property prohibited.
    8.04.080     Burning prohibited.
    8.04.090     Dumping prohibited.
    8.04.100     Pre-enforcement notice.
    8.04.110     Abatement.
    8.04.120     Collection.
    8.04.130     Criminal enforcement.
    8.04.140     Successive violations.

Article I. Solid Waste Collection

8.04.010 Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:
“Approved commercial garbage containers” means contractor-furnished commercial bins (two-yard minimum capacity). These containers are designed for automated collection. All containers have permanently attached, tight-fitting lids, and will meet all state of Utah Department of Health regulations.
“Approved container” means containers approved by the City in its solid waste rate resolution, which are designed and suitable for automated solid waste collection.
“Approved residential garbage containers” means ninety-five-gallon containers provided by the City. These containers are designed specifically for automated collection, and are equipped with wheels for easy movement by residents and other city users. All containers have permanently attached, tight-fitting lids. Such containers may be referred to as “Standard.”
“Automated collection” means solid waste collection using specialized trucks capable of lifting and emptying specially designed solid waste receptacles.
“Business” means a location or structure lawfully used or occupied, on either a temporary or permanent basis, for purposes of carrying on a trade or profession for a profit.
“Centralized collection” means a group of residences, as defined in this chapter, receiving solid waste collection at a single point utilizing a dumpster or other approved container, rather than individual cans kept by each dwelling.
“City” means the City of Moab and all territory within its municipal limits as same may change from time to time.
“Commercial” means all classes of customers receiving solid waste collection service which, however denominated, are not classified as a residence, including, without limitation, offices, restaurants, hotels, resorts, motels, campgrounds, inns, government buildings, churches, hospitals, schools, meeting facilities, retail establishments, industrial facilities, workshops, warehouses, garages, businesses or any other type of nonresidential land use.
“Contractor” means the person authorized by contract with the City to collect and dispose of solid waste generated within the City limits.
“Disposable plastic bag” means a bag made from either noncompostable plastic or compostable plastic that is less than 2.25 mil in thickness according to ASTM D6988-08 or ISO 4593-1993 or ISO 4591:1992 standards, and which is provided by a vendor to a customer at the point of sale for the purpose of transporting goods or merchandise. The term “disposable plastic bag” does not include:
    1. Bags provided by pharmacists to contain prescription drugs;
    2. Newspaper bags, door hanger bags, laundry-dry cleaning bags, or bags sold in packages containing multiple bags and intended for food storage, garbage, pet waste, or yard waste;
    3. Reusable bags that are made of cloth or other machine washable fabric that have handles, or a durable plastic bag that is at least 2.25 mil thick with handles and specifically designed and manufactured for multiple uses. Reusable bags shall not contain lead, cadmium, or any other heavy metal in toxic amounts;
    4. Disposable paper bags; or
    5. Bags used by consumers inside retail stores to:
        a. Package bulk items, such as produce, nuts, grains, candy or small hardware items;
        b. Contain or wrap frozen foods, meat, or fish, regardless of whether the items are prepackaged; or
        c. Contain or wrap flowers, potted plants, or other items where moisture may be a problem.
“Owner” means a person, firm, partnership, corporation, or other entity that exercises control over a retail store.
“Residence” or “residential,” as applied in this chapter, means those solid waste customers consisting of a house, apartment, town home, condominium, mobile home, or other structure which is lawfully occupied as a human dwelling, but excluding hotels, motels, inns, or other dwellings lawfully operated as overnight accommodations.
“Retail store” means a place of business that sells any goods or household items to the ultimate consumer including, but not limited to: grocery stores; convenience stores; drugstores; hardware stores; and similar outlets selling general merchandise of any kind, apparel, food (whether prepared or not), beverages, tools, recreational products, or the like. Retail stores include premises that may be operated temporarily, seasonally, or for a nonprofit purpose.
“Solid waste” means commercial or residential garbage, refuse, trash, or other discarded material, including liquids and semisolid materials such as food scraps, rags, cardboard, yard waste, glass, paper, plastics, or wood, but excluding the types of waste described in “special waste.”
“Special waste” means the following materials:
    1. Medical or infectious waste;
    2. Animal carcasses;
    3. Discarded appliances;
    4. Construction debris;
    5. Motor vehicles;
    6. Sewage, sludge, or septage;
    7. Explosives;
    8. Toxic or hazardous wastes as defined by Utah or federal law;
    9. Materials collected for recycling;
    10. Used motor oil;
    11. Mining slag, drilling mud, or other wastes from mineral extraction or industrial operations;
    12. Ashes or other material which is combusting;
    13. Bulky materials which cannot be collected by the contractor using automated collection pursuant to the terms of the franchise agreement;
    14. Restaurant grease; and
    15. Large metal objects. (Ord. 18-17 Att. A* (part), 2018; Ord. 04-06 (part), 2004)
* Code Reviser’s Note: Ord. 18-17, which adds definitions for “disposable plastic bag,” “retail store” and “owner” to this section, takes effect January 1, 2019.

8.04.020 Mandatory collection.
Solid waste shall only be collected within the City limits by the approved contractor pursuant to the terms of a solid waste collection franchise agreement with the City. As defined in this chapter, every residence or commercial establishment shall be required to receive and pay for solid waste collection services from the City. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit a person from hauling residential or commercial solid waste or special waste generated from a location owned by that person to an authorized disposal facility, provided that the owner shall at all times remain liable for solid waste collection service charges assessed by the City pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 04-06 (part), 2004)

8.04.030 Rates and charges.
Rates for solid waste collection shall be established and modified from time to time by the City Council. Every solid waste customer within city limits, whether residential or commercial, receiving culinary water or sewer service from the City, shall be billed for solid waste service together with water or sewer service charges. As provided for water and sewer service charges, the owner of every property required to receive solid waste collection services shall be required to execute an application agreeing to be liable for all charges for service. In the event that a property owner fails or refuses to pay for solid waste service, the City shall be authorized to discontinue providing solid waste service and to disconnect the culinary water service connection to the property until all accrued charges have been paid in full. Prior to terminating service, the City shall deliver a written notice of default to the owner advising that if payment is not made in full by a date specified, the City will discontinue solid waste and culinary water service to the property. Any person wishing to contest a notice issued under this section may request a hearing before the City Council pursuant to Section 8.04.100 of this chapter.
A. Solid waste charges may be suspended for residential customers for periods of time in excess of thirty days when the residence is unoccupied, provided that the property owner provides written notice to the City Treasurer of same. During the period the residence is unoccupied, culinary water service and solid waste service shall be suspended. In no case shall solid waste service be suspended pursuant to this subsection during a time in which the residence also receives culinary water service.
B. Each residential unit shall be billed separately for solid waste service, unless centralized collection is authorized pursuant to Section 8.04.040 of this chapter. Rates assessed on residential customers shall be assessed on a per unit basis.
C. In its discretion, the City may issue a refund to a customer due to a billing error, retroactive to a maximum of three months (without proration) from the date the correction is made.
D. The solid waste collection rate applicable to a given property shall be based upon the type of land use, whether commercial or residential, regardless of the type of container used by the customer. Properties with more than one land use shall be charged the higher applicable rate. (Ord. 04-06 (part), 2004)

8.04.040 Automated collection and point of collection.
All solid waste shall be deposited into approved containers for automated collection by the contractor. The point of collection shall be at the curb of a public street or alley. In the event that the property of the customer is not adjacent to a public street or alley, the customer shall place the container in the next most accessible location acceptable to the contractor, which may be on private property. Property owners shall allow the contractor reasonable access to their property for purposes of collection.
A. Centralized collection may be authorized by the City for residential customers where site constraints make individual can service impracticable, and where there is an individual property owner or entity that assumes liability for payment of all solid waste collection services. The City shall provide such authorization in writing. The rate owing for such service shall be based upon the centralized collection rate multiplied by the number of residential units. Residential customers utilizing centralized collection not authorized by the City shall pay the standard residential rate. (Ord. 04-06 (part), 2004)

8.04.050 Collection schedule; time of placement.
Collection of solid waste shall be pursuant to schedules established by the City and contractor, except that customers can request and pay for additional pickups in accordance with approved rates as needed. Solid waste shall not be placed out for pickup more than twenty-four hours before a scheduled pickup. Empty cans shall be promptly removed from the curb within twenty-four hours of pickup. (Ord. 04-06 (part), 2004)

8.04.060 Rules and regulations.
City staff may promulgate additional rules and regulations as are necessary or appropriate to implement this chapter. All such regulations shall be written and made available to the public. (Ord. 04-06 (part), 2004)

Article II. Health and Safety

8.04.065 Distribution of disposable plastic bags prohibited.
A. It is unlawful for the owner of any retail store to distribute disposable plastic bags to customers at or before the point of sale. The owners of retail stores are encouraged to provide recyclable paper bags, reusable bags, or boxes to customers and establish an at-store recycling program that provides customers the opportunity to return clean carryout bags.
B. Retail stores distributing paper bags to customers shall use bags containing a minimum of forty percent recycled paper content.
C. The City Manager or his/her designee(s) shall have the primary responsibility for enforcement of this section. If the City Manager or his/her designee(s) determines that a violation of this section has occurred, he/she shall issue a written warning to the owner or manager of the retail store indicating that a violation has occurred, and allowing a reasonable period of time, but not less than thirty days, in which to cure or abate the violation(s). Subsequent violations of this section shall be subject to the penalties set forth below.
D. A person violating this section shall be liable for a civil penalty as follows:
    1. A fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars for the first violation following a written warning within a one-year period.
    2. A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for the second and each subsequent violation within a one-year period.
    3. The City may obtain civil injunctive relief, without requirement of bond, upon proof of three or more violations within a one-year period. In any civil injunctive proceeding the City may also recover its reasonable attorney’s fees and court costs. (Ord. 18-17 Att. A* (part), 2018)
* Code Reviser’s Note: Ord. 18-17 takes effect January 1, 2019.

8.04.070 Accumulations and disposal on property prohibited.
No owner or lessee of real property shall knowingly allow or cause solid waste or special waste to be deposited, disposed, or otherwise allowed to accumulate upon property which is not zoned and licensed as a storage or disposal site.
A. Accumulations of solid waste or special waste as a result of ordinary commercial or residential activities is permitted in advance of regularly scheduled pickups, provided that all solid waste is housed in approved containers, and any special waste is properly contained so as to prevent odors, fumes, leaks, dust, insects, unsightly debris, animal infestations, or other hazardous conditions or nuisances. (Ord. 04-06 (part), 2004)

8.04.080 Burning prohibited.
No person shall knowingly cause or allow solid waste or special waste to be burned or incinerated within the City. (Ord. 04-06 (part), 2004)

8.04.090 Dumping prohibited.
No person shall knowing dump, leave, deposit, or release solid waste or special waste upon any real property within the City, except in conformity with local zoning requirements and applicable state and federal regulations. (Ord. 04-06 (part), 2004)

8.04.100 Pre-enforcement notice.
Prior to commencing any civil enforcement or collection proceedings for a default or other violations of this chapter, the City shall first deliver written notice to the affected person advising of the nature of the violation and allowing a reasonable opportunity to cure or abate the violation, or request a hearing before the City Council. A person wishing to contest a notice issued under this section may request a hearing by delivering written notice to the City prior to the expiration of the cure period. A timely notice shall stay enforcement proceedings until a hearing can be held. The City Council’s decision shall be final for purposes of seeking judicial review or enforcement. The exhaustion of this administrative remedy shall be a jurisdictional prerequisite to a judicial action by any person challenging the validity of any enforcement or administrative action by the City. (Ord. 04-06 (part), 2004)

8.04.110 Abatement.
In the event that a party fails to cure or abate a violation, the City may, in its discretion, elect to remove or dispose of the offending solid waste or special waste. The City, or its designee, shall be authorized to enter upon private property for the purpose of removing or abating the violation. The owner of the real property shall be liable to the City for all actual costs incurred in cleaning up or abating the violation. (Ord. 04-06 (part), 2004)

8.04.120 Collection.
In addition to all other remedies, the City may commence a civil action to collect any sums owing pursuant to this chapter, or to obtain mandatory injunctive relief. In any injunctive proceeding, the City need only prove the violation of the ordinance to obtain injunctive relief.
A. In no instance shall an owner or real property be held liable for solid waste, water, or sewer service charges incurred by a prior owner of the property.
B. In its discretion, the City may elect to commence a civil action to collect any debt owing under this chapter. In any civil proceeding where liability is imposed, the City shall be entitled to recover its reasonable attorney fees and court costs, in addition to the relief authorized by this chapter. (Ord. 04-06 (part), 2004)

8.04.130 Criminal enforcement.
In addition to all other remedies, any violation of this chapter shall be punishable as a criminal Class B misdemeanor, as provided under U.C.A. 76-3-204 and 76-3-301. In any criminal enforcement proceeding, the court shall have jurisdiction to assess costs, order restitution to victims, or require abatement of violations, as provided by law. (Ord. 04-06 (part), 2004)

8.04.140 Successive violations.
Each day of a continuing or ongoing violation of this chapter may be prosecuted as a separate offense for purposes of all remedies authorized by this chapter. (Ord. 04-06 (part), 2004)

Chapter 8.08 NUISANCES

Sections:
8.08.010     Purpose.
8.08.020     Nuisance defined.
8.08.030     Creation or maintenance prohibited.
8.08.040     Authors designated.
8.08.050     Accumulations of offensive materials.
8.08.060     Weed abatement.
8.08.065     Disposal of debris in surface water drainage system.
8.08.070     Inspector-Office established.
8.08.080     Inspector-Duties.
8.08.090     Notice-Proof of service.
8.08.100     Hearing.
8.08.110     Failure to comply.
8.08.120     Preparation of itemized statement of expenses incurred.
8.08.130     Failure to make payment.
8.08.140     Collection by lawsuit.
8.08.150     Collection through taxation.
8.08.160     Maintenance or creation deemed an infraction.
8.08.170     Maintenance of property within commercial zones.

8.08.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to establish a means whereby the municipality may remove or abate or cause the removal or abatement of injurious and noxious weeds, and of garbage, refuse, or unsightly or deleterious objects or structures pursuant to the powers granted to it by Chapter 11 of Title 10, Utah Code Annotated, 1953, as amended, and pursuant to its general power to abate nuisances. It is declared that the above listed weeds, objects and structures shall constitute a nuisance when they create a fire hazard, a source of contamination or pollution of water, air, or property, a danger to health, a breeding place or habitation for insects or rodents or other forms of life deleterious to human habitation or are unsightly or deleterious to their surroundings. (Prior code § 16-10(a))

8.08.020 Nuisance defined.
For the purposes of this chapter, a “nuisance” is defined as whatever is dangerous to human life or health and whatever renders soil, air, water or food impure or unwholesome.
A “public nuisance” consists of unlawfully doing any act or omitting to perform any duty which act or omission results in any of the following:
A. Annoys, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of three or more persons;
B. Offends public decency;
C. Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct, or renders dangerous for passage, any lake, stream, canal or basin, or any public park, square, street or highway;
D. In any way renders three or more persons insecure in life or the use of property. (Prior code § 16-1)

8.08.030 Creation or maintenance prohibited.
No person, either as owner, agent or occupant, shall create, maintain or aid in creating or contributing to a nuisance. (Prior code § 16-2)

8.08.040 Authors designated.
Where a nuisance exists upon property, and is the outgrowth of the usual, natural or necessary use of the property, the landlord thereof or his agent, or the tenant or his agent and all other persons having control of the property on which such nuisance exists shall be the authors thereof, and shall be equally liable therefor; but where any such nuisance shall arise from the unusual or unnecessary use to which such property may be put, or from business use to which such property may be put, or from business thereon conducted, then the occupants and all other persons contributing to the continuance of such nuisance shall be the authors thereof. (Prior code § 16-3)

8.08.050 Accumulations of offensive materials.
Any dirt gathered in cleaning yards; waste of mills or factories; any rags, damaged merchandise, or wet, broken, or leaking barrels, casks or boxes; or any materials which are offensive or tend to decay, to become putrid or to render the atmosphere impure or unwholesome in or about any lot or premises shall be deemed a nuisance, and it shall be unlawful for any person occupying such premises to fail to abate the same. (Prior code § 16-7)

8.08.060 Weed abatement.
No owner, agent, occupant or person in control of any lot within the City shall allow or maintain weeds or rank vegetable growth which exhale unpleasant and noxious odors or which attract insects, create fire hazards or conceal deposits of filth. Any such condition is declared to be a nuisance and dangerous to the health of the inhabitants of the City, and the same shall be abated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 85-08 (part), 1985; prior code § 16-8)

8.08.065 Disposal of debris in surface water drainage system.
A. The purpose of this section is to regulate the disposal of debris that adversely affects the function of the surface water drainage system of the City; and to protect the water quality of local streams and channels.
B. Dumping any material or harmful substance in a stream channel, ditch, storm drain, or street gutter which regularly or periodically carries surface water is prohibited. This material includes brush, fill, and other debris that will raise flood and storm water levels in the City’s drainage system. This material also includes chemicals, oil, and other substances that are harmful to water quality, surface water and ground water quality.
C. The designated official responsible for receiving complaints, enforcement, monitoring compliance, and abatement shall be as set forth by section 8.08.070 of this chapter. (Ord. 92-11, 1992)

8.08.070 Inspector-Office established.
The office of inspector is created for the purpose of administering the provisions of this chapter and the powers delegated to this municipality by said statutes subject to such control and review as the City Council may from time to time direct. Until such time as the City Council may otherwise appoint an inspector by resolution, the building inspector shall perform the functions of inspector.
The City Council may appoint such assistant inspectors and delegate to them such powers and duties as it may from time to time determine by resolution. The powers and duties of the assistants shall be the same as those of the inspector, unless otherwise so specified by resolution. (Prior code § 16-10(b))

8.08.080 Inspector-Duties.
The inspector is authorized and directed to inspect and examine real property situated within the municipality for the purpose of determining whether or not it contains injurious or noxious weeds, garbage, refuse or unsightly or deleterious objects or structures, and for the purpose of determining whether or not the existence of said weeds or objects creates a fire hazard or constitutes a source of contamination or other danger to health and safety, or otherwise creates nuisances, as above declared.
If the inspector concludes that such conditions exist in whole or in part, he shall:
A. Ascertain the names of the owners and occupants and descriptions of the premises where such objects and conditions exist;
B. Serve notice in writing upon the owner and occupant of such land, either personally or by mailing notice, postage prepaid, addressed to the owner and occupant at their last known post office addresses, as disclosed by the records of the county assessor, or as otherwise ascertained, requiring such owner or occupant, or both, as the case may be, to eradicate or destroy and remove the same within such time as the inspector may designate, which shall not be less than ten days from the date of service of such notice;
C. Inform the owner or occupant or both by means of said notice or an attached document that in the event he disagrees with the determination of the inspector and does not wish to remove said objectionable conditions, he may request in writing a hearing before the governing body at a time and place to be set by the governing body. A written application for a hearing shall stay the time within which the owner or occupant must conform to the decision of the inspector.
In the event the owner or occupant makes such request for a hearing, the governing body shall set the time and place for hearing said objections and the City Recorder shall notify said owner or occupant in writing of the time and place at which he may appear and be heard. Said hearing shall not be heard within less than five days from the date of service or mailing of said notice. (Prior code § 16-10(c))

8.08.090 Notice-Proof of service.
One notice shall be deemed sufficient on any lot or parcel of property for the entire season of weed growth during that year. The inspector shall make proof of service of such notice under oath, and file the same in the office of the county treasurer. (Prior code § 16-10(d))

8.08.100 Hearing.
A. At the written request of an owner or occupant ordered to remove or abate said weeds, objectionable conditions or objects from his real property, the governing body shall conduct an informal hearing (which need not be reported) wherein said owner or occupant may present such evidence and argument as is pertinent to the question of whether or not the removal or abatement of said objects or conditions is properly within the purview of this chapter. The Board shall also permit the presentation of evidence and argument by the inspector and other interested parties. Thereafter within not more than ten days the governing body shall over the signature of the Mayor, or such other member of the governing body as it may designate by resolution, render its written decision, a copy of which shall be mailed to or served upon the owner or occupant by the inspector.
B. In the event the decision of the governing body upholds the determination of the inspector, the notice originally given by the inspector as above provided shall be deemed to be sufficient to require the owner or occupant to remove or abate said objects or conditions and he shall have up to ten days from the date of notice of the decision within which to conform thereto.
C. In the event that the decision of the governing body either overrules or modifies the determination of the inspector, the written decision of the governing body shall apprise him of that fact and set forth the details and extent to which the owner or occupant must make removal or other abatement of the said objects or conditions, if any. The owner or occupant shall be required to conform to the decision of the governing body within ten days after service or mailing of a copy of said decision and said decision shall be deemed to be the modified decision of the inspector.
D. The inspector shall file an amended notice and proof of service of said notice and file the same in the office of the county treasurer. (Prior code § 16-10(e))

8.08.110 Failure to comply.
If any owner or occupant of lands described in such notice or decision shall fail or neglect to conform to the requirements thereof relating to the eradication or destruction or removal of such weeds, garbage, refuse, objects, or structures, the inspector shall employ all necessary assistance to cause such materials to be removed or destroyed at the expense of the municipality. (Prior code § 16-10(f))

8.08.120 Preparation of itemized statement of expenses incurred.
The inspector shall prepare an itemized statement of all expenses incurred in the removal and destruction of said materials and shall mail a copy thereof to the owner or occupant, or both, demanding payment within twenty days of the date of mailing. Said notice shall be deemed delivered when mailed by registered mail addressed to the property owner’s or occupant’s last known address. (Prior code § 16-10(g))

8.08.130 Failure to make payment.
In the event the owner or occupant fails to make payment of the amount set forth in said statement to the municipal treasurer within said twenty days, the inspector either may cause suit to be brought in an appropriate court of law or may refer the matter to the county treasurer as provided in this chapter. (Prior code § 16-10(h))

8.08.140 Collection by lawsuit.
In the event collection of expense of destruction and removal are pursued through the courts, the City shall sue for and receive judgment for all of said expenses of destruction and removal, together with reasonable attorney’s fees, interest and court costs and shall execute upon such judgment in the manner provided by law. (Prior code § 16-10(i))

8.08.150 Collection through taxation.
In the event that the inspector elects to refer the expenses of destruction or removal to the county treasurer for inclusion in the tax notice of the property owner, he shall make in triplicate an itemized statement of all expenses incurred in the destruction and removal of the same and shall deliver the three copies of said statement to the county treasurer within ten days after the completion of the work of destroying or removing such weeds, refuse, garbage, objects or structures. Thereupon the costs of such work shall be pursued by the county treasurer in accordance with the provisions of Section 10-11-14, Utah Code Annotated, 1953, as amended, and the recalcitrant owner shall have such rights and shall be subject to such powers as are thereby granted. (Prior code § 16-10(j))

8.08.160 Maintenance or creation deemed an infraction.
It shall be an infraction, and a violation of municipal ordinances for any person or persons, as owner, agent or occupant to create, maintain or aid in creating or contributing to a nuisance, as contemplated in this chapter, and defined in Section 8.08.020 of this code. (Ord. 12-80, 1980: prior code § 17-50)

8.08.170 Maintenance of property within commercial zones.
Any owner, agent, occupant or person in control of any lot within a commercial zone shall be responsible to maintain the appearance of that property. Appearance here means that the property shall have junk and trash removed, weeds cut or removed, and existing landscape maintained. Maintained here means that the existing landscape shall be watered, trimmed, mowed, weeded or otherwise cared for in a reasonable manner. (Ord. 02-06, 2002)

Chapter 8.12 FIREWORKS

Sections:
8.12.010     State statutes adopted by reference.
8.12.020     License-Required for retail sales.
8.12.030     License-Fee.

8.12.010 State statutes adopted by reference.
Title 11 Chapter 3, Utah Code Annotated, 1953, as amended, is adopted in its entirety by reference hereto and made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth. (Ord. 85-05 § 2, 1985)

8.12.020 License-Required for retail sales.
It is unlawful for any person to engage in the occupation of a retailer selling pyrotechnic devices described in this chapter in the City, without first obtaining a license from the City Recorder. (Ord. 85-05 § 3, 1985)

8.12.030 License-Fee.
The fee for any license to sell or display fireworks at retail or for any renewal thereof, shall be fifty dollars. (Ord. 85-05 § 4, 1985)

Chapter 8.16 MISCELLANEOUS SANITARY REGULATIONS

Sections:
8.16.010     Fly protection and control.
8.16.020     Draining, cleaning and filling of lots and premises.
8.16.030     Sanitation of stables or places where animals are kept.
8.16.040     Unclean receptacles prohibited.
8.16.050     Fouling drinking fountains prohibited.
8.16.060     Establishment of sanitary rules and regulations.

8.16.010 Fly protection and control.
It is unlawful for any person to suffer or permit, or have upon his premises, whether owned or occupied by him, any of the following unsanitary, fly-producing, disease-causing conditions:
A. Manure which is not securely protected from flies;
B. Any privy, vault, cesspool, sink, pit or like place which is not securely protected from flies;
C. Garbage which is not securely protected from flies;
D. Vegetable waste, trash, litter, rags or refuse of any kind, nature or description in which flies may breed or multiply. (Prior code § 12-1)

8.16.020 Draining, cleaning and filling of lots and premises.
When any lot or excavation in the City shall from any cause whatsoever become the repository of stagnant water or any decaying or offensive substances, liquid or solid, it shall be the duty of the owner, occupant or agent of such premises (within a specified time given in a written notice from the health department) to cause such excavation or lot to be drained or cleaned and to be filled with clean earth or other inoffensive substance. (Prior code § 12-2)

8.16.030 Sanitation of stables or places where animals are kept.
No person having charge of any stable, stall, shed, apartment or yard in which any animal shall be kept, or in any place within the City in which manure or liquid discharges of any animal shall accumulate or collect, shall permit such stable, stall, shed, apartment or yard to be kept in an unclean or unsanitary condition. (Prior code § 12-3)

8.16.040 Unclean receptacles prohibited.
No person shall cause or permit any unclean, stinking, foul, defective or filthy drain, ditch, tank or gutter, or any leaking or broken slop, garbage or manure box or receptacle of similar character to remain on his premises. (Prior code § 12-4)

8.16.050 Fouling drinking fountains prohibited.
No person shall expectorate or spit or perform any ablutions in, upon, at or near any public drinking fountain, or permit horses, cattle, dogs or any other animals to come into contact with or drink from such drinking fountain. (Prior code § 12-5)

8.16.060 Establishment of sanitary rules and regulations.
The City Council may establish such sanitary rules and regulations as may be necessary to promote the general health and to prevent the outbreak or spread of infectious or contagious disease; and to provide penalties for the infraction of any such ordinances. (Prior code § 12-6)

Chapter 8.20 OVERNIGHT CAMPING

Sections:
8.20.010     Camping in undesignated areas.
8.20.020     Use of public property.
8.20.030     Camping defined.

8.20.010 Camping in undesignated areas.
It is an infraction for any person to establish a temporary site for the purpose of human habitation to provide overnight or short term camping on a public or private road, street, alley, or lot, other than in designated campgrounds or recreational vehicle parks, within Moab city limits. Any camping equipment left standing in violation of this section may be impounded or removed by a peace officer or designated official. For purposes of impoundment and/or removal, a peace officer or designated official may, after making a reasonable effort to locate the owner, impound and remove any vehicle, trailer, or associated camping equipment. The cost of fines, fees for impoundment for each day that it is held in storage, and removal costs shall be charged to the owner or any person who claims the impounded equipment, trailer or vehicle. (Ord. 08-26 (part), 2008)

8.20.020 Use of public property.
It is an infraction for any person to engage in camping upon any public right-of-way, public property, park, or other property owned by a governmental entity and not a designated campground or recreational vehicle park within the Moab city limits during the hours of eleven p.m. and six a.m. Any camping equipment left standing in violation of this section may be impounded or removed by a peace officer or designated official as provided in Section 8.20.010. (Ord. 08-26 (part), 2008)

8.20.030 Camping defined.
For purposes of this chapter, the term “camping” means to establish, for human habitation or temporary lodging any tent, lean-to, tepee, yurt, hut, tarp, sleeping bag, blanket, vehicle, trailer, camper, or other means of shelter as temporary lodging out of doors for vacation, outings, or other outdoor recreation purposes, or for any business purpose. Nothing contained in this definition shall prevent the use of umbrellas, sun shades, or other usual equipment for temporary protection from the sun or elements and not for human habitation or overnight use. The term “camping” as used in this chapter shall not be defined to include any camping activity authorized pursuant to a special event or special business event license issued by the City pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 4.03. (Ord. 08-26 (part), 2008)

Title 9 PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE

Chapters:
9.04         Offenses by or against Public Officers and Government
9.08         Offenses against the Person
9.12         Offenses against Public Decency
9.16         Offenses against Public Peace
9.20         Offenses Pertaining to Property
9.24         Offenses by or against Minors
9.28         Weapons
9.32         Miscellaneous Offenses
9.36         Housing Discrimination
9.40         Employment Discrimination
9.44         Mutual Commitment Registry

Chapter 9.04 OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST PUBLIC OFFICERS AND GOVERNMENT

Sections:
9.04.010     Making false or misleading reports.
9.04.020     Failure to assist police officer.
9.04.030     Resisting arrest.
9.04.040     Harassment of police officer.
9.04.050     Disobedience of lawful order of police officer or fireman.
9.04.060     Obstructing police officer.
9.04.070     Aiding escape of prisoners.
9.04.080     False alarms.
9.04.090     Obstructing fireman.
9.04.100     Obstructing municipal operations.
9.04.110     Failure to comply with written promise to appear in court.
9.04.120     Failure to appear in court.
9.04.130     Violation of Section 9.04.120-Penalty.
9.04.140     Violation-Penalty.

9.04.010 Making false or misleading reports.
No person shall wilfully make to the Police Department any false, fraudulent, misleading or unfounded report or statement, or wilfully misrepresent any fact for the purpose of interfering with the orderly operation of the Police Department or with the intention of misleading any police officer. (Prior code § 20-6)

9.04.020 Failure to assist police officer.
It is unlawful for any citizen over the age of eighteen years wilfully to decline to assist any police officer in the City when requested by such police officer in the suppression of an unlawful assembly or in the arrest of any person whom the police officer is lawfully empowered to arrest. (Ord. 8-81 (part), 1981: prior code § 20-1-7)

9.04.030 Resisting arrest.
A. It is unlawful for any person to resist arrest as defined and provided by this section.
B. A person commits resisting arrest if he intentionally prevents or attempts to prevent a peace officer, acting under color of his official authority, from effecting an arrest of the actor or another, by:
    1. Using or threatening to use physical force or violence against the peace officer or another; or
    2. Using any other means which creates a substantial risk of causing physical injury to the peace officer or another.
C. It is no defense to a prosecution under this section that the peace officer was attempting to make an arrest which in fact was unlawful, if he was acting under the color of his official authority, and in attempting to make the arrest he was not resorting to unreasonable or excessive force giving rise to the right of self-defense. A peace officer acts “under the color of his official authority” when, in the regular course of assigned duties, he is called upon to make, and does make, a judgment in good faith based upon surrounding facts and circumstances that an arrest should be made by him.
D. The term “peace officer,” as used in this section, means a police officer in uniform, or if out of uniform, one who has identified himself by exhibiting his credentials as such peace officer to the person whose arrest is attempted. (Ord. 8-81 (part), 1981: prior code § 20-1-8)

9.04.040 Harassment of police officer.
It is unlawful for any person, with intent to harass, annoy or alarm a police officer, known to him to be a police officer, to:
A. Strike, shove, kick or otherwise touch such police officer or subject him to physical contact; or
B. In a public place, direct obscene language or make an obscene gesture to or at a police officer; or
C. Repeatedly insult, taunt or challenge a police officer in a manner intended to provoke a violent or disorderly response. (Ord. 8-81 (part), 1981: prior code § 20-1-9)

9.04.050 Disobedience of lawful order of police officer or fireman.
It is unlawful for any person to disobey a reasonable request or order to move issued by a person he knows to be a police officer or fireman, either for the purpose of preventing obstruction of a highway or passageway, or maintaining public safety by dispersing those gathered in dangerous proximity to a fire, riot, or other hazard. (Ord. 8-81 (part), 1981: prior code § 20-1-10)

9.04.060 Obstructing police officer.
A. It is unlawful for any person to obstruct a police officer as defined and provided by this section.
B. A person commits the offense of obstructing a police officer when, by using or threatening to use violence, force or physical interference, or obstacle, he intentionally obstructs, impairs, or hinders the enforcement of the penal laws of the state, or the ordinances of the City, or the preservation of the peace, by a police officer acting under color of his official authority.
C. It is no defense to a prosecution under this section that the police officer was acting in an illegal manner if he was acting under color of his official authority as defined herein.
D. This section does not apply to obstruction, impairment or hindrance of the making of an arrest. (Ord. 8-81 (part), 1981: prior code § 20-1-11)

9.04.070 Aiding escape of prisoners.
No person convicted of any offense against this code or any other ordinance of the City, and in lawful custody therefor, shall escape from such custody. No person shall aid or assist another to escape from lawful confinement or aid or assist another to escape from any peace officer. No person shall take into the jail, or deliver to any prisoner therein confined or in custody of any officer or such prison, any weapon, tool, intoxicating drink or other article or attempt to do so. (Prior code § 17-34)

9.04.080 False alarms.
No person shall make or turn in to the fire department a false alarm or report or tamper with or remove any part of the fire alarm system. (Prior code § 9-1)

9.04.090 Obstructing fireman.
A. It is unlawful for any person to obstruct a fireman as defined and provided by this section.
B. A person commits the offense of obstructing a fireman when, by using or threatening to use violence, force or physical interference, or obstacle, he intentionally obstructs, impairs or hinders the prevention, control or abatement of fire or the performance of an official duty by a fireman acting under color of this official authority. (Ord. 8-81 (part), 1981: prior code § 20-2-1)

9.04.100 Obstructing municipal operations.
A. It is unlawful for any person intentionally to obstruct, impair or hinder the performance of a municipal function by an officer or employee of the City by using or threatening to use violence, force or physical interference or obstacle.
B. The provisions of this section shall apply to:
    1. The obstruction, impairment or hindrance of lawful action by an officer or employee of the City; or
    2. The obstruction, impairment or hindrance of the making of an arrest; or
    3. The obstruction, impairment or hindrance of a municipal function by lawful activities in connection with a labor dispute. (Ord. 8-81 (part), 1981: prior code § 20-3-1)

9.04.110 Failure to comply with written promise to appear in court.
A. No person shall wilfully violate his written promise to appear in court regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which he was originally arrested.
B. A written promise to appear in court may be complied with by an appearance by counsel. (Prior code § 1-11)

9.04.120 Failure to appear in court.
A. It is unlawful for any person wilfully to fail to appear in the municipal court of the City on the date when and at the time and place where summoned to appear by any police officer or other officer of the City in writing.
B. It is unlawful for any person wilfully to fail to appear in the municipal court of the City on the date when and at the time and place where required by any lawful process duly served.
C. It is unlawful for any person wilfully to fail to appear in the municipal court of the City on the date when and at the time and place where required by an order of the municipal court which has been:
    1. Made by the court in the presence of such person; or
    2. Reduced to writing and served upon such person by personal service.
D. The provisions of this section shall not be deemed or construed to prevent or preclude an appearance by counsel when such appearance is allowed by the Utah Rules of Municipal Court Procedure. (Ord. 8-81 (part), 1981: prior code § 20-4-1)

9.04.130 Violation of Section 9.04.120-Penalty.
Violation of the provisions of Section 9.04.120, failure to appear in court, shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars, or imprisonment in the county jail or county jail for not more than ninety days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 86-06 § 8, 1986: Ord. 85-03 § 1, 1985: prior code § 20-4-2)

9.04.140 Violation-Penalty.
Violation of the provisions of the foregoing sections of this chapter, except as otherwise provided herein, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 86-06 § 9, 1986: Ord. 8-81 (part), 1981: prior code § 20-3-2)

Chapter 9.08 OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON

Sections:
9.08.010     Assault and battery.
9.08.020     Obtaining goods under false pretenses.
9.08.030     Swindling.

9.08.010 Assault and battery.
An assault is an unlawful attempt, coupled with a present ability, to commit a violent injury on the person of another. A battery is an unlawful use of force or violence upon the person of another. No person shall commit an assault or battery. (Prior code § 17-3)

9.08.020 Obtaining goods under false pretenses.
No person shall obtain any goods, chattels or property under false pretense, or enter any public house, shop or other place and obtain refreshments or other article, thing or consideration or value whatever, and depart without paying or satisfying the owner therefor. (Prior code § 17-30)

9.08.030 Swindling.
No person shall practice any game, trick or device with intent to swindle another. (Prior code § 17-41)

Chapter 9.12 OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC DECENCY

Sections:
9.12.010     Suitable clothing required for bathing or swimming.
9.12.020     Disorderly house.
9.12.030     Drunkenness.
9.12.040     Gambling-Prohibited generally.
9.12.050     Gambling-Houses prohibited.
9.12.060     Gambling-Mechanical devices prohibited.
9.12.070     Gambling-Unlawful to permit on premises.
9.12.080     Gambling-Possession of devices and paraphernalia prohibited.
9.12.090     Houses of ill fame.
9.12.100     Prostitution-Prohibited generally.
9.12.110     Prostitution-Unlawful to ply vocation on street.
9.12.120     Furnishing narcotics or marijuana to minor.
9.12.130     Possession of marijuana.
9.12.140     Obscenity-Definitions.
9.12.150     Obscenity-Prohibited generally.
9.12.160     Obscenity-Seizure of articles.
9.12.170     Obscenity-Holding of articles pending prosecution.
9.12.180     Obscenity-Destruction of article upon conviction.
9.12.190     Obscenity-Enjoining sale or distribution.
9.12.200     Obscenity-Applicability of Section 9.12.140 to 9.12.190.

9.12.010 Suitable clothing required for bathing or swimming.
No person shall bathe or swim in any of the waters within the City, except in public or private bath houses, unless clothed in a suitable bathing suit. (Prior code § 17-4)

9.12.020 Disorderly house.
No person shall keep any ill-governed or disorderly house, or suffer or permit any drunkenness, quarreling, fighting, unlawful games or riotous or disorderly conduct whatever or assist in keeping or maintaining any house or place where lewd or disorderly persons assemble. (Prior code § 17-9)

9.12.030 Drunkenness.
No person shall be in an intoxicated condition in any street, lane, alley, public building, park or stadium, or any other public place within the City. (Prior code § 17-11)

9.12.040 Gambling-Prohibited generally.
No person shall play at any game for money, other property or thing representing money or other property. (Prior code § 17-14)

9.12.050 Gambling-Houses prohibited.
No person shall keep a house, shop or any other place resorted to for the purpose of gambling, or permit or suffer any person in any house, shop or other place under his control or care to play at cards, dice, faro, roulette, keno or any other game for money or other property. In a prosecution under this section, any person who has charge of or attends to any such house, shop or place shall be deemed the keeper thereof. (Prior code § 17-15)

9.12.060 Gambling-Mechanical devices prohibited.
No person either as owner, lessee, agent, employee, mortgagee or otherwise shall operate, keep, maintain, rent, use or conduct within the City any machine, contrivance, appliance or mechanical device upon the result of the action of which, money or any commodity, merchandise or other valuable thing is staked or hazarded, and which is operated or played by placing or depositing therein any coins, substitutes for coins, checks, slugs, balls or other article or device, or in any manner, and by means of the action whereof, or as a result of the operating of which, any merchandise, money or article of value, check or token redeemable in or exchangeable for money or any other thing of value or article representing value is won or lost, or taken from or obtained from such machine, when the result of the action or operation of such machine, contrivance, appliance or mechanical device is dependent upon hazard or chance. (Prior code § 17-16)

9.12.070 Gambling-Unlawful to permit on premises.
No person shall knowingly permit or suffer any game or gambling device whereby or by means of which money or thing representing money or of value may be won or lost to be kept, maintained or operated upon any premises owned by him in whole or in part, or leased or rented by him to any other person. (Prior code § 17-17)

9.12.080 Gambling-Possession of devices and paraphernalia prohibited.
No person shall have in his possession any cards, dice, chips, tables, wheels, spindles or other devices, layout or paraphernalia whatever for use in gambling or by means of which, money or things representing money or of value may be won or lost. (Prior code § 17-18)

9.12.090 Houses of ill fame.
No person within the City shall:
A. Keep a house of ill fame resorted for the purpose of prostitution or lewdness, or wilfully reside in such house or resort for lewdness;
B. Be the owner of any building or tenement, the whole or any part of which is used for any of the purposes mentioned in subsection A of this section; or have control of such building or tenement as agent, guardian or lessee of such owner, or as the agent of such guardian or lessee, after notice of such improper use of such building or tenement, or fail to suppress the same by removing therefrom the occupants thereof;
C. Let any building or tenement knowing that the lessee intends using the same or any part thereof for any of the purposes mentioned in subsection A of this section; or harbor or keep about his private premises any whoremaster, strumpet or whore, knowing such person to be guilty of or following a lewd course of life. (Prior code § 17-19)

9.12.100 Prostitution-Prohibited generally.
No woman shall pursue or advertise in any manner her vocation as a prostitute, or be guilty of prostitution. (Prior code § 17-37)

9.12.110 Prostitution-Unlawful to ply vocation on street.
All prostitutes, solicitors to prostitution and all persons of evil fame or report plying their vocation upon the streets, alleys or public places in the City are common nuisances and are prohibited. (Prior code § 17-38)

9.12.120 Furnishing narcotics or marijuana to minor.
No person shall sell, give or furnish any narcotic or marijuana in any form to any person under twenty-one years of age. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the use, sale, giving or furnishing of any narcotic upon the prescription of a physician. (Prior code § 17-22)

9.12.130 Possession of marijuana.
A. It is unlawful for any person knowingly and intentionally to use, to possess or to be present where marijuana is being used or possessed and the use or possession is open, obvious, apparent, and not concealed from those present. No person shall be convicted under this section if the evidence shows that he did not possess or use the substance himself or advise, encourage, or assist anyone else to do so.
B. Any person who violates subsection A of this section shall, on conviction, be fined not more than five hundred dollars. (Ord. 86-06 § 10, 1986: Ord. 5-79, 1979: prior code § 17-22.1)

9.12.140 Obscenity-Definitions.
For the purposes of Sections 9.12.150 to 9.12.200 the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
A. Obscene. Whether to the average adult person, applying contemporary community standards, the dominant theme of the material or the conduct taken as a whole appeals to the prurient interest. The judge or the jury, if one is impaneled, shall be the sole triers of what is obscene. The community standards shall be the standards of the community of the state. “Prurient interest” means a shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sex or excretion, which goes substantially beyond customary limits of candor in description or representation of such matter and is a matter which is utterly without redeeming social importance.
B. “Wilfully” means a purpose or willingness to commit the act or make the omission referred to. Such term does not require any intent to violate the law or to injure another or to require any advantage. Every person having any of the items described in subsections C, D and F of Section 9.12.150 in his possession shall have the duty to make a reasonable investigation of the contents thereof and shall be presumed to have knowledge of the contents thereof which such an investigation would disclose. (Prior code § 17-23)

9.12.150 Obscenity-Prohibited generally.
No person shall wilfully do any of the following:
A. Associate in a lewd, lascivious or obscene manner with any person, whether married or unmarried, engage in open and gross lewdness, lascivious or obscene behavior or make any open, public, indecent or obscene exposure of his person or of his private parts, or the person or private parts of another;
B. Procure, counsel or assist any person to expose himself, or to take part in any artists’ model exhibition, or to make any other exhibition of himself to public view, or to the view of any number of persons, such as is adapted to excite to obscene or lewd thoughts or acts;
C. Import, write, compose, stereotype, print, design, copy, draw, paint or otherwise prepare, publish, sell, offer for sale, display, exhibit by machine or otherwise or distribute any writing, paper, book, picture, drawing, magazine, pamphlet, print, design figure, still or motion picture, photograph or negative thereof, photocopy, engraving, sound recording, card, instrument or other such article which is obscene; or buy, procure, receive or have in his possession any such writing, paper, book, picture, drawing, magazine, pamphlet, print, design, figure, still or motion picture, photograph or negative thereof, photocopy, engraving, sound recording, card, instrument or other article which is obscene, with the intent of selling, exhibiting, loaning or circulating, or with the intent to introduce the same into a household, school or place of education, or any other place for the purpose of selling, exhibiting, loaning or circulating;
D. Write, compose or publish any notice or advertisement of any such writing, paper, book, picture, drawing, magazine, pamphlet, print, design, figure, still or motion picture, photograph or negative thereof, photocopy, engraving, sound recording, card, instrument or other article which is obscene, or any notice or advertisement of any article, prescription or preparation for producing or facilitation a miscarriage;
E. Sing or speak an obscene or lewd song, ballad or any other obscene or lewd words in any public place or in the presence or other persons who may be annoyed thereby;
F. Sell or distribute or import, print or publish for the purpose of selling or distributing to a person under the age of eighteen years a book, pamphlet, ballad, printed paper, phonograph record, print, picture, figure, image or description or other article which manifestly tends to corrupt the morals of youths under the age of eighteen years; or introduce into a household, school or place of education or buy, procure, receive or have in his possession any such book, pamphlet, ballad, printed paper, phonograph record, print, picture, figure, image or other thing either for the purpose of sale, exhibition, loan or circulation to a person under the age of eighteen years or with intent to introduce the same into a household, school or place of education for such a purpose. In deciding whether such items tend to corrupt the morals of youth, the test shall be whether to the average youth under the age of eighteen years, applying contemporary community standards, the dominant theme of the material taken as a whole appeals to the prurient interest. (Ord. 19-13 § 21 (part), 2019; prior code § 17-24)

9.12.160 Obscenity-Seizure of articles.
Every person who is authorized to arrest any person for a violation of subsections C, D and F of Section 9.12.150 is equally authorized to seize any of the prohibited articles found in possession or under the control of the person so arrested and to deliver the same to the magistrate before whom the person so arrested is required to be taken. (Prior code § 17-25)

9.12.170 Obscenity-Holding of articles pending prosecution.
The magistrate to whom any of the prohibited articles are delivered pursuant to Section 9.12.160, upon the examination of the accused, or if the examination is delayed or prevented, without awaiting such examination, shall determine the character of such article and if he finds it to be obscene or tends to corrupt the morals of the youth, as the case may be, he must deliver one copy to the prosecuting attorney of the City and shall at once impound all the other copies until the defendant is acquitted, the prosecution abandoned or the time for an appeal has elapsed, or in case of an appeal, until the matter is finally adjudicated by the appropriate appellate court, and then he shall cause them to be destroyed or returned to the accused, as the case may be. (Prior code § 17-26)

9.12.180 Obscenity-Destruction of article upon conviction.
Upon the final conviction of a person accused under Section 9.12.160 the prosecuting attorney of the City shall cause any writing, paper, book, picture, print, design, figure, still or motion picture, photograph or negative thereof, photocopy, engraving, sound recording, card, instrument or other thing which is obscene, or which tends to corrupt the morals of the youth, in respect whereof the accused stands convicted and which remains in the possession or under the control of such prosecuting attorney, to be destroyed. (Prior code § 17-27)

9.12.190 Obscenity-Enjoining sale or distribution.
The district courts of this state shall have jurisdiction to enjoin the sale and distribution of obscene articles as follows:
A. The City Attorney, when a person sells or offers for sale or distributes or is about to sell or distribute or has in his possession with intent to sell or distribute or is about to acquire possession with intent to sell or distribute any writing, paper, book, drawing, magazine, pamphlet, print, design, figure, still or motion picture, photograph or negative thereof, photocopy, engraving, sound recording, card, instrument or other article which the City Attorney believes to be obscene, may maintain for and on behalf of the City an action for an injunction against such person in the district court to prevent the sale or further sale or the distribution or further distribution or the acquisition or possession of such articles. Such action shall be in accordance with the Utah Rules of Civil Procedure except as herein provided. A jury trial of the issue of obscenity may be demanded by any party.
B. The person sought to be enjoined shall be entitled to a trial of the issues within a reasonable time after joinder of issue, and a decision shall be rendered by the court within a reasonable time after the conclusion of the trial. If on the trial of the issue the court or jury, if one is demanded, determines from the evidence, which shall be clear and convincing, that the article is obscene, the court shall enter judgment or decree enjoining the sale or further sale or the distribution or the further distribution or the acquisition or possession of such article.
C. Upon application of the plaintiff for a preliminary injunction after suit is commenced and pending the trial of the issues, the court may forthwith restrain the defendant from selling or offering such article for sale until one day after joinder of issue. The court shall not conduct a hearing on such application for a preliminary injunction without first giving the defendant at least three days’ notice of such hearing. No security shall be required to make such preliminary injunction.
D. In the event that a final order or judgment of injunction is entered in favor of the petitioner and against the person sought to be enjoined, such final order shall contain a provision directing the person to surrender to the sheriff of the county any of the matter described in this section, and such sheriff shall be directed to seize and destroy the same.
E. Every person who sells, distributes or acquires possession with intent to sell or distribute any of the matter referred to in this section, after service upon him of a summons and complaint in any action brought by the City Attorney pursuant to this section, is presumed to have a knowledge of the contents thereof from the date of such service.
F. Any person not admitted to do business in this state who publishes and causes any of the matter referred to in subsection A of this section to be sent into the state for ultimate sale at retail in the state thereby consents that it may be used in any proceedings commenced pursuant to this section and thereby appoints the secretary of state to be his true and lawful attorney upon whom may be served all legal processes in any action or proceeding against it growing out of such distribution of matter for sale at retail in this state and such distribution shall be a signification of its agreement that such process shall in any action against it which is so served, be of the same legal force and validity as if served upon him personally. Service of such process shall be made by serving a copy thereof upon the secretary of state or by filing such copy in his office together with payment of a fee of two dollars, and such service shall be sufficient service upon such nonresident; provided, that notice of such service and a copy of the process are within ten days thereafter sent by mail by the plaintiff to the defendant at the address of such defendant as appears on the matter distributed and if no address so appears then at the last known address of the defendant; and that the plaintiff’s affidavit of compliances with the provisions of this subsection are attached to the summons. The Secretary of State shall keep a record of all such processes so served which shall show the day and hour of such service. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to abrogate or pre-empt the operation of Rule 17 (e) of the Utah Rules of Civil Procedure.
G. This section shall apply only to the articles before the court, and it shall not apply to future articles not yet in existence or to other articles already in existence but not before the court.
H. This section shall not be construed in any way to limit the district courts in the exercise of their jurisdiction under any other provision of law. (Prior code § 17-28)

9.12.200 Obscenity-Applicability of Section 9.12.140 to 9.12.190.
Sections 9.12.140 to 9.12.190 shall not apply to persons who may possess and distribute obscene material or participate in the other conduct which is proscribed therein when such possession, distribution or participation occurs in the course of bona fide educational, artistic, scientific, medical or comparable research or study or in the course of law enforcement activities or in other like circumstances where the nature of the possession, distribution or participation is not related to the appeal to prurient interest. Nothing in such sections shall apply to any recognized historical society or museum, the state law library, any county or city law library, the state library, the public library, any library of any college or university or to any archive or library under the supervision and control of the state, county, municipality or other political subdivision. (Prior code § 17-29)

Chapter 9.16 OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE

Sections:
9.16.010     Disorderly conduct.
9.16.020     Disturbing the peace.
9.16.030     Abusive language.
9.16.040     Fighting.
9.16.050     Loitering and obstructing passage.
9.16.060     Loitering and obstructing passage after requested to move on by police.
9.16.070     Riots.

9.16.010 Disorderly conduct.
Any person committing any of the following acts shall be guilty of an infraction punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars:
A. Any person who shall make, aid, countenance or assist in making any improper noise, riot, disturbance, breach of the peace or diversion tending to a breach of the peace within the City;
B. Any persons who shall collect in bodies or crowds for unlawful purposes, or for any purpose, to the annoyance or disturbance of other persons;
C. Any person who is idle or dissolute and goes about begging;
D. Any person who uses or exercises any juggling or other unlawful game or play;
E. Any person found in a house of ill fame or a gaming house;
F. Any person lodging in or found at any time in an outhouse, shed, barn, stable or unoccupied building, or lodging in open air, and not giving a good account of himself;
G. Any person who shall abet in any fight, quarrel or other disturbance in the City;
H. Any person who stands, loiters or strolls about in any place in the City waiting or seeking to obtain money or other valuable thing from persons that shall engage in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick to obtain money or other valuable thing in any place in the City, or who shall aid or abet or in any manner be concerned therein;
I. All touts, ropers, steers or cappers, so-called, for any gambling room or house who shall ply or attempt to ply their calling on any public street;
J. Any person found loitering about in any hotel, block, barroom, beer parlor, dramshop, gambling house or disorderly house, or wandering about the streets either by night or day without any known lawful means of support, or without being able to give a satisfactory account of himself;
K. Any person who is known to be a thief, burglar, pickpocket, robber or confidence man, either by his own confession or otherwise, or by having been convicted of larceny, burglary or other crime against the laws of the state who is found lounging in or prowling or loitering around any banking institution, place of public amusement, hotel, store, shop, car, public gathering, public assembly, courtroom, public building, private dwelling house, outhouse, house of ill fame, gambling house, tippling house or any public place and who is unable to give a reasonable excuse for being so found. (Ord. 86-06 § 11, 1986; prior code § 17-8)

9.16.020 Disturbing the peace.
No person shall wilfully disturb the peace or quiet of any neighborhood, household or person by loud or unusual noise, by tumultuous or offensive conduct or by threatening, traducing, quarreling, challenging to fight or fighting within the City. (Ord. 19-13 § 21 (part), 2019; prior code § 17-10)

9.16.030 Abusive language.
No person shall abuse another by using menacing, insulting, slanderous or profane language. (Prior code § 17-1)

9.16.040 Fighting.
It is unlawful for two or more persons to engage in a fight. (Prior code § 17-12)

9.16.050 Loitering and obstructing passage.
No persons shall congregate about or upon any sidewalk, stairway, doorway, window or in front of any business or dwelling house, theater, lecture room, church or elsewhere, and by so doing obstruct or interfere with the free passage of persons entering, leaving or occupying any such building or premises. (Prior code § 17-20)

9.16.060 Loitering and obstructing passage after requested to move on by police.
No person shall obstruct or encumber any street corner or other public place in the City, by lounging in or about the same after being requested to move on by any peace officer. (Prior code § 17-21)

9.16.070 Riots.
Any use of force of violence, disturbing of the public peace or any threat to pursue such force or violence by two or more persons acting together and without the authority of law, if accompanied by immediate power of execution, is a riot. No person shall participate in any riot. (Prior code § 17-40)

Chapter 9.20 OFFENSES PERTAINING TO PROPERTY

Sections:
9.20.010     Petit larceny.
9.20.020     Destruction, injury or removal of property.
9.20.030     Destruction, injury or removal of fences or signs.
9.20.040     Trespass.

9.20.010 Petit larceny.
No person shall commit petit larceny within the City. (Prior code § 17-33)

9.20.020 Destruction, injury or removal of property.
No person shall wilfully injure, deface or destroy any building or fixture thereof; injure, destroy or secrete any goods, chattels or valuable papers of another; take down, injure or remove any monument, street sign or any tree marked as a boundary of any tract of land or city lot; or destroy any fence, fountain, shade or fruit tree or any kind of public or private property. (Prior code § 17-35)

9.20.030 Destruction, injury or removal of fences or signs.
No person shall wantonly mar, injure, deface or destroy any fence, guidepost, signboard or awning in any street or public place in the City. (Prior code § 17-36)

9.20.040 Trespass.
No person shall take down any fence, let down any bars or open any gate so as to expose any enclosure, or ride, drive or walk across, or lodge, camp or sleep upon the premises of another, without permission of the owner or occupant thereof. (Prior code § 17-44)

Chapter 9.24 OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST MINORS

Sections:
9.24.010     Curfew-Established-Exceptions.
9.24.020     Curfew-Responsibility of parents or guardians.
9.24.030     Furnishing tobacco to minors.

9.24.010 Curfew-Established-Exceptions.
No persons sixteen or seventeen years of age shall be, or remain in or upon, any of the streets, alleys or public places or vacant lots within the City at night between the hours of eleven p.m. and six a.m. following, Sunday through Thursday, and between the hours of twelve midnight and six a.m. following, Friday and Saturday and no person fifteen years of age and under shall be, or remain in, or upon, any of the streets, alleys or public places or vacant lots within the City at night between the hours of eleven p.m. and six a.m. Sunday through Saturday. No minor person covered by this section shall be, or remain in, or upon, any of the streets, alleys or public places or vacant lots within the City at night unless such person is accompanied by a parent, guardian or other person having legal custody of such minor person, or unless the employment or lawful business of such minor person makes it necessary to be upon the streets, alleys or public places between such specified hours, in which event such minor person shall obtain a permit from the Chief of Police. Where a permit is required from the Chief of Police under this section, such permit shall be kept upon the person and it shall be unlawful to be upon the streets, alleys or public places within such curfew hours without such permit. (Ord. 9-80, 1980: prior code § 17-6)

9.24.020 Curfew-Responsibility of parents or guardians.
No person, guardian or other person having legal charge or custody of any person under seventeen years of age shall allow or permit any such person or child, ward or other person under such age, while in such legal custody, to go or be in or upon any of the streets, alleys, or public places in the City when such going or being in or upon such streets, alleys, or public places would be a violation by such minor person of any provision of Section 9.24.010. (Prior code § 17-7)

9.24.030 Furnishing tobacco to minors.
No person shall sell, give or furnish any cigar, cigarette or tobacco in any form to any person under eighteen years of age. (Prior code § 17-42)

Chapter 9.28 WEAPONS

Sections:
9.28.010     Discharge of firearms.
9.28.020     Carrying a concealed weapon.

9.28.010 Discharge of firearms.
No person shall discharge any gun, air gun, pistol or pellet gun within the City, except by accident, in self-defense, in the case of any civil officer in the discharge of his duty, in the case of target shooting after the erection of a proper breastwork or battery for the protection of the citizens or at a regularly licensed shooting gallery. (Ord. 17-13, 2017)

9.28.020 Carrying a concealed weapon.
No person, except a peace officer, without the written consent of a peace officer shall carry any slingshot, brass knuckles, revolver, dagger, stiletto, knife, dirk or other concealed deadly weapon. (Prior code § 17-45)

Chapter 9.32 MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES

Sections:
9.32.010     Advertisement of quack nostrums and cures.
9.32.020     Abandoned refrigerators and iceboxes.
9.32.030     Possession of burglary tools.
9.32.040     Traps and deadfalls.

9.32.010 Advertisement of quack nostrums and cures.
No person shall place or post or cause to placed or posted, in any street or other public place in the City a handbill or advertisement giving notice of any person having or professing to have skill in the treatment or curing of any disorder or disease, or giving notice of the sale or exposure for sale of any nostrum or medicine. (Prior code § 17-2)

9.32.020 Abandoned refrigerators and iceboxes.
A. No person shall leave outside of any building or dwelling in a place accessible to children any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or any other container of any kind which has an airtight door or lock which may not be released for opening from the inside of such.
B. No person shall leave outside of any building or dwelling in a place accessible to children any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or any other container of any kind which has an airtight snaplock or other device thereon without first removing the snaplock or doors from such icebox, refrigerator or container. (Prior code § 17-39)

9.32.030 Possession of burglary tools.
No person shall have in his possession any nippers of the description known as “burglar’s nippers,” picklock, skeleton key, key to be used with a bit or bits, jimmy or other burglar’s instrument or tool of whatsoever kind or description, unless it is shown that such possession is innocent or for a lawful purpose. (Prior code § 17-5)

9.32.040 Traps and deadfalls.
No person shall arrange any trap, prepare any deadfall or dig any pit to injure another’s person or property. (Prior code § 17-43)

Chapter 9.36 HOUSING DISCRIMINATION

Sections:
9.36.010     Purpose.
9.36.020     Administration.
9.36.030     No private right of action--No special rights.
9.36.040     Severability.
9.36.050     Definitions.
9.36.060     Applicability.
9.36.070     Unlawful housing practices.
9.36.080     Unlawful intimidation and retaliation.
9.36.090     Procedures for filing complaints.
9.36.100     Investigation.
9.36.110     Conciliation.
9.36.120     Disposition of a complaint.
9.36.130     Offenses and penalties.

9.36.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that every person within the City has the right to seek housing without undue discrimination. Discriminatory housing practices can be detrimental because they impede the social and economic progress of the City by preventing all of the City’s citizens from contributing to or fully participating in the cultural, spiritual, social and commercial life of the community, which is essential to the growth and vitality of the City’s neighborhoods and businesses. While the Utah Fair Housing Act, Utah Code Section 57-21-1 et seq., addresses housing related discrimination based on race; color; religion; sex; national origin; familial status; source of income; and disability, it does not address discrimination based on sexual orientation or gender identity. It is further the purpose of this chapter to provide a clear and comprehensive mandate for the prevention and elimination of discrimination in housing in the City against individuals based upon sexual orientation or gender identity and this chapter shall be liberally construed to achieve that purpose. (Ord. 10-23, 2010)

9.36.020 Administration.
The City Manager is responsible for administering and implementing this chapter. (Ord. 10-23, 2010)

9.36.030 No private right of action--No special rights.
This chapter does not create a private cause of action, nor does it create any right or remedy that is the same or substantially equivalent to the remedies provided under federal or state law. This chapter does not create any special rights or privileges which would not be available to all of the City’s citizens because every person has a sexual orientation and a gender identity. (Ord. 10-23, 2010)

9.36.040 Severability.
If any section, sentence, paragraph, term, definition or provision of this chapter is for any reason determined to be illegal, invalid, superseded by other authority or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction or by any state or federal regulatory authority having jurisdiction thereof, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such determination shall have no effect on the validity of any other section, sentence, paragraph, term, definition or provision of this chapter, all of which will remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 10-23, 2010)

9.36.050 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:
“City” means all area within the incorporated city limits of the City of Moab, Utah.
“City Attorney” means the duly appointed City Attorney.
“City of Moab” means the City of Moab as a corporate entity.
“City Manager” means the duly appointed City Manager.
“City prosecutor” means the duly appointed city prosecutor.
“Complainant” means a person, including the City Manager, who files a complaint under this chapter.
“Conciliation” means the attempted resolution of issues raised in a complaint filed under this chapter, or raised in the investigation of the complaint, through informal negotiations involving the Complainant, the Respondent, and the City Manager.
“Conciliation agreement” means a written agreement setting forth the resolution of issues by conciliation under this chapter.
“Discrimination” means any direct or indirect exclusion, distinction, segregation, limitation, refusal, denial, or other differentiation in the treatment of a person or persons because of a person’s actual or perceived sexual orientation or gender identity or because of a person’s association with any such person. Discrimination shall not be interpreted to require or to grant or accord preferential treatment to any person because of that person’s sexual orientation or gender identity.
“Dwelling” means any building or structure, or a portion of a building or structure, occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence of one or more households inside the City and vacant land that is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location of a dwelling inside the City.
“Gender identity” means a person’s actual or perceived gender identity, appearance, mannerisms, or other characteristics of a person with or without regard to the person’s sex at birth.
“Person” includes one or more individuals, corporations, limited liability companies, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint-stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in cases under the United States Bankruptcy Code, receivers, and fiduciaries.
“Real estate broker” or “salesperson” means a principal real estate broker, an associate real estate broker, or a real estate sales agent as those terms are defined in Utah Code Section 61-2-2 or any successor provision.
“Religious organization” means a religious corporation, association, educational institution, society, trust, or any entity or association which is a wholly owned or controlled subsidiary or agency of any religious corporation, association, society, trust or corporation sole.
“Rent” means to lease, sublease, let, or otherwise grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant.
“Residential real estate related transaction” means the making or purchasing loans or providing other financial assistance for purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a dwelling; or selling, brokering, or appraising residential real property inside the City.
“Respondent” means a person identified in a complaint as having committed an unlawful housing practice under this chapter.
“Sexual orientation” means a person’s actual or perceived orientation as heterosexual, homosexual, or bisexual.
“Unlawful practice” means a discriminatory act or practice relating to housing that is prohibited under this chapter. (Ord. 19-13 § 21 (part), 2019; Ord. 10-23, 2010)

9.36.060 Applicability.
This chapter applies to housing practices within the corporate limits of the City of Moab.
This chapter does not apply to a temporary or permanent residence facility operated by a nonprofit organization; a charitable organization; or a person in conjunction with a religious organization, association, or society, including any dormitory operated by a public or private educational institution, if the discrimination is based on sexual orientation or gender identity for reasons of personal modesty or privacy or in the furtherance of a religious organization’s sincerely held religious beliefs.
This chapter does not prohibit or restrict a religious organization or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization from limiting the sale, rental, or occupancy of dwellings it owns or operates for primarily noncommercial purposes to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons. This chapter does not prohibit distinctions based on a person’s inability or failure to fulfill the terms and conditions, including financial obligations, of a lease, rental agreement, contract of purchase or sale, mortgage, trust deed, or other financing agreement.
This chapter does not apply to: (1) the United States government, any of its departments or agencies, or any corporation wholly owned by it; or (2) the government of the state of Utah or any of its departments, agencies, or political subdivision, except for the City and Grand County. (Ord. 10-23, 2010)

9.36.070 Unlawful housing practices.
A. It is a discriminatory housing practice to do any of the following:
    1. Refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental, or otherwise deny or make unavailable any dwelling from any person because of the person’s sexual orientation or gender identity;
    2. Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of the sale or rental of any dwelling or in providing facilities or services in connection with the dwelling because of the person’s sexual orientation or gender identity;
    3. Represent to any person that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale, or rental when in fact the dwelling is available;
    4. To make a representation orally or in writing or make, print, circulate, publish, post, or cause to be made, printed, circulated, published, or posted any notice, statement, or advertisement, or to use any application form for the sale or rental of a dwelling, that directly or indirectly expresses any preference, limitation, or discrimination based on sexual orientation or gender identity, or expresses any intent to make any such preference, limitation, or discrimination;
    5. To induce or attempt to induce, for profit, any person to buy, sell, or rent any dwelling by making representations about the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of persons of a particular sexual orientation or gender identity;
    6. Engage in any discriminatory housing practices because of sexual orientation or gender identity based upon a person’s association with another person.
B. It is a discriminatory housing practice for a real estate broker or salesperson to do any of the following because of a person’s sexual orientation or gender identity:
    1. To discriminate against any person in making available a residential real estate transaction, or in the terms or conditions of the transaction, inside the City, because of a person’s sexual orientation or gender identity;
    2. To deny any person access to, or membership or participation in, any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers’ organization, or other service, organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings inside the City or to discriminate against any person in the terms or conditions of access, membership, or participation in the organization, service, or facility inside the City because of a person’s sexual orientation or gender identity; or
    3. Engage in any discriminatory housing practices inside the City because of sexual orientation or gender identity based upon a person’s association with another person.
C. Exceptions. This chapter does not apply to the following:
    1. The sale or rental of any single-household dwelling, if the owner:
        a. Owns an interest in fewer than five single-household dwellings held for lease or sale at one time located inside the City;
        b. Has sold fewer than three single-household dwellings inside the City in which the owner resided in the dwelling within the twenty-four-month period preceding the sale or rental of the dwelling; and
        c. Does not use the services or facilities of any real estate broker, agent, or salesperson, or of any other person in the business of selling or renting dwellings, in connection with the sale or rental of the dwelling inside the City.
    2. The rental of a dwelling, when the owner actually maintains and occupies part of the dwelling as a residence.
    3. Nothing in this section prohibits conduct against a person because of the person’s conviction by a court of competent jurisdiction of the illegal manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance under state or federal law. (Ord. 19-13 § 21 (part), 2019; Ord. 10-23, 2010)

9.36.080 Unlawful intimidation and retaliation.
It is unlawful for any person to discriminate against, harass, threaten, harm, damage, or otherwise penalize another person for opposing an unlawful practice, for filing a complaint, or for testifying, assisting, or participating in any manner in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing under this chapter. (Ord. 10-23, 2010)

9.36.090 Procedures for filing complaints.
A. Any person who claims to have been injured by an unlawful housing practice may file a complaint with the City Manager. A complaint may also be filed by the City Manager if the City Manager has reasonable cause to believe that a person has committed an unlawful housing practice. A complaint must be filed within one hundred eighty calendar days after an alleged unlawful housing practice has occurred.
B. A complaint must be in writing on a form provided by the City Manager, made under oath or affirmation, and contain the following information:
    1. The complainant’s name, address, and signature;
    2. The date the alleged unlawful housing practice occurred;
    3. A statement of the facts upon which the allegation of an unlawful practice are based; and
    4. The respondent’s name and address.
C. Within ten days after the filing of a complaint, the City Manager shall:
    1. Provide the respondent named in the complaint written notice that a complaint alleging the commission of an unlawful housing practice has been filed against the respondent;
    2. Furnish a copy of the complaint to the respondent; and
    3. Advise the respondent of the respondent’s procedural rights and obligations, including the right to file a written, signed, and verified informal answer to the complaint within fifteen days after service of notice of the complaint.
D. Not later than the fifteenth day after service of the notice and copy of the complaint, a Respondent may file an answer to the complaint. The answer must be in writing, made under oath or affirmation, and contain the following information:
    1. The respondent’s name, address, telephone number, and signature of the respondent or the respondent’s attorney, if any; and
    2. A concise statement of facts in response to the allegations in the complaint, including facts of any defense or exception. (Ord. 10-23, 2010)

9.36.100 Investigation.
A. Upon the filing of a complaint, the City Manager shall commence an investigation to determine the facts behind the complaint and whether there is reasonable cause to believe the respondent committed an unlawful housing practice, except that no investigation may commence if, after reviewing the allegations of the complaint, the City Manager determines that the complaint does not come within the scope of this chapter. Upon determining that a particular complaint does not come within the scope of this chapter, the City Manager shall dismiss the complaint, notify the complainant and the respondent and take no further action. In connection with any investigation of a complaint filed under this chapter, the City Manager shall seek the voluntary cooperation of any person to:
    1. Obtain access to premises, records, documents, individuals, and any other possible source of information;
    2. Examine, record, and copy necessary materials; and
    3. Take and record testimony or statements of any person reasonably necessary for the furtherance of the investigation.
B. The City Manager may request a subpoena duces tecum to compel the attendance of a witness or the production of relevant materials or documents. The City Manager may dismiss a complaint during the investigation and prior to referral to the City prosecutor if the City Manager determines that:
    1. The complaint was not filed within the required time period;
    2. The location of the alleged unlawful housing practice is not within the City’s jurisdiction;
    3. The alleged unlawful housing practice is not a violation of this chapter;
    4. The complainant refuses to cooperate with the City Manager in the investigation of the complaint or enforcement of an executed conciliation agreement;
    5. The complainant cannot be located after the City Manager has performed a reasonable search;
    6. A conciliation agreement has been executed by the complainant and respondent;
    7. The complainant withdraws the complaint by written notice to the City Manager. (Ord. 10-23, 2010)

9.36.110 Conciliation.
A. During or after the investigation, but subsequent to the mailing of the notice of the complaint to the respondent, the City Manager shall, if it appears that the respondent has committed an unlawful housing practice, attempt to conciliate the complaint. In conciliating a complaint, the City Manager shall try to achieve a just resolution and obtain assurances that the respondent will satisfactorily remedy any violation of the complainant’s rights and take action to ensure the elimination of both present and future unlawful housing practices. A conciliation agreement may include: sensitivity training for the Respondent and/or the Respondent’s employees; the Respondent’s agreement to adopt and pursue a policy of non-discrimination in its practices; and/or the Respondent’s agreement to not engage in discriminatory practices in the future.
B. A conciliation agreement executed under this section must be in writing in a form approved by the City Attorney and must be signed and verified by the respondent and the complainant, subject to approval of the City Manager who shall indicate approval by signing the agreement.
C. If a respondent voluntarily enters into a conciliation agreement, the City Manager shall immediately dismiss the complaint. (Ord. 10-23, 2010)

9.36.120 Disposition of a complaint.
If, upon completion of an investigation of a complaint, the City Manager determines that an unlawful housing practice has occurred and is unable to secure an acceptable conciliation agreement from the respondent, then the City Manager shall file a report with the City prosecutor for review, issuance of an information, and the initiation of an action in Justice Court. (Ord. 10-23, 2010)

9.36.130 Offenses and penalties.
A person violates this chapter if the person intentionally or knowingly violates a provision of this chapter or if the person intentionally or knowingly obstructs or prevents compliance with this chapter. An offense committed under this chapter by a respondent owning or operating twenty or fewer dwellings is punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars. An offense committed under this chapter by a respondent owning or operating twenty-one or more dwellings or by a real estate broker or salesperson is punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars. (Ord. 10-23, 2010)

Chapter 9.40 EMPLOYMENT DISCRIMINATION

Sections:
9.40.010     Purpose.
9.40.020     Administration.
9.40.030     No private right of action--No special rights.
9.40.040     Severability.
9.40.050     Definitions.
9.40.060     Applicability.
9.40.070     Unlawful employment practices.
9.40.080     Unlawful intimidation and retaliation.
9.40.090     Procedures for filing complaints.
9.40.100     Investigation.
9.40.110     Conciliation.
9.40.120     Disposition of a complaint.
9.40.130     Offenses and penalties.

9.40.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that every person within the City has the right to seek employment without undue discrimination. Discriminatory employment practices are detrimental because they impede the social and economic progress of the City by preventing all of the City’s citizens from contributing to or fully participating in the cultural, spiritual, social and commercial life of the community, which is essential to the growth and vitality of the City’s neighborhoods and businesses. While the Utah Anti-Discrimination Act, Utah Code Section 34A-5-101 at seq. addresses employment-related discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, pregnancy, childbirth or pregnancy-related conditions, national origin, age and disability, it does not address discrimination based on sexual orientation or gender identity. It is further the purpose of this chapter to provide a clear and comprehensive mandate for the prevention and elimination of discrimination in employment in the City against individuals based upon sexual orientation or gender identity and this chapter shall be liberally construed to achieve that purpose. (Ord. 10-24, 2010)

9.40.020 Administration.
The City Manager is responsible for administering and implementing this chapter. (Ord. 10-24, 2010)

9.40.030 No private right of action--No special rights.
This chapter does not create a private cause of action, nor does it create any right or remedy that is the same or substantially equivalent to the remedies provided under federal or state law. This chapter does not create any special rights or privileges which would not be available to all of the City’s citizens because every person has a sexual orientation and a gender identity. (Ord. 10-24, 2010)

9.40.040 Severability.
If any section, sentence, paragraph, term, definition or provision of this chapter is for any reason determined to be illegal, invalid, superseded by other authority or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction or by any state or federal regulatory authority having jurisdiction thereof, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such determination shall have no effect on the validity of any other section, sentence, paragraph, term, definition or provision of this chapter, all of which will remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 10-24, 2010)

9.40.050 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:
“City” means all area within the incorporated city limits of the City of Moab, Utah.
“City Attorney” means the City of Moab’s duly appointed City Attorney.
“City Manager” means the City of Moab’s duly appointed City Manager.
“City of Moab” means the City of Moab as a corporate entity.
“City prosecutor” means the City of Moab’s duly appointed city prosecutor.
“Complainant” means a person, including the City Manager, who files a complaint under this chapter.
“Conciliation” means the attempted resolution of issues raised in a complaint filed under this chapter, or raised in the investigation of the complaint, through informal negotiations involving the complainant, the respondent, and the City Manager.
“Conciliation agreement” means a written agreement setting forth the resolution of issues by conciliation under this chapter.
“Discrimination” means any direct or indirect exclusion, distinction, segregation, limitation, refusal, denial, or other differentiation in the treatment of a person because of a person’s actual or perceived sexual orientation or gender identity or because of a person’s association with any such person. Discrimination shall not be interpreted to require or to grant or accord preferential treatment to any person because of that person’s sexual orientation or gender identity.
“Employee” means any individual applying with or employed by an employer. The term does not include an elected official.
“Employer” means any person employing fifteen or more employees in the City for each working day in each of twenty or more calendar weeks in the current or preceding calendar year, and includes any agent of such a person.
“Employment agency” means any person, and any agent of a person, undertaking to procure employees or opportunities to work for any other person in the City or holding itself out to be equipped to procure employees or opportunities to work for any other person in the City.
“Gender identity” means a person’s actual or perceived gender identity, appearance, mannerisms, or other characteristics of an individual with or without regard to the person’s sex at birth.
“Labor organization” means any organization that exists for the purpose in whole or in part of collective dealing with employers concerning grievances, terms or conditions of employment; or other mutual aid or protection in connection with employment.
“Otherwise qualified” means a person who possesses the following required by an employer for any particular job, job classification, or position:
    1. Education;
    2. Training;
    3. Ability;
    4. Moral character;
    5. Integrity;
    6. Disposition to work;
    7. Adherence to reasonable rules and regulations; and
    8. Other job related qualifications required by an employer.
“Person” means one or more individuals, partnerships, associations, corporations, legal representatives, trusts or trustees, receivers, the City of Moab and Grand County as employers.
“Religious organization” means a religious corporation, association, educational institution, society, trust or any entity or association which is a wholly owned or controlled subsidiary or agency of any religious corporation, association, society, trust or corporation sole.
“Respondent” means a person identified in a complaint as having committed an unlawful practice under this chapter.
“Sexual orientation” means a person’s actual or perceived orientation as heterosexual, homosexual, or bisexual.
“Unlawful practice” means a discriminatory act or practice relating to employment that is prohibited under this chapter. (Ord. 10-24, 2010)

9.40.060 Applicability.
This chapter does not apply to:
A. A religious organization;
B. An expressive association whose employment of a person protected by this chapter would significantly burden the association’s rights of expressive association under Boy Scouts of America v. Dale, 530 U.S. 640 (2000); the United States government, any of its departments or agencies, or any corporation wholly owned by it; or
C. The United States government, any of its departments or agencies, or any corporation wholly owned by it; or the state of Utah or any of its departments, agencies, or political subdivisions except for the City of Moab and Grand County as corporate entities. (Ord. 10-24, 2010)

9.40.070 Unlawful employment practices.
A. Employers. An employer may not refuse to hire, promote, discharge, demote, or terminate any person, and may not retaliate against, harass, or discriminate in matters of compensation or in terms, privileges, and conditions of employment against any person otherwise qualified because of a person’s sexual orientation or gender identity.
B. Employment Agencies. An employment agency may not refuse to list and properly classify for employment, or refuse to refer a person for employment, in a known available job for which the person is otherwise qualified, because of a person’s sexual orientation or gender identity.
C. Labor Organizations. A labor organization may not exclude any person otherwise qualified from full membership rights in the labor organization, expel the person from membership in the labor organization, or otherwise discriminate against or harass any of the labor organization’s members in full employment of work opportunity, or representation, because of a person’s sexual orientation or gender identity.
D. Training Programs. An employer, labor organization, joint apprenticeship committee, or vocational school, providing, coordinating, or controlling apprenticeship programs, or providing, coordinating, or controlling on-the-job-training programs, instruction, training, or retraining programs may not deny to, or withhold from, any qualified person, the right to be admitted to, or participate in any apprenticeship training program, on-the-job-training program, or other occupational instruction, training or retraining program, because of a person’s sexual orientation or gender identity.
E. Notices and Advertisements. Unless based upon a bona fide occupational qualification, or required by and given to an agency of government for security reasons, an employer, employment agency, or labor organization may not print, or circulate, or cause to be printed or circulated, any statement, advertisement, or publication, use any form of application for employment or membership, or make any inquiry in connection with prospective employment or membership that expresses, either directly or indirectly any limitation, specification, or discrimination because of a person’s sexual orientation or gender identity.
It is unlawful for a joint labor-management committee controlling apprenticeship or other training or retraining (including on-the-job training programs) to print or publish, or cause to be printed or published, any notice or advertisement relating to admission to, or employment in, any program established to provide apprenticeship or other training by the joint labor-management committee that indicates any preference, limitation, specification, or discrimination, based on sexual orientation or gender identity.
Nothing in this chapter prohibits a notice or advertisement from indicating a preference, limitation, specification, or discrimination based on sexual orientation or gender identity when sexual orientation or gender identity is a bona fide occupational qualification for employment.
F. No Preferential Treatment. Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to require any employer, employment agency, labor organization, vocational school, joint labor-management committee, or apprenticeship program subject to this chapter to grant preferential treatment to any person because of the person’s sexual orientation or gender identity on account of an imbalance which may exist with respect to the total number or percentage of persons of any sexual orientation or gender identity employed by any employer, referred or classified for employment by an employment agency or labor organization, admitted to membership or classified by any labor organization, or admitted to or employed in, any apprenticeship or other training program, in comparison with the total number or percentage of persons of that sexual orientation or gender identity available in the City’s available work force. (Ord. 10-24, 2010)

9.40.080 Unlawful intimidation and retaliation.
It is unlawful for any person to discriminate against, harass, threaten, harm, damage, or otherwise penalize another person for opposing an unlawful practice, for filing a complaint, or for testifying, assisting, or participating in any manner in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing under this chapter. (Ord. 10-24, 2010)

9.40.090 Procedures for filing complaints.
A. Any person who claims to have been injured by an unlawful employment practice subject to the City’s jurisdiction under this chapter may file a complaint with the City Manager. A complaint may also be filed by the City Manager if the City Manager has reasonable cause to believe that a person has committed an unlawful employment practice. A complaint must be filed within one hundred eighty calendar days after an alleged unlawful employment practice has occurred.
B. A complaint must be in writing on a form provided by the City Manager, made under oath or affirmation, and contain the following information:
    1. The complainant’s name, address, and signature;
    2. The date the alleged unlawful employment practice occurred;
    3. A statement of the facts upon which the allegation of an unlawful employment practice are based; and
    4. The respondent’s name and address.
C. Promptly after the filing of a complaint, the City Manager shall:
    1. Provide the respondent named in the complaint written notice that a complaint alleging the commission of an unlawful employment practice has been filed against the respondent;
    2. Furnish a copy of the complaint to the respondent; and
    3. Advise the respondent of the respondent’s procedural rights and obligations, including the right to file a written, signed, and verified informal answer to the complaint within fifteen days after service of notice of the complaint.
D. Not later than the fifteenth day after service of the notice and copy of the complaint, a respondent may file an answer to the complaint. The answer must be in writing, made under oath or affirmation, and contain the following information:
    1. The respondent’s name, address, telephone number, and signature of the respondent or the respondent’s attorney, if any; and
    2. A concise statement of facts in response to the allegations in the complaint, including facts of any defense or exception. (Ord. 10-24, 2010)

9.40.100 Investigation.
A. Upon the filing of a complaint, the City Manager shall commence an investigation to determine the facts behind the complaint and whether there is reasonable cause to believe the respondent committed an unlawful employment practice, except that no investigation may commence if, after reviewing the allegations of the complaint, the City Manager determines that the complaint does not come within the scope of this chapter. Upon determining that a particular complaint does not come within the scope of this chapter, the City Manager shall dismiss the complaint, notify the complainant and respondent and take no further action.
B. In connection with any investigation of a complaint filed under this chapter, the City Manager shall seek the voluntary cooperation of any person to:
    1. Obtain access to premises, records, documents, individuals, and any other possible source of information;
    2. Examine, record, and copy necessary materials; and
    3. Take and record testimony or statements of any person reasonably necessary for the furtherance of the investigation.
C. The City Manager may request the issuance of a subpoena or subpoena duces tecum to compel the attendance of a witness or the production of relevant materials or documents.
D. The City Manager may dismiss a complaint during the investigation and prior to referral to the City prosecutor if the City Manager determines that:
    1. The complaint was not filed within the required time period;
    2. The location of the alleged unlawful employment practice is not within the City’s jurisdiction;
    3. The employer does not employ a sufficient number of employees in the City to meet this chapter’s jurisdictional requirements;
    4. The alleged unlawful employment practice is not a violation of this chapter;
    5. The complainant refuses to cooperate with the City Manager in the investigation of the complaint or enforcement of an executed conciliation agreement;
    6. The complainant cannot be located after the City Manager has performed a reasonable search; or
    7. A conciliation agreement has been executed by the complainant and respondent.
    8. The complainant withdraws the complaint by written notice to the City Manager. (Ord. 10-24, 2010)

9.40.110 Conciliation.
A. During or after the investigation, but subsequent to the mailing of the notice of the complaint to the respondent, the City Manager shall, if the respondent appears to have committed an unlawful employment practice, attempt to conciliate the complaint. In conciliating a complaint, the City Manager shall try to achieve a just resolution and obtain assurances that the respondent will satisfactorily remedy any violation of the complainant’s rights and take action to ensure the elimination of both present and future unlawful employment practices. A conciliation agreement may include: Sensitivity training for the respondent and/or the respondent’s employees; the respondent’s agreement to adopt and pursue a policy of non-discrimination in employment practices; and the respondent’s agreement to not engage in discriminatory practices in the future.
B. A conciliation agreement executed under this section must be in writing in a form approved by the City Attorney and must be signed and verified by the respondent and the complainant, subject to approval of the City Manager who shall indicate approval by signing the agreement.
C. If a respondent voluntarily enters into a conciliation agreement, the City Manager shall immediately dismiss the complaint. (Ord. 10-24, 2010)

9.40.120 Disposition of a complaint.
If, upon completion of an investigation of a complaint, the City Manager determines that an unlawful employment practice has occurred and is unable to secure an acceptable conciliation agreement from the respondent, then the City Manager shall file a report with the City prosecutor for review, issuance of an information, and the initiation of an action in justice court. (Ord. 10-24, 2010)

9.40.130 Offenses and penalties.
A person violates this chapter if the person engages in any action made unlawful by this chapter. An offense committed under this chapter by an employer employing fifty or fewer employees is punishable by a civil fine of not more than five hundred dollars. An offense committed under this chapter by an individual employing fifty-one or more employees or by an employment agency or labor organization is punishable by a civil fine of not more than one thousand dollars. (Ord. 10-24, 2010)

Chapter 9.44 MUTUAL COMMITMENT REGISTRY

Sections:
9.44.010     Purpose.
9.44.020     Eligibility requirements for the mutual commitment registry.
9.44.030     Declaration of mutual commitment.
9.44.040     Termination of mutual commitment.
9.44.050     Registration, fee and amendment.
9.44.060     Privileges and benefits.

9.44.010 Purpose.
The City is committed to promoting justice, equality and inclusiveness in the provision of health care and many other benefits that may be offered by the City or other employers within city limits. It is the purpose of this chapter to allow any two adults in a committed relationship who meet the mutual commitment registry criteria to register with the City and to obtain a certificate attesting to their status. (Ord. 13-18 (part), 2013)

9.44.020 Eligibility requirements for the mutual commitment registry.
To be eligible to register a relationship of mutual commitment with the City of Moab, two individuals (the “declarants”) must meet the following criteria:
A. Be persons eighteen years of age or older and be unmarried according to the laws of the state of Utah;
B. Freely declare that they are solely and mutually committed to each other;
C. Be competent to contract;
D. Be directly dependent upon, or interdependent with, each other, sharing a common financial obligation that is evidenced by acceptable documentation. Acceptable documentation shall include any three of the following five documents:
    1. A joint loan obligation, mortgage, or a lease of joint ownership of a vehicle;
    2. A life insurance policy, retirement benefits account, a will of trust of one declarant designating the other declarant as beneficiary thereto, or a will of trust of one declarant which designates the other declarant as executor or successor trustee;
    3. A mutually granted power of attorney for purposes of health care or financial management;
    4. Proof showing that one declarant is authorized to sign for purposes of the other declarant’s bank or credit account;
    5. Proof of a joint bank or credit account;
E. Currently share a primary residence within Moab city limits. For these purposes, “primary residence” means the place where both declarants reside. The legal right to occupy the residence need not be joint; and
F. Execute a declaration of mutual commitment, attesting to the foregoing requirements and attesting that the parties are in a relationship of mutual commitment, support and caring, that they are responsible for each other’s physical and financial welfare, and that they have the intention to remain in that relationship. (Ord. 13-18 (part), 2013)

9.44.030 Declaration of mutual commitment.
A. Mutual commitment declarants shall make an official record of their relationships by executing a declaration of mutual commitment on the form prescribed by the City.
B. The declaration must include a statement that the persons are in a relationship of mutual commitment, support and caring and are responsible for each other’s welfare.
C. The declaration must include a statement that both persons agree to file a notice of the termination of the relationship if there is a change in the status of their relationship such that they cease to meet the criteria of the mutual commitment registry.
D. The sworn declaration shall include the date on which the mutual commitment was registered, the mailing address(es) of both declarants, and the notarized signatures of both declarants. The declaration shall further state that the declarants meet all the criteria for the mutual commitment registry set forth in Section 9.44.020.
E. The City shall have no duty to verify the information provided by the individuals filing the declaration of mutual commitment. (Ord. 13-18 (part), 2013)

9.44.040 Termination of mutual commitment.
A mutual commitment ends when:
A. Either of the declarants dies; or
B. One or both declarants execute a notice of termination, stating that one or more of the criteria listed in Section 9.44.020 no longer applies. If only one of the declarants executes the notice of termination, then that declarant shall attest to the fact that he or she has sent a copy of the notice of termination to the other declarant at the other declarant’s last known address. This notice requirement does not apply if the termination of the mutual commitment is due to the death of one of the declarants.
C. A person cannot register a mutual commitment until at least six months after any other mutual commitment of which he or she was a declarant ended and a notice that the mutual commitment ended was given. This does not apply if the earlier mutual commitment ended because one of the individuals died. (Ord. 13-18 (part), 2013)

9.44.050 Registration, fee and amendment.
A. The City Recorder’s office will keep a record of all declarations of mutual commitment and of all notices terminating a mutual commitment.
B. The fee for filing a declaration of mutual commitment shall be twenty-five dollars. The payment of this fee entitles the persons filing the declaration of mutual commitment to two certified copies of the official declaration.
C. No fee will be charged for filing a notice terminating a mutual commitment.
D. An amendment to a declaration may be filed by a declarant with the City Recorder’s office at any time to show a change in his or her mailing address. The record will be maintained so that amendments and notices terminating a mutual commitment are filed with the declaration of mutual commitment to which they apply. (Ord. 13-18 (part), 2013)

9.44.060 Privileges and benefits.
A. Use and Access to City Facilities and Programs. All facilities owned and operated by the City, including but not limited to recreational facilities and programs, shall allow those listed on the mutual commitment registry, and his or her children, to be included in the privileges and benefits accorded a spouse and children for the purpose of access to city facilities and programs. For employee health insurance, benefits shall be provided within the parameters of the City’s in-effect health insurance contract.
B. Other Benefits. The City may, from time to time, be requested by the City Council or administration or private employers within the City to have the registry act as verification of mutual commitment status for other benefits which meet the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and welfare of its citizens. Such requests may be granted by the City Council. (Ord. 13-18 (part), 2013)

Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC

Chapters:
10.04        Vehicle Code
10.08        Bicycles
10.12        Disabled Parking Zones

Chapter 10.04 VEHICLE CODE

Sections:
10.04.010    Adoption by reference.
10.04.020    Definitions.
10.04.030    Yield intersections--Erection of signs.
10.04.040    Intoxication and consumption about motor vehicle.
10.04.050    Emergency removal of parked vehicle.
10.04.060    U-turns.
10.04.070    Proper lookout required.
10.04.080    Driving or riding on sidewalk--Exception.
10.04.090    Prima facie speed limit.
10.04.100    Traffic control generally.
10.04.110    Angle parking.
10.04.120    Through streets--Designation.
10.04.130    Stop intersections--Designation.
10.04.140    Yield intersections--Designation.
10.04.150    Stop entrances--Designated.
10.04.160    Parking or blocking streets or highways.
10.04.170    Unlawful parking--Parking at curb.
10.04.180    Unlawful parking--Vehicle for sale.
10.04.190    Unlawful parking--Loading zone.
10.04.200    Unlawful parking--Prohibited where--Exception.
10.04.210    Unlawful parking--Alleys.
10.04.220    Unlawful parking--Cab and bus stands.
10.04.230    Unlawful parking, idling or camping.
10.04.240    Citation to code.
10.04.250    Violation--Penalty.

10.04.010 Adoption by reference.
All of Chapter 41, Title 31, and all of Chapters 1, 2, 6, 7, 8, 21, 22, and 24 of Title 41, Utah Code Annotated, as amended by the 1983 Utah State Legislature, particularly by Senate Bill 7 and House Bills 142, 143 and 146, together with all amendments and additions that may hereafter be made, are enacted approved and adopted as a part of this section to form the traffic code for this municipality, except as hereinafter specified, and by this reference are made a part of this chapter to the same extent and effect as though such code were copied herein in full. Three copies of the laws adopted by reference shall be filed for use and examination in the office of the City Recorder. (Ord. 83-03 § 2, 1983: prior code § 14-1)

10.04.020 Definitions.
Unless the context otherwise requires, all references in the traffic code to:
“Block” means the distance on both sides of a street between two intersecting streets.
“Inoperative vehicle” is defined as any vehicle that is unlicensed or unregistered, and/or is unable to be operated because of needed mechanical or other physical repairs.
“Local authorities” means the governing body of this municipality.
“Magistrate” means the justice of the peace or judge of the municipality.
“Recreational vehicle (RV)” means a vehicle other than a mobile home, primarily designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational or vacation use, which is either a self-propelled motor vehicle or pulled by another vehicle. The term “recreational vehicle” also includes a boat, a snowmobile, personal watercraft, an all-terrain vehicle, or off-highway vehicle, a travel trailer, a camping trailer, a motor home, a fifth wheel trailer, trailers, and other similar vehicles.
“The State Road Commission” or “State Department of Transportation” means the municipality and its officers, departments, agencies and agents.
“Trailer” means any truck trailer or other trailer designed or adapted primarily for the transportation of materials, debris, or property of whatever kind, including, without limitation, boats, personal watercraft, snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles, or motorcycles, whether occupied or empty.
“Travel trailer,” “camping trailer,” or “fifth wheel trailer” means a portable vehicle without motive power, whether occupied or empty, designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational or vacation use that does not require a special highway movement permit when drawn by a self-propelled motor vehicle. (Ord. 18-02 (part), 2018: Ord. 10-02, 2010; Ord. 83-03 § 3, 1983: Ord. 4-79 § 1(B), 1979)

10.04.030 Yield intersections--Erection of signs.
The City street department shall erect and maintain a yield sign at all yield entrances to intersections. (Prior code § 14-9)

10.04.040 Intoxication and consumption about motor vehicle.
A. It is unlawful for any person under the influence of intoxicating liquor or narcotic drugs to be in or about any vehicle with the intention of driving or operating such vehicle.
B. It is unlawful for any person to drink any intoxicating liquor or partake of any narcotic drug in a motor vehicle on the streets or alleys of the City. (Prior code § 14-10)

10.04.050 Emergency removal of parked vehicle.
Members of the police, street and fire departments may remove any vehicle parked in the streets upon the existing of such emergency as requires such action. (Prior code § 14-11)

10.04.060 U-turns.
The driver of any vehicle shall not make a U-turn where there is a “NO U-TURN” sign posted. (Prior code § 14-12)

10.04.070 Proper lookout required.
No person shall drive a vehicle on the streets of the City without keeping a reasonable and proper lookout for other traffic. (Prior code § 14-13)

10.04.080 Driving or riding on sidewalk--Exception.
It is unlawful for any person to drive, back, ride, or cause to be driven, backed or ridden any vehicle upon, over or across any public curbing or public sidewalk in the City; provided, however, that a vehicle may be driven, backed, or ridden over and across a public sidewalk at any duly constructed or prepared driveway. (Prior code § 14-14)

10.04.090 Prima facie speed limit.
A. When appropriate traffic control or regulatory signs giving notice of speeds are posted, the prima facie maximum speed limits designated upon said signs shall apply to the appropriate streets or portions of streets so posted.
B. In the absence of any speed limit sign designating a speed limit applicable thereto, the prima facie speed limit shall be thirty miles per hour. (Ord. 4-79 § 3, 1979: prior code § 14-15 (Schedule 1))

10.04.100 Traffic control generally.
The traffic control and regulation of all public streets shall be as posted, regulated or controlled by appropriate traffic control devices, signs or other regulatory devices or controls. (Ord. 4-79 § 4, 1979)

10.04.110 Angle parking.
A. All parking within the City shall be parallel except as may by ordinance following public hearing be designated as angle parking, provided that angle parking shall not be permitted on any state highway without the permission of the State Department of Transportation.
B. The City Engineer shall prepare and maintain a master parking map which shall show all designated parking zones within the City which map shall be referred to and modified by all ordinances establishing or disestablishing angle parking zones. (Ord. 84-08 § 1, 1984: prior code § 14-15 (Schedule 2))

10.04.120 Through streets--Designation.
Through streets shall be as set by council. (Prior code § 14-15 (Schedule 3))

10.04.130 Stop intersections--Designation.
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, the intersections constituting stop intersections are as set by council. (Prior code § 14-15 (Schedule 4))

10.04.140 Yield intersections--Designation.
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, the intersections constituting yield intersections are as set by council. (Prior code § 14-15 (Schedule 5))

10.04.150 Stop entrances--Designated.
When appropriate traffic control or regulatory signs are posted at entrances to intersections identifying them as stop or yield entrances, such streets are declared to be stop entrances as designated by the signs. (Ord. 4-79 § 6, 1979)

10.04.160 Parking or blocking streets or highways.
In addition to the parking provisions contained in the Utah Traffic Code, as adopted by this municipality, it is unlawful for any person to:
A. Remain standing, lying or sitting on any street or highway in such a manner as to obstruct the free passage of vehicular or pedestrian traffic thereon;
B. Wilfully remain standing, lying or sitting on any street or highway in such manner for more than one minute after being requested to move by any police officer;
C. Wilfully remain on such street or highway in such manner as to obstruct the free passage of any person or vehicle into or out of any property abutting upon the street or highway or any property having access to such street or highway. (Ord. 4-79 § 7, 1979)

10.04.170 Unlawful parking--Parking at curb.
No motor vehicle shall be parked with the left side of the vehicle next to the curb, except on one-way streets. It is unlawful to stand or park any motor vehicle in a street other than parallel with the curb and with the two rear wheels of the vehicle within twelve inches of the regularly established curbline except on those streets which have been marked for angle parking; then vehicles shall be parked at the angle to the curb indicated by such marks. (Ord. 4-79 § 5(A), 1979)

10.04.180 Unlawful parking--Vehicle for sale.
It is unlawful to park any vehicle on any street for the purpose of displaying it for sale, or to park any vehicle from which merchandise is peddled on any business street. (Ord. 4-79 § 5(B), 1979)

10.04.190 Unlawful parking--Loading zone.
When so posted, it is unlawful for the driver of a passenger vehicle to stand or park such vehicle for a period of time longer than is permitted by the posted sign for the loading or unloading of passengers, or for the driver to stand or park any freight-carrying motor vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary to load, unload and deliver materials in any place designated as a loading zone and marked as such. (Ord. 4-79 § 5(C), 1979)

10.04.200 Unlawful parking--Prohibited where--Exception.
It is unlawful for any person, except physicians on emergency calls or designated emergency vehicles when properly posted, to park any motor vehicle on any street in violation of the posted restrictions. (Ord. 4-79 § 5(D), 1979)

10.04.210 Unlawful parking--Alleys.
No person shall park a motor vehicle within an alley in such manner or under such conditions as to leave less than ten feet of the width of the roadway available for the free movement of vehicular traffic. No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property. (Ord. 4-79 § 5(E), 1979)

10.04.220 Unlawful parking--Cab and bus stands.
No motor vehicle other than a licensed taxicab shall be parked in any area designated by ordinance as a taxicab stand and no vehicle other than a bus shall be parked in a place so designated as a bus loading zone. (Ord. 4-79 § 5(F), 1979)

10.04.230 Unlawful parking, idling or camping.
A. Definitions. As used in this section:
    1. “Block” means the distance on both sides of a street between two intersecting streets.
    2. “Commercial vehicle” means a motor vehicle in excess of one-ton capacity of whatever make or type designed for or adapted to commercial or agricultural purposes, regardless of the use to which such vehicle is put at any particular time. The term “commercial vehicle” includes, without limitation, all so-called “semi” truck tractors and “semi” truck-trailers, as well as motorized equipment, such as loaders, backhoes, excavators, or the like.
    3. “Idling” means running an engine on a motor vehicle while parked.
    4. “Public street” means any right-of-way owned by the City of Moab, Grand County or Utah Department of Transportation (UDOT) within the City limits of Moab. This includes roads, streets and alleys.
    5. “Recreational vehicle (RV)” means a vehicle other than a mobile home, primarily designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational or vacation use, which is either a self-propelled motor vehicle or pulled by another vehicle. The term “recreational vehicle” also includes a boat, a snowmobile, personal watercraft, an all-terrain vehicle, or off-highway vehicle, a travel trailer, a camping trailer, a motor home, a fifth wheel trailer, trailers, and other similar vehicles.
    6. “Running” means any vehicle, as defined in this section, parked with a generator or refrigeration unit in operation.
    7. “Trailer” means any truck trailer or other trailer designed or adapted primarily for the transportation of materials, debris, or property of whatever kind, including, without limitation, boats, personal watercraft, snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles, or motorcycles, whether occupied or empty.
    8. “Travel trailer,” “camping trailer,” or “fifth wheel trailer” means a portable vehicle without motive power, whether occupied or empty, designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational or vacation use that does not require a special highway movement permit when drawn by a self-propelled motor vehicle.
B. Idling or Running Prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to park while idling or running, any motor vehicle, commercial vehicle, or recreational vehicle as defined in this section on any public road, street, alley or municipal property for a period of time in excess of four consecutive hours. Any vehicle parked or left standing in violation of this subsection may be impounded or removed by any certified peace officer or other designated official, and the owner may be fined as provided in this chapter.
C. Idling or Running Overnight Prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to park while idling or running any motor vehicle, commercial vehicle or recreational vehicle on any public road, street, alley, or municipal property for any length of time between the hours of ten p.m. and seven a.m. Any vehicle so parked or left standing in violation of this subsection may be impounded or removed by any certified peace officer or other designated official, and the owner may be fined as provided in this chapter.
D. Camping Prohibited. It is unlawful to park any motor vehicle, commercial vehicle, or recreational vehicle on a public road, street, alley, or private property, for purposes of human habitation or overnight camping. Any vehicle parked in violation of this subsection for a period exceeding four consecutive hours may be impounded or removed by any on duty peace officer, or other designated official, and the owner may be fined as provided in this chapter.
    1. Vehicles moved from a parking spot and then reparked on the same block, as defined in this section, within twenty-four hours from the time of removal shall be deemed to have been continuously parked for the purposes of this subsection.
E. Impoundment. For purposes of impoundment and removal, a certified peace officer, or other designated official, may, after placing a visible notification on the vehicle and making a reasonable effort to locate the owner, impound and remove any motor vehicle which has been unmoved for four consecutive hours. The cost of impoundment and removal shall be charged to the owner or any person who claims the impounded motor vehicle.
F. Ownership. The presence of any motor vehicle, commercial vehicle, or recreational vehicle when parked in violation of this section is prima facie evidence that the registered owner or lessee of such vehicle parked the same, or that the driver was acting as the agent of the owner or lessee.
G. Relocation. No motor vehicle, commercial vehicle, or recreational vehicle that has been the subject of a violation of this section shall be subsequently relocated or parked on the same block where the violation occurred for a period of one hundred eighty days from the date of violation. Relocation or parking of the vehicle in violation of this subsection shall be a separate violation.
H. Continuing Violations. In the case of a continuing violation under this section, each day of violation shall be deemed a separate offense.
I. Exception. The prohibitions in this section shall not apply to vehicles under continuous human operation in connection with construction activities, or vehicles left temporarily idling or running in connection with deliveries.
J. Conflicting Ordinances. This section shall control and take precedence over any conflicting provisions in this code concerning parking or storage of vehicles. (Ord. 18-02 (part), 2018: Ord. 17-35, 2017)
Editor’s note: Ord. No. 10-02, adopted February 23, 2010, repealed the former § 10.04.230, and enacted a new § 10.04.230 as set out herein. The former § 10.04.230 pertained to unlawful parking; vehicles left standing for more than forty-eight hours and overnight camping in vehicles and derived from Ord. No. 4-79, 1979 and Ord. No. 93-02, 1993.

10.04.240 Citation to code.
Where a citation or complaint is issued, it shall be sufficient to use the number of the Utah Code followed by “the ordinances of Moab” to show the section of the ordinance of the City which has been violated. (Ord. 4-79 § 2, 1979)

10.04.250 Violation--Penalty.
Any person violating, causing or permitting a violation of any provision of this chapter or the provisions adopted or incorporated by reference shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars or by a jail sentence not to exceed six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 86-06 § 12, 1986: Ord. 4-79 § 8, 1979: prior code § 14-16)

Chapter 10.08 BICYCLES

Sections:
10.08.010    Definitions.
10.08.020    Dealers--Record of sale.
10.08.030    Dealers--Completion and delivery of registration certificate.
10.08.040    Dealers--Attachment of registration insignia.
10.08.050    Dealers--Sale of cycles bearing no serial or frame number prohibited.
10.08.060    Registration of cycles not bought from dealer.
10.08.070    Sale of previously registered cycles.
10.08.080    Registration of currently owned cycles not previously registered.
10.08.090    Malicious destruction of serial or frame number prohibited.
10.08.100    Violation-Penalty.

10.08.010 Definitions.
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following words shall have the meanings stated in this section:
A. “Cycle” means a device upon which any person may ride propelled by human power through a belt, chain or gears and having one or more wheels in tandem or other arrangement. Cycles with wheels of at least twenty inches in diameter and frame size of at least fourteen inches shall be mandatorily subject to this chapter. Other cycles may be registered by the owner at his option.
B. “Cycle dealer” means any person engaged in buying, selling, bartering and exchanging cycles, whether dealing exclusively in cycles or in conjunction with other wares, goods and merchandise.
C. “Sale” means all transactions wherein ownership of a cycle is transferred from one person to another whether by sale, exchange, gift or other means. (Prior code § 14-19)

10.08.020 Dealers--Record of sale.
All cycle dealers engaged in the business of selling cycles within the limits of the City shall make and maintain a record of all sales containing the following information:
A. The name and address of the cycle dealer;
B. The name and address of the purchaser;
C. The serial or frame number, brand name, model, number of speeds, frame size, wheel size, color, whether new or used, whether a men’s or ladies’ make and such other descriptive items as will assist in identifying the cycle;
D. Additionally, the record shall include the coded NCIC Agency Identifier number of the area in which the cycle was sold and the registration number. (Prior code § 14-20)

10.08.030 Dealers--Completion and delivery of registration certificate.
A. All cycle dealers at the time of sale of a cycle shall complete a cycle registration certificate in triplicate which shall bear the coded NCIC Agency Identifier number of the area of sale and the registration number of the cycle. The certificate of registration shall bear the information required by Section 10.08.020 and for which provision is made upon the registration form and shall bear the signature of the dealer and date of issuance.
B. The dealer shall deliver a copy of such registration certificate to the buyer, shall retain a copy for the dealer’s files and shall on or before the tenth day of the month following the date of sale, deliver or mail the original certificate of registration to the office of the City Recorder.
C. The dealer shall acquire registration certificate forms from the City bearing the requisite NCIC Agency Identifier numbers and registration numbers, together with the registration insignia described in this chapter. (Prior code § 14-21)

10.08.040 Dealers--Attachment of registration insignia.
All cycle dealers shall at the time of sale of a cycle, attach to the down tube of the frame of the cycle, a registration insignia provided to the dealer by the City for that purpose. Such registration insignia shall bear the applicable NCIC Agency Identifier number and the registration number of the cycle. Such numbers shall coincide with the numbers appearing upon the registration certificate required by this chapter. (Prior code § 14-22)

10.08.050 Dealers--Sale of cycles bearing no serial or frame number prohibited.
No cycle dealer shall sell or deliver a cycle which does not bear a serial number on its frame. Whenever the cycle has no serial or frame number, the dealer shall stamp or have stamped on the frame the registration number that is to be issued for that cycle and the NCIC Agency Identifier number of the political subdivision regulating the dealer. (Prior code § 14-23)

10.08.060 Registration of cycles not bought from dealer.
In the event that an owner acquires a cycle other than through a sale to him by a cycle dealer, he shall make application with the office of the City Recorder in person, by mail or otherwise for registration certificates and registration insignia. Upon receipt thereof, the buyer shall complete such registration form and file the original thereof with the office of the City Recorder. He shall thereupon attach the registration insignia to the down tube of the frame of the cycle in the same manner as required of cycle dealers in this chapter. (Prior code § 14-24)

10.08.070 Sale of previously registered cycles.
In the event that the sale of a cycle involves a cycle previously registered and bearing a registration insignia, the dealer or buyer, whichever is applicable, shall in addition to all other reporting and recording make a record of the former number and make a report of the former insignia number to the applicable city office at the same time that the registration certificate involving the sale is filed. (Prior code § 14-25)

10.08.080 Registration of currently owned cycles not previously registered.
All persons owning cycles which have not been registered pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or of any other predecessor ordinance permitting or requiring registration may apply to the office of the City Recorder for registration forms and registration insignia, complete the registration certificate, file it with the office of the City Recorder and attach the applicable registration insignia to the cycle as provided for dealers in this chapter. (Prior code § 14-26)

10.08.090 Malicious destruction of serial or frame number prohibited.
No person shall wilfully or maliciously destroy or alter the serial or frame number of any cycle, or the registration insignia attached to any cycle which the same is valid. (Prior code § 14-27)

10.08.100 Violation-Penalty.
Any person violating, causing or permitting violation of any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine in an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars. (Ord. 86-06 § 13, 1986: prior code § 14-28)

Chapter 10.12 DISABLED PARKING ZONES

Sections:
10.12.010    Establishment.
10.12.020    Use.

10.12.010 Establishment.
Disabled parking zones shall be provided in such locations in the City as may be recommended by the City Engineer and ordained by the City Council following public hearing. The City Engineer shall prepare and maintain a master disabled parking map which shall show all disabled parking zones within the City, which map shall be referred to and modified by all ordinances establishing or disestablishing disabled parking zones. Such master disabled parking map may be the same map as the master parking map providing for parallel and angle parking. Any designation which includes a portion of a state highway shall also be approved by the State Department of Transportation. (Ord. 84-07 § 1(a), 1984)

10.12.020 Use.
Any disabled person as defined in Section 41-1-49.8 of the Utah code Annotated 1953, as amended and as hereinafter amended, shall be allowed to park a motor vehicle for reasonable periods without charge in metered parking zones and restricted parking areas other than those available for emergency use in a manner as to allow proper access to the automobile by the disabled person. Only those vehicles carrying distinctive (logo) handicapped license plates shall be allowed to park in publicly owned parking zones reserved for the handicapped. All other vehicles shall be subject to an infraction for improper parking. (Ord. 84-07 § 1(b), 1984)

Title 11 (RESERVED)

Title 12 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES

Chapters:
12.04        Streets and Sidewalks Generally
12.08        Sidewalk and Driveway Construction
12.12        Excavations
12.16        Street and Sidewalk Obstructions
12.20        Public Parks
12.24        Tree Stewardship
12.28        Street Numbers

Chapter 12.04 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS GENERALLY

Sections:
12.04.010    Street plan-Official map.
12.04.020    Protection of mapped streets.
12.04.030    Permit to build on street.
12.04.040    Street names.
12.04.050    Street defects-Report and repair.
12.04.060    Minimum clearance of power lines.
12.04.070    Signs-Location and clearance.
12.04.080    Gates which open onto sidewalk.
12.04.090    Removal of earth from streets or property.
12.04.100    Removal of snow from sidewalk.
12.04.110    Removal of barricades prohibited.
12.04.120    Placement of building materials.
12.04.130    Water overflow from ditches or canals.
12.04.140    Water discharge from roof or eaves.
12.04.150    Riding animals or playing games on sidewalk in commercial zones.

12.04.010 Street plan-Official map.
From and after the time when the Planning Commission shall have adopted a major street plan, the City Council may establish an official map of the whole or any part of the City theretofore existing and established by law as public streets. Such official map may also show the location of the lines of streets on plats of subdivisions which shall have been approved by the Planning Commission. The City Council may make, from time to time, other additions to or modifications of the official map by placing thereto the lines of proposed new streets or street extensions, widenings, narrowings or vacations which have been accurately surveyed and definitely located; provided, that before taking such action, the City Council shall hold a public hearing thereon, that such proposed addition to or modification of the official map shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for its approval. In the event of Planning Commission disapproval, such addition or modification shall require the favorable vote of not less than a majority of the entire membership of the City Council. The placing of any street or street lines upon the official map shall not in and of itself constitute or be deemed to constitute the opening or establishment of any street or the taking or acceptance of any land for street purposes. Upon adopting the ordinance creating the official map, the City Council shall direct that such ordinance be recorded in the office of the county recorder. (Prior code § 21-3)

12.04.020 Protection of mapped streets.
From and after the time when an official map has been recorded in the office of the county recorder, no permit shall be issued by the building inspector for any building or structure or part thereof on any land located between the mapped lines of any street as shown on the official map. Any person aggrieved by his inability to obtain such a permit may appeal to the Board of adjustment. (Prior code § 21-4 (part))

12.04.030 Permit to build on street.
The Board of adjustment shall have the power, upon an appeal filed with it by the owner of any such land, to authorize the grant of a permit for a building or structure or part thereof within any mapped-street location in any case in which the Board of adjustment, upon the evidence finds that the property of the appellant of which such a mapped-street location forms a part will not yield a reasonable return to the owner unless such permit is granted, or that balancing of the interest of the City in preserving the integrity of the official map and the interest of the owner in the use and benefits of the property, the grant of such permit is required by consideration of justice and equity. Before taking any such action, the Board of adjustment shall hold a public hearing thereon. In the event that the Board of adjustment decides to authorize a building permit it shall have the power to specify the exact location, ground area, height and other details and conditions of extent and character and also the duration of the building, structure or part thereof permitted. (Prior code § 21-4 (part))

12.04.040 Street names.
All streets shall be known by the name by which they are designated in the official plats filed in the office of the City Recorder, unless such names have been or shall be changed by ordinance. (Prior code § 21-5)

12.04.050 Street defects-Report and repair.
All defects in public streets coming to the knowledge of any officer or person in the employ of the City shall be by him at once communicated to the superintendent of streets who shall cause adequate repairs to be made, and until such repairs are completed, he shall do whatever shall be necessary to protect the public from injury by reason of the defect. (Prior code § 21-6)

12.04.060 Minimum clearance of power lines.
All power, telephone, television or other lines shall have a minimum clearance of fifteen feet above any streets, alleys, highways or other public property used for vehicular traffic. (Prior code § 21-8)

12.04.070 Signs-Location and clearance.
All poles which are used to support any signs shall be located on private property, and such signs shall have a minimum clearance of twelve feet above any sidewalks and twenty feet above any streets, alleys or other roadways. (Prior code § 21-9)

12.04.080 Gates which open onto sidewalk.
No person owning or having the control or management of any alley, road or passageway shall construct any hand gates to such alley, road or passageway so that the gates thereto when open shall project outwardly more than two feet over or upon the sidewalk beyond the property line. (Prior code § 21-10)

12.04.090 Removal of earth from streets or property.
No person shall dig, cut or remove any sod or earth from any street, or other public place within the City without a permit from the street supervisor, or from any premises not his own without the consent of the owner. (Prior code § 21-11)

12.04.100 Removal of snow from sidewalk.
Every owner, occupant, lessee or agent of any property abutting on any paved sidewalk shall remove or cause to be removed from such paved sidewalk all hail, snow or sleet falling thereon within one hour after such hail, snow or sleet has ceased falling; provided, that in case of a storm between the hours of five p.m. and six a.m. such sidewalk shall be cleaned before eight a.m. following such storm. (Prior code § 21-12)

12.04.110 Removal of barricades prohibited.
No person shall remove any barricade erected in front of or about any defective sidewalk or street within the City, or in any way interfere with, change or destroy such barricade, until such sidewalk or street is repaired or rebuilt. (Prior code § 21-15)

12.04.120 Placement of building materials.
No person shall place or pile or cause or permit to be placed or piled any sand, gravel, lime, cement, plaster, concrete or any other substance or mixture or allow the same to remain on any portion of any paved street or sidewalk in the City; or make, mix or to cause or permit to be made or mixed any mortar, plaster, concrete or any other like substance or mixture on any portion of any paved street or sidewalk in the City; provided, that in cases where work is being done on buildings or pavements, the City Council may grant the person or contractor doing such work permission to mix cement, concrete or building materials in tight boxes or tightly joined boards on such pavements or walks under such restrictions as the City Council may deem proper. (Prior code § 21-18)

12.04.130 Water overflow from ditches or canals.
No person shall allow water to overflow from any irrigation ditch or canal, or from any other ditch or canal, upon the streets or sidewalks of the City. (Prior code § 21-20)

12.04.140 Water discharge from roof or eaves.
No person owning, occupying or having control of any premises shall suffer or permit water from the roof or eaves of any house, building or any other structure, or from any other source under the control of such person, to be discharged and spread upon the surface of any sidewalk. (Prior code § 21-21)

12.04.150 Riding animals or playing games on sidewalk in commercial zones.
No person shall drive or ride any animal, bicycle, rollerskates, rollerblades, or skateboard upon any sidewalk in any area of the City where the same is prohibited, except across a sidewalk at established crossings, and no person shall obstruct any sidewalk or street by games of any kind, playing of ball, quoits, marbles, rolling of hoops, flying of kites, or annoy or obstruct the free travel of any foot passenger in commercial zones. Parked bicycles shall not obstruct sidewalks or obstruct the ingress or egress of doorways or pedestrian openings. (Ord. 91-07, 1991: prior code § 21-22)

Chapter 12.08 SIDEWALK AND DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION

Sections:
12.08.010    Permit required.
12.08.020    Conformance with specifications and requirements required.
12.08.030    Adherence to established lines and grades.
12.08.040    Superintendent of streets--Supervision of work.
12.08.050    Driveway construction.
12.08.060    Sidewalks, curbs and gutters required at time of construction.
12.08.070    Motor vehicle access.

12.08.010 Permit required.
No person, either as owner, agent, servant, contractor or employee, shall construct any permanent sidewalk in the City without first having obtained from the superintendent of streets a permit to do so. (Prior code § 21-24)

12.08.020 Conformance with specifications and requirements required.
The acceptance of a permit under this chapter shall be deemed as agreement upon the part of such person to construct such sidewalk in accordance with the specifications furnished by the superintendent of streets as to the character and quality of the work; and if the sidewalk is constructed of cement the character and quality of the cement, the constituent parts of the mixture and the thickness of the walk. No person shall construct any such sidewalk in violation of the specifications given by the superintendent of streets. (Prior code § 21-25)

12.08.030 Adherence to established lines and grades.
No person, either as owner, servant, contractor or employee shall construct, where the grade has been established, any sidewalk in the City unless such sidewalk is constructed to lines and grades as given and established by the superintendent of streets, except where special permission to deviate from such lines and grades is first obtained from the City Council. (Prior code § 21-26)

12.08.040 Superintendent of streets--Supervision of work.
All sidewalks shall be constructed under the inspection of the superintendent of streets or his duly authorized representative. (Prior code § 21-27)

12.08.050 Driveway construction.
No person shall construct any driveway across sidewalk space, or cut or change the construction of a sidewalk, curb or gutter for the purpose of making a driveway, without first making written application and obtaining from the superintendent of streets a permit so to do. The acceptance of such permit shall be deemed an agreement on the part of such person to construct such driveway in accordance with specifications furnished by the superintendent. (Prior code § 21-7)

12.08.060 Sidewalks, curbs and gutters required at time of construction.
A. Sidewalks, curbs and gutters, and street paving shall be installed along all street frontage of any building lot at the time of construction upon that lot unless an exception is granted by the City Council as established under subsection (D) of this section.
B. The location and specifications for said sidewalks, curbs and gutters, and streets shall be determined by the City Engineer.
C. The construction of streets, sidewalks, curbs and gutters will be complete at the time of final inspection by the building inspector unless an exception has been granted by the City Council as established under subsection (D) of this section.
D. In the event that the lot frontage meets all of the following criteria, the City Council may grant an exception where the property owner shall pay a fee in lieu of construction. Those criteria are:
    1. The frontage of the lot exceeds two hundred lineal feet;
    2. The lot is intended only for a single-household residence;
    3. The construction of the street, curb and gutter, and sidewalks is inconsistent with the street character; and
    4. The exception will not create, extend or perpetuate a half-paved street.
E. The fee in lieu of construction shall be an amount equal to one hundred ten percent of the estimated cost of constructing two hundred lineal feet of the required improvements. Those funds shall be submitted by the property owner to the City for deposit into a street fund for future use to develop and repair sidewalks, curbs and gutters, pedestrian trails, and streets within the City. The City Engineer shall calculate the lineal foot costs for construction of the improvements by consulting licensed contractors in the area. (Ord. 19-13 § 21 (part), 2019; Ord. 18-09, 2018: Ord. 13-19, 2013: Ord. 88-01, 1988)

12.08.070 Motor vehicle access.
Access to all lots and parcels of land having frontage on a public street shall be controlled as follows:
A. All driveways and sidewalks shall be constructed in conformance with Chapter 12.08, Sidewalk and Driveway Construction.
B. Access shall be allowed by not more than two driveways from any one street, unless it can be shown that additional driveways will promote traffic safety. The development review team shall determine the appropriate number of driveways.
C. Multi-Household Dwellings of Seven or More Units. Vehicular access for multi-household development of seven or more units shall be designed in such a way as to allow vehicles to pull forward into the on-street traffic flow.
D. Driveway entrances shall be not closer to each other than twenty feet in the I-1, C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4 and C-5 zones and not closer than ten feet in R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, RA-1 and A-2 zones unless approved by the public works department. When the driveway accesses a single-household home that is located on the bulb portion of a cul-de-sac, the drive separation shall not be less than five feet in width at the curb line.
E. Driveway Width. Commercial driveways shall be not more than thirty feet in width in any commercial or industrial zone measured at right angles to the centerline of the driveway unless required by other government agencies such as Utah Department of Transportation. In residential zones, driveways shall be not less than twelve feet and not more than twenty-two feet in width, except that the width for large-scale residential developments shall not exceed thirty feet unless required by an industry standard or other government agency.
F. Corner Lots. On commercial corner lots in the C-1, C-2, C-3, and C-4 zoned properties on Main Street, no driveway shall be closer than fifty feet to the back of curbs along the street that abuts the side property line. In the C-5, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, RA-1 and A-2 zones, no driveway shall be closer than thirty feet to the side lot line along an intersecting side street.
G. Where there is no existing curb and gutter or sidewalk, a curb or fence may be required by the City.
H. Shared driveways may be approved to serve up to two lots. The shared driveway shall only be allowed at the discretion of the development review team, by exception, and provided the application meets the standards and criteria listed below:
    1. The deeds for any lots which utilize a shared driveway shall include all appropriate easements to pass and repass; to install utilities as necessary; to grade, drain, and maintain; and provide slope easements where required by the City Engineer. A driveway maintenance requirement shall be stipulated in the deeds of both lots and shall be presented as part of the application for an exception. Such deeds shall also contain a provision that the driveway shall not be used for access to any other property and an acknowledgment that the City shall have no responsibility to construct, maintain, repair, or replace the driveway or to provide any service on or along the driveway access to such lot that is not generally provided by the City, on or along other individual driveways within the City.
I. Accessway. The shared driveway shall intersect with an existing or proposed city street or state highway. The driveway width shall be suitable in location and dimension for the proposed driveway and shall be not less than twenty feet in width in residential zones and thirty feet in width in commercial zones unless required by another government agency. (Ord. 19-13 § 21 (part), 2019; Ord. 17-37 (part), 2017)

Chapter 12.12 EXCAVATIONS

Sections:
12.12.010    Permit required.
12.12.020    Erection of lights and barricades.
12.12.030    Restoration of street after completion of work.

12.12.010 Permit required.
No person shall make any excavation in any street, lane or alley, or remove any pavement or other material forming any street or improvement thereon, without a permit from the superintendent of streets.
No person shall excavate any sidewalk within the City without first obtaining a permit from the superintendent of streets therefor. (Prior code § 21-28)

12.12.020 Erection of lights and barricades.
No person, by or for whom any excavation is made in a public street for any purpose, shall fail to cause a barricade, rail or other sufficient fence to be placed so as to enclose such excavation, together with the dirt, gravel or other material thrown therefrom, and to maintain such barricade during the whole time for which such excavation continues; and no person shall fail to have lighted lanterns or some other proper and sufficient lights fixed to parts of such barricade, or in some other proper manner over or near the excavation, and over and near the dirt, gravel or other material taken therefrom, and so kept from the beginning of twilight through the whole of every night during all of the time such excavation exists. No person maliciously or wantonly and with legal cause shall extinguish, remove or diminish such lights or tear down or remove any rail, fence or barricade fixed in accordance with the provisions of this section. (Prior code § 21-29)

12.12.030 Restoration of street after completion of work.
Whenever an excavation for any purpose is made or permitted in a public street under or by the order of the department having power to grant such permit, the street shall be restored to its normal condition by the person or department making the excavation, without unnecessary delay, and if it is not restored in a manner satisfactory to the superintendent of streets, although it may not be dangerous to public travel, the superintendent of streets shall notify the person who made the excavation forthwith to make such further restoration as the superintendent deems necessary, and if such person neglects so to do within five days after such notice, the superintendent shall cause such restoration to be made and shall charge such person therefor. Until such restoration is completed, he shall protect the public from injury by reason of such defect. (Prior code § 21-30)

Chapter 12.16 STREET AND SIDEWALK OBSTRUCTIONS

Sections:
12.16.010    Removal authority.
12.16.020    Parking of inoperable vehicles, commercial vehicles, and recreational equipment on city streets.
12.16.030    Responsibility for obstructions on sidewalk and adjacent street.
12.16.040    Sidewalk obstruction while receiving or delivering goods or merchandise.
12.16.050    Sidewalk obstruction by pedestrians.
12.16.060    Obstruction of free passage along street.

12.16.010 Removal authority.
The Police Department may remove from any street, parking, gutter, sidewalk or any other city-owned or controlled property all brush, foliage or other obstruction which interferes with or impairs the view of an intersection or a railroad crossing or which creates a traffic hazard. (Prior code § 21-13)

12.16.020 Parking of inoperable vehicles, commercial vehicles, and recreational equipment on city streets.
A. For purposes of this section, an “inoperable vehicle” shall be defined to be any vehicle which is: (1) not currently licensed for operation on public roads by state of Utah or any other state; or (2) wrecked, damaged, or otherwise lacking in essential parts or equipment for safe and lawful travel on public roads. It is unlawful to park any inoperable vehicle, including trucks, automobiles, equipment trailers, travel trailers, recreational vehicles, campers, all terrain vehicles, boats, or other vehicles (however denominated) on any public street within the City limits, for a period of more than four consecutive hours.
B. For purposes of this section “operable commercial vehicles” shall be defined to include any vehicle which: (1) is currently licensed for lawful operation on public roads by the state of Utah or any other lawful authority; (2) has a capacity of two tons or more; (3) is utilized for commercial or business purposes; or (4) is wheeled or tracked equipment including, without limitation, tractors, bulldozers, back hoes, construction equipment, delivery vans, tow trucks, utility trucks, or equipment such as flat bed trailers, box trailers, or equipment trailers used to carry other equipment. It is unlawful to park any operable commercial vehicle on any public street within the City limits for a period of more than four consecutive hours, except that such vehicles may be parked for a period not to exceed forty-eight consecutive hours where necessary for: (1) individual deliveries or pickups to/from an adjacent residence or business; (2) construction related activities that are the subject of a valid building permit from building authorities; or (3) services provided to an adjacent residence or business (i.e., repair services, landscaping, or the like).
C. For purposes of this section “recreational equipment” shall be defined to include all terrain vehicles, boats, campers, dirt bikes, travel trailers, snowmobiles, recreational vehicles, other recreational equipment, and trailers carrying same. It is unlawful to park any recreational equipment on any public street within the City limits for a period of more than four consecutive hours, except that such equipment may be parked for a period not to exceed twenty-four consecutive hours for purposes of maintenance, cleaning, or readying for departure.
D. In addition to the issuance of a citation for any violations of this section, the Police Department may remove and impound any vehicle found to be in violation of this section. The owner of any vehicle impounded pursuant to this section may recover possession of the vehicle upon payment of all applicable towing, storage, and impound fees incurred or assessed in connection with that vehicle. (Ord. 13-13, 2013: Ord. 00-08, 2000: prior code § 21-13A)

12.16.030 Responsibility for obstructions on sidewalk and adjacent street.
No person owning, occupying or having the control of any premises shall place or permit to be placed upon the sidewalk or on the half of the street next to such premises any of the following:
A. Any broken ware, glass, filth, rubbish, refuse, ice, water, mud, garbage, ashes, tin cans or other like substance;
B. Any wagons, lumber, wood, boxes, fencing, building material, dead trees, tree stumps, merchandise or other thing which shall obstruct such public street or sidewalk or any part thereof, or the free use and enjoyment thereof, or the free passage over and upon the same or any part thereof, without the permission of the City Council. (Prior code § 21-14)

12.16.040 Sidewalk obstruction while receiving or delivering goods or merchandise.
No person shall place or keep, or suffer to be placed or kept, upon any sidewalk any goods, wares or merchandise which he may be receiving or delivering without leaving a five-foot passageway clear upon such sidewalk, and no person receiving or delivering goods, wares or merchandise shall suffer the same to be or remain on such sidewalk for a longer period than five hours. (Prior code § 21-16)

12.16.050 Sidewalk obstruction by pedestrians.
Pedestrians shall not obstruct or prevent the free use of sidewalks or crosswalks by other pedestrians. (Prior code § 21-17)

12.16.060 Obstruction of free passage along street.
No person shall place, leave or deposit upon any street any vehicles, lumber, wood, boxes, fences or fencing, building materials, dead trees, tree stumps, merchandise or any article or thing which shall obstruct such street or any part thereof, or the free use and enjoyment thereof, or the free passage over or upon the same, or any part thereof, without the express permission of the City Council, and then only in accordance with the strict terms of such permission. (Prior code § 21-19)

Chapter 12.20 PUBLIC PARKS

Sections:
12.20.005    Definitions.
12.20.010    Designated--Erection of signs.
12.20.020    Permit for extension--Exceptions.
12.20.030    Violation--Penalty.
12.20.040    Consumption or possession of alcoholic beverage prohibited.
12.20.050    Creation of smoke-free outdoor public places.
12.20.060    Restricted park uses.

12.20.005 Definitions.
“Mass gathering” means an outdoor assembly of one hundred or more people on city-owned property that reasonably can be expected to continue for two or more hours.
“Motorized vehicle” means any motorized vehicle capable of, or designed for, travel on or immediately over land, water, paved pathways or other natural terrain. This includes motor assisted bicycles (electric, gas or diesel).
“Public park” means and includes city-owned parks, public squares, ball diamonds, soccer fields, path systems and other recreation areas, but not designated smoking areas specified by the City.
“Slacklining” means the act of walking or balancing along a suspended length of flat webbing fixed above ground that is tensioned between two anchors. Slacklining is similar to slack rope walking and tightrope walking.
“Smoke” or “smoking” means and includes: Possession, carrying, or holding a lighted pipe, cigar, or cigarette of any kind, or any other lighted smoking equipment, or the lighting or emitting or exhaling of smoke of a pipe, cigar, or cigarette of any kind, or of any other lighted smoking equipment. (Ord. 16-12 (part), 2016: Ord. 11-12, 2011)

12.20.010 Designated--Erection of signs.
A. Public parks in the City, except as otherwise provided, shall be closed at eleven p.m. daily, and shall remain closed until five a.m. of the next day.
B. Appropriate signs shall be erected, giving notice of the closing hours established in this section in each public park.
C. When the aforesaid signs have been erected, it shall be unlawful for any person, except a person excepted from the operation of this subsection, to enter or remain in or upon the premises of any park during the hours of closing established in this section. (Ord. 16-12 (part), 2016: Ord. 10-81 (part), 1981: prior code § 29-1-1)

12.20.020 Permit for extension--Exceptions.
A. The City Council finds that justification for exceptions to park closing hours may exist in the case of activities of groups of citizens when valid reasons are established for the extension of such closing hours and responsibility for removal of litter, trash and debris and the performance of conditions can be established. The City parks department is directed to establish rules and procedures for the issuance of permits consistent with the guidelines of this chapter.
B. Permits may be issued for the use of any part or all of the park after the specified closing time and until a time specified in such permit. When any such permit has been issued, the closing time of the park specified in the permit shall be extended to the time specified. Such permit may require performance of conditions including removal of litter, trash and debris, and in such case shall entitle the applicant to be or remain in such park after the extended closing time and until such conditions are performed.
C. The provisions of this section shall not apply to employees of the department, police officers, ambulance personnel, firemen, or any city, state or county officers engaged in the performance of their duties. (Ord. 16-12 (part), 2016: Ord. 10-81 (part), 1981: prior code § 29-1-2)

12.20.030 Violation--Penalty.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter, whether by act of commission or act of omission, shall be guilty of an infraction, and upon conviction thereof, shall be liable to punishment by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars. Repeat offenders are punished with a Class B misdemeanor, as defined by Utah statute. (Ord. 16-12 (part), 2016: Ord. 86-06 § 14, 1986: Ord. 10-81 (part), 1981: prior code § 29-1-3)

12.20.040 Consumption or possession of alcoholic beverage prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to consume or possess beer or alcoholic beverages within any public park of the City of Moab, except as authorized pursuant to Title 4. (Ord. 17-34 (part), 2017: Ord. 16-12 (part), 2016: Ord. 12-12 (part), 2012: prior code § 17-48)

12.20.050 Creation of smoke-free outdoor public places.
Smoking is hereby prohibited in public parks and within fifty feet of mass gatherings.
A. Exceptions:
    1. This regulation does not apply to smoking areas for employees. Designated employee smoking areas are subject to the Utah Indoor Clean Air Act 26-38-1-9.
    2. No smoking signs shall be clearly posted in every outdoor public place.
    3. Signs shall include the international “No Smoking” symbol. (Ord. 16-12 (part), 2016: Ord. 11-12, 2011)

12.20.060 Restricted park uses.
The following uses shall be restricted as follows:
A. Motorized vehicles, as defined in this chapter, shall be prohibited in all public parks, unless the motorized vehicles are involved in a car show approved by council.
B. Slacklining, as defined in this chapter, shall only be permitted in the following designated areas:
    1. Swanny Park next to skate park on designated posts only (not to use trees as anchors).
    2. Mill Creek Parkway next to the BMX park on designated posts only (not to use trees as anchors). (Ord. 16-12 (part), 2016)

Chapter 12.24 TREE STEWARDSHIP1

Sections:
12.24.010    Purpose.
12.24.020    Definitions.
12.24.030    Applicability.
12.24.040    Urban forester.
12.24.050    Abuse or mutilation of public trees.
12.24.060    Street trees--Private property owner responsibility.
12.24.070    Resolution of conflicts between trees and structures.
12.24.080    Protection of public trees.
12.24.090    Permit required for pruning, spraying, removal or planting trees in public places.
12.24.100    License to engage in business of pruning or removing trees located in public places--Required.
12.24.110    Situations which are declared public nuisances.
12.24.120    Abatement of public nuisances.
12.24.130    Pruning and removal by city.
12.24.140    Interference with planting, maintenance, and removal unlawful.
12.24.150    Replacement of removed or damaged trees.
12.24.160    Penalty for violation.
12.24.170    Enforcement.
12.24.180    Appeals.
12.24.190    Performance evaluation of chapter.

12.24.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote and protect the public health, safety and general welfare by providing for the regulation of the planting, maintenance and removal of trees, shrubs, and other plants within public spaces; to provide a basis for the professional management of public trees; to provide for their enduring viability and safety; and to perpetuate the many contributions they make to the financial, social, aesthetic and environmental well-being of the City and its residents and visitors. (Ord. 08-17 (part), 2008)

12.24.020 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein:
“Tree stewardship” means the ongoing and shared responsibility between public and private entities for the protection, care and renewal of trees and the people whom they serve.
“Planting strip” means the lawn, dirt or landscaped area, or tree well, located on publicly owned land or easement adjacent to a publicly owned street and/or sidewalk.
“Public trees” means all trees now, or hereafter, growing in a public planting strip, or on other city-owned and maintained parks.
“Nonpublic trees” means trees now, or hereafter, growing on private property.
“Top” or “topping” means the inter-nodal cutting back (between existing stem and/or branch nodes) of stems or branches resulting in the severe alteration of the species’ genetic structural characteristics.
“Urban forester” means the Moab City forester who is designated by the City Manager.
“Urban forestry program” means the program and staff which includes the Moab public works department and urban forester charged with the care and management of public trees. (Ord. 08-17 (part), 2008)

12.24.030 Applicability.
This chapter covers all trees located in city and Utah Department of Transportation rights-of-way, public parks and other public grounds owned by the City, and private trees that are a public nuisance or hazard. (Ord. 08-17 (part), 2008)

12.24.040 Urban forester.
The urban forester with the help of the Moab public works department shall:
A. Exercise full control over the regulation, planting, care and control of shade and ornamental trees and planting, care and control of ornamental trees and shrubbery planted in any public street, avenue or way of the City;
B. Plant trees in any public place;
C. Remove any tree or part thereof, dangerous to public safety, or which has become a nuisance;
D. Recommend funding levels to the City Council and have a budgeted line item to purchase trees and fund the shade tree program;
E. Develop policies and procedures regarding the urban forester duties;
F. Issue permits required by this chapter;
G. Establish educational and informational programs;
H. Establish and maintain the street tree inventory data base and mapping;
I. Develop and administer an urban forestry master plan and a landscape specification manual; and
J. Administer this chapter.
Receipt of Gifts and Bequests. The City shall have the authority to receive gifts or bequests from any person for the planting, improvement or maintenance of trees and landscaping on any street, avenue or public property. Such gifts or bequests shall be received by the City Treasurer and conveyed into a special fund for the purposes set out in this section. (Ord. 08-17 (part), 2008)

12.24.050 Abuse or mutilation of public trees.
It is unlawful for any person to damage, transplant, top, remove, or mutilate any tree on public property without the consent of the urban forester. (Ord. 08-17 (part), 2008)

12.24.060 Street trees--Private property owner responsibility.
Any owner of private property, abutting city parking/planting strips upon which street trees are located, shall have the following responsibilities:
A. Periodic watering and fertilization of street trees when necessary to maintain good health and vigor;
B. Protection of street trees against damage caused by lawn mowers, weed trimmers, snow blowers and similar equipment or attachment of any item such as signs, nails, wires, ropes, and chains;
C. Maintain public rights-of-way in a neat, clean, orderly and healthful conditions. This is meant to include weeding, removal of litter, mowing of lawns, replacement of dead plants and the regular watering of all plantings. Senior citizens and the disabled may be exempt from this clause when approved by the urban forester; and
D. At the time a new building is constructed on any building lot, trees and irrigation systems shall be installed along all public rights-of-way by the owner or developer of the property. The location, species, size and spacing of the trees shall be approved by the urban forester. At his or her discretion, the urban forester may waive the requirements of this subsection for residential lots. (Ord. 08-17 (part), 2008)

12.24.070 Resolution of conflicts between trees and structures.
Where sidewalk or curb damage due to tree roots occurs, every effort shall be made to correct the problem without removing or damaging the tree. The urban forester shall be responsible for developing or approving corrective measures in consultation with the City Engineer and streets supervisor. (Ord. 08-17 (part), 2008)

12.24.080 Protection of public trees.
Construction activities including but not limited to excavation, fill, soil compaction, demolition, construction or renovation of any building, street, sidewalk, parking lot, or utility can damage trees and create unsafe conditions for the public. All such work occurring within a distance of one-and-one-half times the height of an adjoining public tree shall be coordinated with the urban forester to mitigate damage to the tree and danger to the public. Protection measures as specified by the urban forester shall be required as a condition of issuance of any required permits and/or certification of occupancy. (Ord. 08-17 (part), 2008)

12.24.090 Permit required for pruning, spraying, removal or planting trees in public places.
A. Scope of Requirements. No person except authorized municipal staff or crew of a regulated public service company or their authorized representatives may perform any of the following acts without first obtaining a permit from the urban forester for which no fee shall be charged:
    1. Plant on city-owned property or public right-of-way, or treat, prune, remove or otherwise disturb any tree or shrub located on city-owned property or public right-of-way, except that this provision shall not be construed to prohibit owners of property adjacent to city-owned property or public right-of-way from watering or fertilizing without a permit any tree, shrub, or other plants located on such city-owned property or public right-of-way; or
    2. Damage, cut, tap, top, carve, or transplant any tree or shrub located on city-owned property or public right-of-way. The Utah Shade Tree Pruning Standards book published by the Utah Community Forest Council and the American National Standard for Tree Care Operations (ANSI A300) shall be adhered to for pruning and maintaining trees.
B. Issuance. Within seven days of receipt of a permit application, the urban forester shall issue a permit to perform (within thirty days of the date of issuance) any of the acts specified of this section for which a permit is required whenever:
    1. Such acts would result in the abatement of a public nuisance;
    2. Such acts are not inconsistent with city pruning and safety standards;
    3. An application has been signed by the applicant and submitted to the urban forester detailing the location, number, size and species of trees, shrubs, or other plants that will be affected by such acts, setting forth the purpose of such acts and the methods to be used, and presenting any additional information that the urban forester may find reasonably necessary; or
    4. The applicant agrees to perform the work for which the permit is sought in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
C. Public Utility Companies. Public utility companies shall notify the urban forester prior to pruning any tree located on city-owned property for the purpose of maintaining safe line clearance and shall carry out such work in accordance with accepted arboricultural standards. (Ord. 08-17 (part), 2008)

12.24.100 License to engage in business of pruning or removing trees located in public places--Required.
No person shall engage in the business or occupation of trimming, pruning, treating or removing trees that are located within the public streets, parking or alleyways of the City without first applying for and procuring a license as provided in this chapter; provided, that no license shall be required of any public service company engaging in trimming, pruning, or removing trees in public streets, parking or alleyways in the pursuit of their public service endeavors. Before any license required by this section shall be issued, each application therefore shall indemnify the City or any person injured or damaged against any loss or damage of any kind or description resulting from the pursuit of such business or occupation. (Ord. 08-17 (part), 2008)

12.24.110 Situations which are declared public nuisances.
The following are defined and declared to be public nuisances under this chapter:
A. Any tree or shrub that is host to a communicable or destructive disease or other pestilence;
B. The roots of any tree which cause the surface of a public street, curb or sidewalk to be up-heaved or otherwise disturbed;
C. Any tree or portion thereof which by reason of location or condition, constitutes an imminent danger to the health, safety or well-being of the public. (Ord. 08-17 (part), 2008)

12.24.120 Abatement of public nuisances.
Upon the determination by the urban forester that a tree constitutes a public nuisance, the urban forester shall give written notice to the owner of the property upon which said nuisance exists to trim, remove or otherwise control such tree in such a manner as will abate such nuisance. Failure to comply with such written notice within fourteen days thereafter is a violation of this chapter. Once in violation, the City may abate or procure abatement thereof, and the expense of such abatement shall be collected from the person so offending. (Ord. 08-17 (part), 2008)

12.24.130 Pruning and removal by city.
The City shall have authority to condemn and remove any tree, tree stump, shrub or vine upon any of the streets, avenues or ways where the tree, tree stump, shrub or vine is dead, diseased or for any other reason undesirable. The City shall have the authority to trim or prune any street tree or remove any tree which has been planted in violation of this code or any other ordinance of the City. (Ord. 08-17 (part), 2008)

12.24.140 Interference with planting, maintenance, and removal unlawful.
No person, firm or corporation shall interfere with the urban forester, public works personnel, or persons acting under the urban forester’s authority while engaged in planting, mulching, pruning, or removing any tree, shrub or plant in any street, avenue, or way or public place in the City. (Ord. 08-17 (part), 2008)

12.24.150 Replacement of removed or damaged trees.
Whenever trees are removed from any public street, avenue or planting strip, adequate replacement or payment for plantings in other public spaces shall be made by the person to whom permission for such removal was given; such replacement or payment shall be determined by the urban forester; and in consideration of permission to remove such trees, the permittee shall sign an agreement to plant or pay for the planting of such replacement trees.
Any person that removes or damages trees installed on city-owned property or public rights-of-way without permission from the urban forester shall pay the City for the replacement cost of the trees and/or replace such trees according to the following basal area formula: The basal area (square inches of a cross section area measured at twelve inches above the ground or tree stump if tree is removed at ground level) is calculated by multiplying the tree’s radius (half its diameter) by itself and multiplying that number by 3.14. Dividing the removed or damaged tree’s basal area by the basal area of the replacement trees will determine the number of replacement trees required. The minimum diameter of replacement trees shall be two inches measured at twelve inches above the ground.
The basal area formula and the cost to buy, plant and water replacement trees shall be the basis for the urban forester to determine the replacement cost of the removed or damaged trees.
If the site does not have sufficient space or an adequate irrigation system for the number of replacement trees required, the urban forester may have the trees planted in other public locations or serve a fine for the replacement cost of the trees.
Any person that removes or damages trees installed on city-owned property or public rights-of-way without permission from the urban forester can also be subject to Section 78-38-3 of the Utah State Code. (Ord. 08-17 (part), 2008)

12.24.160 Penalty for violation.
All violations of this chapter are classified as Class B misdemeanors, punishable by a fine or imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day of violation or noncompliance shall constitute a separate offense and may be prosecuted accordingly. (Ord. 08-17 (part), 2008)

12.24.170 Enforcement.
The urban forester is charged with the responsibility for the enforcement of this chapter and may serve notice to any person in violation thereof or institute legal proceedings as may be required, and the City Attorney is hereby authorized to institute appropriate proceedings to that end. (Ord. 08-17 (part), 2008)

12.24.180 Appeals.
Any action of the urban forester may be appealed to the City Manager. (Ord. 08-17 (part), 2008)

12.24.190 Performance evaluation of chapter.
The urban forester shall collect and maintain all records and data necessary to objectively evaluate whether progress is being made toward the stated goals of this chapter. An annual summary and recommendations for action shall be prepared at the direction of the urban forester and presented to the City Manager. The City Manager shall consider the report and recommendations and take all actions deemed necessary to accomplish the goals of this chapter. These actions may include, but are not limited to, revision or amendment of this chapter or the adoption of other resolutions or ordinances. (Ord. 08-17 (part), 2008)
1Prior history: prior code §§ 25-1 through 25-18; Ords. 92-23 and 96-31.

Chapter 12.28 STREET NUMBERS

Sections:
12.28.010    Street numbers--Required.
12.28.020    Building inspector--Duty to enforce.
12.28.030    Assignment of number--Notification of owner.
12.28.040    Noncompliance--Notification--Penalty.
12.28.050    Street number to be assigned with building permit.
12.28.060    Definitions.

12.28.010 Street numbers--Required.
A. The City Council has determined that the health, welfare and safety of the citizens of Moab require that all residences and businesses within the City be properly marked with a street number.
B. Effective sixty days from the date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, every homeowner and business owner in the City shall be required to display on the front of such residence or business a series of numbers that identify the street address of such home or business. Such numbers shall be no less than three inches high and shall be clearly legible from the center of the street. (Ord. 86-05 §§ 1, 2, 1986)

12.28.020 Building inspector--Duty to enforce.
In order to effectuate the ordinance codified in this chapter, the Moab city building inspector is directed to conduct a survey and identify those homes and businesses that do not have a street address number displayed. He shall then be required to personally contact each of those homeowners or business owners to determine whether or not a street number has been assigned to the home or business. In the event that no number has been assigned to the home or business, he shall assign a number thereto. (Ord. 86-05 § 3, 1986)

12.28.030 Assignment of number--Notification of owner.
All assignments of new numbers shall be in writing and addressed to the owner. A duplicate copy of such notice shall be retained by the building inspector for the City records. In the course of contacting the individual home and business owner, the building inspector shall advise them that the City has passed an ordinance requiring every home and business owner within the City to display a street number within sixty days following passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter, and request they comply with this chapter. (Ord. 86-05 § 4, 1986)

12.28.040 Noncompliance--Notification--Penalty.
A. Following the expiration of sixty days from the passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter the building inspector shall compile a list of all the home or business owners who have failed to comply with this chapter. He shall notify each noncomplying home or business owner advising them that they must install a street number within twenty days, and further advising them that if they fail or refuse to do so that the City will install such number and bill the owner for the cost thereof as provided in this chapter. A copy of the ordinance shall accompany the notice.
B. Should any home or business owner fail to comply with this chapter following the expiration of final notice, the building inspector shall cause the street address number to be installed by the City work crew. Following such installation, the building inspector shall send the home or business owner a bill for the sum of twenty dollars. Such twenty dollar fee for installing the street number is hereby declared to be a legitimate municipal charge and if not timely paid, the City Treasurer shall be required to collect said sum in the same manner as other city bills. (Ord. 86-05 §§ 5, 6, 1986)

12.28.050 Street number to be assigned with building permit.
In all cases when the building inspector issues a building permit for a home or business that has not been assigned an address number, he shall assign a number for said home or business as a part of the building permit. (Ord. 86-05 § 7, 1986)

12.28.060 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter the words “homeowner” or “business owner” shall also refer to the occupant of a home or business. Except when indicated otherwise, notice is proper if made in person or by certified mail with return receipt attached. (Ord. 86-05 § 8, 1986)

Title 13 PUBLIC SERVICES

Chapters:
13.04        Administration and Enforcement
13.07        Creation and Operation of City Stormwater Management Utility
13.08        Connections
13.10        Backflow Prevention
13.12        Extensions
13.16        Service Requirements
13.20        General Use Regulations
13.24        Rates and Charges
13.25        Water and Sewer Impact Fees
13.26        Wastewater and Septage Hauling and Discharge into Municipal Treatment Works
13.28        Drinking Water Source Protection

Chapter 13.04 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT

Sections:
13.04.010    Designation and control of water and sewer system.
13.04.020    Periodic analysis of city water required.
13.04.030    Water and sewer department established.
13.04.040    Waterworks superintendent--Employment.
13.04.050    Waterworks superintendent--Powers and duties.
13.04.060    Waterworks superintendent--Right of entry.
13.04.070    Board of equalization for water assessments.
13.04.080    Interference with city employees prohibited.
13.04.090    Additional rules and regulations.

13.04.010 Designation and control of water and sewer system.
The waterworks constructed by the City to supply the City with water from any source, together with the public sewer system, shall be known and designated as the City water and sewer system. Such system shall be the property of the City and shall be under the sole and exclusive control of the Mayor and City Council, who may from time to time direct the construction of such reservoirs, water tanks, water mains, sewer mains, service pipes, fire hydrants and disposal facilities as the necessities of the inhabitants of the City may require. (Prior code § 26-1)

13.04.020 Periodic analysis of city water required.
It shall be the duty of the Board of health to make or cause to be made once in every three months a bacteriological examination and a chemical analysis of the water furnished by the City through its water system, and report the same to the City Council. (Prior code § 26-2)

13.04.030 Water and sewer department established.
There is established a water and sewer department of the City. (Prior code § 26-29)

13.04.040 Waterworks superintendent--Employment.
The City Council, by and with the advice of the Mayor shall employ a competent and suitable person to care for, look after and take charge of the City water and sewer system. Such employee shall be known as the waterworks superintendent. (Prior code § 26-30)

13.04.050 Waterworks superintendent--Powers and duties.
The waterworks superintendent under the direction of the Mayor and City Council, shall have charge of all water and water sources, water tanks, water mains, fire hydrants and all the equipment and appurtenances pertaining to the City water system. He shall have the direction of the laying of the water and sewer mains and putting in of all service pipes and the regulation of the supply of water. He shall supervise, operate, and maintain the City sewer system. Upon receipt of an order from the City Recorder, he shall turn off water service to property owners and shall perform such other duties as may be required of him by law or ordinance or by his contract of employment. He shall report to the City Council quarterly, or oftener if required, his doings as superintendent, the condition of the water and sewer system, and make such suggestions as the nature of the service may require. (Prior code § 26-31)

13.04.060 Waterworks superintendent--Right of entry.
The waterworks superintendent and his agents shall at all ordinary hours have free access to places supplied with water from the water system and for the purpose of examining the apparatus and ascertaining the amount of water used and manner of its use. (Prior code § 26-32)

13.04.070 Board of equalization for water assessments.
The City Council is constituted a board of equalization of water rates to hear complaints and make corrections of any assessments deemed to be illegal, unequal or unjust. They may, if they see fit, rebate all or any part of the water bill of an indigent person. (Prior code § 26-33)

13.04.080 Interference with city employees prohibited.
No person shall interfere with, molest, hinder or obstruct the management of the water and sewer system, or any of the employees, agents or servants of the City while in the performance of their duties as provided in this chapter. (Prior code § 26-34)

13.04.090 Additional rules and regulations.
The Mayor and the City Council shall make such rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter as may be necessary for the further regulation and control of the City water and sewer system. (Prior code § 26-35)

Chapter 13.07 CREATION AND OPERATION OF CITY STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY

Sections:
13.07.010    Purpose.
13.07.020    Definitions.
13.07.030    Stormwater management utility created.
13.07.040    Ownership of city stormwater facilities and assets.
13.07.050    Utility administration.
13.07.060    User charge imposed.
13.07.070    System of rates and charges.
13.07.080    Billing and collection.
13.07.090    Appeal of charges.
13.07.100    Dumping into stormwater system prohibited.
13.07.110    Obstruction of stormwater flow prohibited.
13.07.120    Enforcement.

13.07.010 Purpose.
The City finds and declares that absent effective maintenance, operation, regulation, and control; existing stormwater drainage conditions in all areas within the City constitute a potential hazard to the health, safety and general welfare of the City. The City Council further finds that natural and manmade stormwater facilities and conveyances constitute a stormwater drainage system and that effective improvement, regulation and control of stormwater though formation, by the City, of a stormwater management utility is required. (Ord. 08-18 (part), 2008)

13.07.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms phrases and words shall mean:
“City” means City of Moab, a municipal corporation of the state of Utah.
“Council” means Moab City Council.
“County” means Grand County.
“Customer” or “person” means any individual; public or private corporation and its officers; partnership; association; firm; trustee; executor of an estate; the state or its departments, institutions, bureaus, agencies; county; city; political subdivision; or any other governmental or legal entity recognized by law.
“Developed parcel” means any parcel whose surface has been altered by grading, filling, or construction of any improvement.
“Director” means the director of the City of Moab public works department or the director’s designee.
“Equivalent residential unit (ERU)” an ERU is equal to three thousand square feet of impervious surface area. This is based on an average single-household residential parcel, which has an impervious surface area of three thousand square feet.
“Impervious surface” means any hard surfaced area of a parcel that prevents the absorption of stormwater into the underlying soil. The following surfaces shall be considered impervious: areas occupied by roofed structures, areas surfaced with concrete, areas surfaced with asphalt pavement, and any other surface type that exhibits similar runoff characteristics.
“Mitigation” means on-site facilities or practices which reduce stormwater quantity or improve stormwater quality.
“National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater Regulations” are the provisions of the Federal Clean Water Act establishing specific permit requirements for the control of stormwater discharge.
“Parcel” means the smallest, separately segregated unit of land having an owner. A parcel has boundaries and surface area, and is documented with a parcel identification number by Grand County.
“Semi-impervious surface” means any surface area of a parcel that retards the absorption of stormwater into the underlying soil, or that causes stormwater to run off in greater quantities that it would from a natural surface in the same location. The following surfaces shall be considered semi-impervious when determined in accordance with Section 13.07.070(D): areas surfaced with road base, gravel, or similar aggregate mixture; natural dirt surfaces that are compacted to such a degree that they do not support vegetative cover on more than twenty percent of the surface area.
“Single-household residential parcel” means any parcel of land containing a single-household or two-household dwelling unit provided that in the case of a two-household unit, the ownership is undivided.
“Stormwater” means water produced by storms, surface drainage, snow and ice melt, and other water handled by the stormwater system.
“Stormwater facilities” means any facility, improvement, development or property made for controlling stormwater quantity and quality.
“Stormwater management utility” or “utility” means the utility created by this chapter which operates, maintains, regulates and improves stormwater facilities and programs within the City of Moab.
“Stormwater system” means all manmade stormwater facilities and conveyances, and natural stormwater systems including stream channels, drainage courses or similar that are owned or maintained by the City and that store, control, treat, and/or convey stormwater.
“Undeveloped parcel” means any parcel that has not been altered by grading, filling, or construction. (Ord. 19-13 § 21 (part), 2019; Ord. 08-18 (part), 2008)

13.07.030 Stormwater management utility created.
There is hereby created and established a stormwater management utility. The utility will have the regulatory authority and responsibility for planning, design, construction, maintenance, administration and operation of all stormwater facilities within the City. (Ord. 08-18 (part), 2008)

13.07.040 Ownership of city stormwater facilities and assets.
The City shall own all stormwater facilities used for the conveyance of stormwaters through, under or over lands or watercourses, beginning at a point where the stormwaters first enter the stormwater system of the City and ending in each instance at a point where the stormwaters exit from the system. Government-owned streets and those stormwater facilities operated and maintained by, or for, the county or the state of Utah shall not be deemed city stormwater facilities. (Ord. 08-18 (part), 2008)

13.07.050 Utility administration.
The stormwater management utility shall be administered by the City’s public works director. (Ord. 08-18 (part), 2008)

13.07.060 User charge imposed.
All persons responsible for impervious and semi-impervious surfaces within the City that contribute runoff to the stormwater system will be responsible for paying a stormwater user charge as set forth in the City’s utility fee schedule as adopted and amended from time to time by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 08-18 (part), 2008)

13.07.070 System of rates and charges.
A. User Charges. The City will impose a monthly stormwater user charge on each parcel of real property within the City except governmentally-owned streets. The user charges shall fund the administration, planning, design, construction, water quality programming, operation, maintenance and repair of existing and future stormwater facilities.
B. Method of Determining User Charge Rates. Stormwater user charge rates shall be set forth in the City’s “utility fee schedule” and will be assessed based on the number of stormwater ERU’s for a given parcel determined in accordance with subsections (B)(1) and (B)(2) below.
    1. Single-household residential parcels: single-household residential and two-household dwelling parcels shall be charged for one stormwater ERU, regardless of the amount of impervious area on the parcel.
    2. All other parcels: the number of stormwater ERU’s for all other parcels is the sum of the values (B)(2)(a) and (B)(2)(b) below, calculated for the parcel:
        a. The total amount of impervious surface area of the parcel measured in square feet divided by three thousand (value of one ERU).
        b. The total amount of semi-pervious area of the parcel measured in square feet divided by six thousand.
C. Method of Determining Amount of Impervious Area. The amount of impervious surface area for all parcels has been initially determined using aerial photography. The impervious surface value for any given parcel will be updated as necessary to reflect changes in the use or subdivision of the property.
D. Method of Determining Amount of Semi-Impervious Area. There has not been an initial determination of semi-impervious area due to the limitations of the aerial photography methodology. If a non-residential customer believes that some of the impervious area calculated for their parcel should be classified as semi-impervious, an appeal may be filed in accordance with Section 13.07.090. Upon receipt of an appeal appealing the classification of impervious area a site specific field determination of the amount of semi-impervious area, if any, will be made by the director using the definitions set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 19-13 § 21 (part), 2019; Ord. 08-18 (part), 2008)

13.07.080 Billing and collection.
A. Enterprise Fund Established. The City Council hereby establishes a stormwater utility enterprise fund to handle all income, expenses and other financial transactions related to the operation, maintenance and improvement of stormwater facilities with the City. All stormwater utility fees collected shall be deposited in the stormwater utility enterprise fund. Monies in the stormwater utility enterprise fund shall not be commingled with or transferred to other city funds. However, the stormwater utility enterprise fund may pay other city funds for serviced and expenses directly attributable to the utility’s activities. The stormwater utility enterprise fund shall be operated according to state law and city ordinances, rules, regulations and policies.
B. Billing. The City’s stormwater system, sanitary sewer system, culinary water system, and solid waste collection system are interrelated services that are part of a unified city plan to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the City and its residents in an environmentally responsible manner. Therefore, the stormwater utility fee shall be included on the City’s regular monthly utility bill for any given property as a separate line item. For developed parcels that do not receive any other city utility services, the owner of record will be billed for the stormwater user charge.
C. Collection. Stormwater user charges shall be considered delinquent if not paid as determined by the procedures established by the City and will be a debt to the City, which shall be subject to recovery in a civil action. The City and the stormwater management utility are hereby specifically authorized to impose late fees, interest charges and costs of collection, including attorney’s fees, on delinquent properties or accounts, as set forth in the City’s utility rate schedule. (Ord. 08-18 (part), 2008)

13.07.090 Appeal of charges.
A. Any customer who disagrees with the stormwater user charge for his or her parcel may apply to the director for an adjustment to the charges. The adjustment request must state the ground for the requested adjustment and must be filed in writing with the director no later than thirty days after receipt of the billing. The director shall review the request and basis for the user charge to determine whether an error was made in the calculation or application of the charge. The director may approve an adjustment to the charge.
B. Any nonresidential customer whose parcel has a minimum of three thousand square feet of gravel or dirt surface that they feel may have been classified as impervious surface may appeal said classification to the director. Upon appeal, the director shall conduct an onsite visual inspection to determine if any portion of the parcel classified as impervious surface should in fact have been classified as semi-impervious surface or pervious surface.
C. An appeal of a director’s decision may be brought before the City Manager within thirty days after the date of the director’s decision. Decision of the City Manager shall be final and conclusive.
D. If an appeal of charges is successful, credit will be applied to all charges from the time of the appealed billing, and will be reflected on a future billing after the appeal is granted. (Ord. 08-18 (part), 2008)

13.07.100 Dumping into stormwater system prohibited.
The only substance allowed to be discharge under this chapter into the City’s stormwater system is stormwater, surface drainage, subsurface drainage, groundwater, roof runoff, or other nonpolluted water. Such water may be discharged only into stormwater facilities which have adequate capacity for the accommodation of such water as determined by the City Engineer. Such discharged water shall comply with applicable state and federal stormwater quality standards. (Ord. 08-18 (part), 2008)

13.07.110 Obstruction of stormwater flow prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to obstruct or contribute to the obstruction of the flow of stormwater into any sump, retention basin, storm drain, curb and gutter, drain inlet, or other associated structural controls that convey stormwater and/or non-storm runoff, unless the obstruction is authorized in writing by the director. (Ord. 08-18 (part), 2008)

13.07.120 Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter may be enforced through the provisions of this code, or by filing civil or criminal actions in the district court as provided by law. The City has the sole discretion to decide whether to file a civil or criminal case for a violation. The possibility of an administrative remedy pursuant to this code shall in no way interfere with the City’s right to prosecute violations of this chapter as criminal offenses. (Ord. 08-18 (part), 2008)

Chapter 13.08 CONNECTIONS1

Sections:
13.08.010    Permit required.
13.08.020    Application.
13.08.030    Permit prerequisites.
13.08.040    Permit issuance--Payment of fees--Installation procedure.
13.08.050    Culinary water meters.
13.08.060    Fire line connections.
13.08.070    Fees.
13.08.080    Rights-of-way.
13.08.090    Barricades and traffic control.
13.08.100    Fees to be paid prior to use of service.
13.08.110    Service outside City limits--Service agreement and annexation.
1 Editor’s note: Ord. No. 19-14, adopted April 23, 2019, repealed and replaced Chapter 13.08, §§ 13.08.010--13.08.090, which pertained to connections and derived from prior code §§ 26-36--26-43 and Ord. Nos. 3-77, 15-77, 87-04, Res. Nos. 06-93, 19-93, Ord. Nos. 94-07 and 01-07.


13.08.010 Permit required.
No person shall connect to the City culinary water or wastewater system or carry on the work of laying, repairing, altering or connecting any pipe, fitting, or equipment to the culinary water or wastewater system without having first obtained authorization to do so as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 19-14 (part), 2019)

13.08.020 Application.
Application for culinary water and/or wastewater connections shall be made in writing by the owner of the premises to be served, or an authorized agent, and shall be accompanied by a plan showing the proposed connection, its size, and the location of all facilities to be connected to it. The application shall be made on the form entitled “Water and Wastewater Connection Application and Agreement” furnished by the City. All culinary water or wastewater connection plans shall be reviewed for compliance with applicable City connection standards and plumbing codes. (Ord. 19-14 (part), 2019)

13.08.030 Permit prerequisites.
The Public Works Department may approve a permit under this chapter only when the plumbing in the dwelling or building to be connected is constructed and installed in accordance with applicable building and plumbing codes. All culinary water and wastewater connections require an approved design showing correct sizing, materials, and, in the case of wastewater connections, proper grade from the service location to the wastewater main. (Ord. 19-14 (part), 2019)

13.08.040 Permit issuance--Payment of fees--Installation procedure.
A. Upon approval of the application by the Public Works Department, clearance by any other City departments, and payment of all applicable fees, the Treasurer may authorize connection to the culinary water or wastewater system. The authorization shall specify the type of occupancy, address, and size/type of the connection(s). All impact fees, connection fees, material charges, and other applicable utility fees are due and payable at the time a building permit is issued for new construction or development.
B. The City will install all connection couplings to the City main culinary water or wastewater lines. Unless otherwise directed by the City, the applicant, at its sole cost, is responsible for arranging for excavation and construction of all culinary water or wastewater service lines from the building(s) to the City connection. All utility construction shall be performed by persons properly licensed to perform work of that type. The City shall be given not less than forty-eight hours’ notice of the installation in order to inspect service lines for workmanship and conformity with approved plans. Nonconforming or defective installations may be rejected. (Ord. 19-14 (part), 2019)

13.08.050 Culinary water meters.
All culinary water meters, whether supplied by the City or supplied and dedicated by the applicant, are the property of the City and are subject to its exclusive control. Unless otherwise directed, the City shall install all culinary water meters. If an applicant does not supply a culinary water meter, the City may order same and the cost of the meter will be due and payable by the applicant at the time of building permit issuance. (Ord. 19-14 (part), 2019)

13.08.060 Fire line connections.
A. All fire line connections to the culinary water system, including those for fire sprinkler systems and fire hydrants, must meet the specifications for line size, passes, and backflow protection as determined by the Public Works Department. All fire sprinkler systems connected to the culinary water system must be installed with a single check valve with a meter that is AWWA-approved.
B. A fire sprinkler system may be connected to the culinary water system using a chemical or antifreeze mechanism; provided, that: (1) the system is installed with a double check valve with a meter and by-pass; (2) all maintenance to such system is performed by the applicant; and (3) the connection meets all approved specifications and plumbing codes. (Ord. 19-14 (part), 2019)

13.08.070 Fees.
Rates for culinary water connections, wastewater connections, fire sprinkler connections, and all other utility fees shall be as set by the City Council from time to time by ordinance or resolution. (Ord. 19-14 (part), 2019)

13.08.080 Rights-of-way.
The applicant is solely responsible for securing easements or rights-of-way necessary to accommodate culinary water or wastewater service. Where necessary, the City may require dedication or conveyance to the City of easements to accommodate installation of public utility lines. (Ord. 19-14 (part), 2019)

13.08.090 Barricades and traffic control.
If utility installation work will encroach upon City rights-of-way, the person performing the work must obtain and comply with an encroachment/excavation permit. The encroachment/excavation permit will address excavation, backfilling, traffic control, and safety measures to be taken in connection with the work. All persons performing utility installation must maintain sufficient warning signage, barricades, and/or signals at or near every excavation. All signage or barriers shall be maintained in compliance with the Utah Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (current version). (Ord. 19-14 (part), 2019)

13.08.100 Fees to be paid prior to use of service.
Before culinary water or wastewater service will be turned on to any premises, all unpaid charges against the premises that are due and payable for culinary water or wastewater service, connection fees, impact fees, materials, or supplies shall be paid in full. (Ord. 19-14 (part), 2019)

13.08.110 Service outside City limits--Service agreement and annexation.
Any applicant for connection to City culinary water or wastewater service for real property located outside the municipal boundaries of the City of Moab shall sign, as a condition for receiving service, a service agreement, in a form approved by the City, specifying the terms of service and providing that, as a condition to connection to municipal culinary water and/or wastewater service, the property owner consents to annexation of the subject property at such time as annexation shall be legally feasible. The City may properly deny an application for culinary water service or wastewater service outside of the municipal limits where capacity is unavailable, or where system requirements, distance, construction costs, terrain features, or the like make service impracticable. (Ord. 19-14 (part), 2019)

Chapter 13.10 BACKFLOW PREVENTION

Sections:
13.10.010    Purpose.
13.10.020    City responsibility.
13.10.030    Plumbing official responsibility.
13.10.040    Certified backflow assembly technician to perform work.
13.10.050    Definitions.
13.10.060    Installation requirements.
13.10.070    Inspection and maintenance requirements.

13.10.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is:
A. To protect the public potable water supply of Moab City from the possibility of contamination or pollution by isolating within the customer’s internal distribution system(s) such contaminants or pollutants which could backflow into the public water systems; and
B. To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections, actual or potential, between the customer’s in-plant potable water system(s), and non-potable water system(s), plumbing fixtures and industrial piping system(s); and
C. To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-connection control which will systematically and effectively prevent the contamination or pollution of all potable water systems. (Ord. 87-02 § 1.1, 1987)

13.10.020 City responsibility.
A. The City shall be responsible for the protection of the public potable water distribution system from contamination or pollution due to the backflow of contaminants or pollutants through the water service connection. If, in the judgement of the City, an approved backflow prevention assembly is required (at the customer’s water service connection or within the customer’s private water system) for the safety of the water system, the designated agent of the City shall give notice in writing to said customer to install such an approved backflow prevention assembly(s) at specific location(s) on his premises. The customer shall immediately install such approved assembly(s) at the customer’s own expense and failure, refusal or inability on the part of the customer to install, have tested and maintain said assembly(s) shall constitute grounds for discontinuing water service to the premises until such requirements have been satisfactorily met. (Ord. 88-02 (part), 1988; Ord. 87-01 § 1.2, 1987)

13.10.030 Plumbing official responsibility.
The plumbing inspection division of the building department has the responsibility to not only review building plans and inspect plumbing as it is installed, but it has the explicit responsibility of preventing cross-connections from being designed and built into the structures within its jurisdiction. Where the review of building plans suggests or detects the potential for a cross-connection being made an integral part of the plumbing system, the plumbing official has the responsibility to require such cross-connections be either eliminated or provided with an approved backflow prevention assembly in accordance with the plumbing code. The plumbing official’s responsibility begins at the point of service (the downstream side of the meter) and carries throughout the entire length of the customer’s water system. The plumbing inspector should inquire about the intended use of water at any point where it is suspected that a cross-connection might be made or where one is actually called for by the plans. When such a cross-connection is discovered, it will be mandatory that a suitable, approved backflow prevention assembly be required by the plans and be properly installed, in accordance with the Utah Plumbing Code. (Ord. 87-01 § 1.3, 1987)

13.10.040 Certified backflow assembly technician to perform work.
A. Certified backflow assembly technicians only shall do the testing, maintenance and/or repair of backflow prevention assemblies. The certified technician must tag each double check valve, pressure vacuum breaker, reduced pressure backflow assembly and air gap, showing the serial number of the assembly, date tested and by whom. The technician’s license number must also be on this tag.
B. In the case of a customer requiring a commercially available technician, any certified technician is authorized to make the test and report the results of that test to the customer, the City and the Bureau of Drinking Water/Sanitation. If such a commercially tested assembly is in need of repair, the Plumbers Law of Utah, Section 58A-2-5(3), requires a licensed plumber make the actual repair. (Ord. 87-01 § 1.4, 1987)

13.10.050 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have meanings as set out in this section:
A. “Approved backflow assembly” means a backflow assembly accepted by the department of health as meeting an applicable specification or as suitable for the proposed use.
B. “Auxiliary water supply” means any water supply on or available to the premises other than the City’s public water supply will be considered as an auxiliary water supply. The auxiliary waters may include water from another public potable water supply or any natural source(s) such as a well, spring, river, stream, harbor, etc., or “used water” or “industrial fluids”. These waters may be contaminated or they may be objectionable and constitute an acceptable water source over which the City does not have authority for sanitary control.
C. “Backflow” means the reversal of the normal flow of water by either back-pressure of back-siphonage.
D. “Back-pressure” means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances under pressure into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source(s) other than the intended source.
E. “Back-siphonage” means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source(s) other than the intended source, caused by the reduction of pressure in the potable water supply system.
F. “Backflow prevention assembly” means an assembly or means designed to prevent backflow. Specifications for backflow prevention assemblies are contained within the Utah Plumbing Code, Chapter 10 (Appendix J), and the Cross Connection Control Program for Utah. All backflow prevention assemblies must be approved by the Utah Department of Health prior to installation. A listing of these approved backflow prevention assemblies may be found in the Cross Connection Control Program for Utah.
G. “Consumer” means a household and the individuals who reside therein which is connected to, and receiving its water supply from, the public drinking water delivery system.
H. “Contamination” means an impairment of the quality of the potable water supply by sewage, industrial fluids, waste liquids, compounds or other materials to a degree which creates an actual or potential hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease.
I. “Cross-connection” means any physical connection or arrangement of piping or fixtures between two otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water and the other non-potable water or industrial fluids of questionable safety, through which, or because of which, backflow may occur into the potable water system. This would include any temporary connections, such as swing connections, removable sections, four-way plug valves, spools, dummy sections of pipe, swivel or change-over devices or sliding multiport tubes.
J. “Cross-connection-Controlled” means a connection between a potable water system and a non-potable water system with an approved backflow prevention assembly properly installed and maintained so that it will continuously afford the protection commensurate with the degree of hazard.
K. “Cross-connection containment” means the installation of an approved backflow assembly at the water service connection to any customer’s premises where it is physically and economically infeasible to find and permanently eliminate or control all actual or potential cross-connections within the customer’s water system; or it shall mean the installation of an approved backflow prevention assembly on the service line leading to and supplying a portion of a customer’s water system where there are actual or potential cross-connections which cannot be effectively eliminated or controlled at the point of the cross-connection (isolation).
L. “Designated agent” means the person designated to be in charge of the water department of the City, and is invested with the authority and responsibility for the implementation of an effective cross-connection control program and for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
M. “May” is permissive.
N. “Point of entry water treatment device” means any device designed to alter water quality which is installed on the consumer’s household plumbing in such a manner that all water entering the household plumbing is affected by the device.
O. “Point of use water treatment device” means any device designed to alter water quality which is installed on a specific tap or outlet of a consumer’s plumbing in such a manner that only water issuing from that tap or outlet becomes affected by the device.
P. “Public drinking water system” means any system which has at least fifteen service connections, or serves at least five individuals daily at least sixty days out of the year.
Q. “Shall” is mandatory. (Ord. 88-02 (part), 1988; Ord. 87-01 § 2, 1987)

13.10.060 Installation requirements.
A. No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or maintained by the City unless the water supply is protected as required by state law, regulations, codes, and this chapter. Service of water to any premises shall be discontinued by the City if a backflow prevention assembly required by this chapter for control of backflow and cross-connections is not installed, tested, and maintained, or if it is found that a backflow prevention assembly has been removed or bypassed, or if an unprotected cross-connection exits on the premises. Service will not be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected.
B. The customer’s system shall be open for inspection at all reasonable times to authorized representatives of the City to determine whether cross-connections or other structural or sanitary hazards, including violation of this chapter, exist. When such a condition becomes known, the City shall deny or immediately discontinue service to the premises by providing a physical break in the service line until the customer has corrected the condition(s) in conformance with the state and city statutes relating to plumbing, water supplies and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
C. An approved backflow prevention assembly shall be installed on each service line to a customer’s water system, at or near the property line or immediately inside the building being served. In all cases, the assembly will be installed before the first branch line leading off the service line, whenever the City deems the protection of the water supply to be in the best interest of the water supply customers.
D. The type of protective assembly required under subsection B of this section shall depend upon the degree of hazard which exists at the point of cross-connection (whether direct or indirect), as stipulated in the Utah Plumbing Code, Chapter 10 (Appendix J).
E. All presently installed backflow prevention assemblies which do not meet the requirements of this chapter but were approved assemblies for the purposes described herein at the time of installation and which have been properly maintained, shall, except for the inspection and maintenance requirements under Section 13.10.070(A), be excluded from the requirements of these rules so long as the City is assured that they will satisfactorily protect the public water system. Whenever the existing assembly is moved from the present location or requires more than minimum maintenance or when the City finds that the maintenance of this assembly constitutes a hazard to health, the unit shall be replaced by an approved backflow prevention assembly meeting the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 87-01 § 3.1, 1987)

13.10.070 Inspection and maintenance requirements.
A. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the customer at any premises where backflow prevention assemblies are installed to have certified inspections and operational tests made at least once per year at the customer’s expense. In those instances where the City deems the hazard to be great, he may require certified inspections and tests at a more frequent interval. These inspections and tests shall be the duty of the City to see that these tests are made according to the regulations set forth by the State Department of Health, Bureau of Drinking Water/Sanitation.
B. Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in water supply lines to provide at least the degree of protection stipulated in the Utah Plumbing Code, Chapter 10 (Appendix J). All backflow prevention assemblies shall be exposed for easy observation and be readily accessible.
C. All backflow prevention assemblies installed in a potable water supply system for protection against backflow shall be maintained in good working condition by the person or persons having control of such assemblies. Upon inspection, any assembly found to be defective or inoperative, shall be replaced or repaired. No assembly shall be removed from use, relocated, or another assembly substituted, without the approval of the City.
D. All backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested within ten working days of installation.
E. No backflow prevention assembly shall be installed so as to create a safety hazard. Example: installed over an electrical panel, steam pipes, boilers, pits, or above ceiling level. (Ord. 87-01 § 3.2, 1987)

Chapter 13.12 EXTENSIONS

Sections:
13.12.010    Master plan of water and sewer works-Preparation.
13.12.020    Cost to be borne by city-Exceptions.
13.12.030    Installation-Application.
13.12.040    Installation-Approval of plans.
13.12.050    Installation-Taking of bids-Supervision of work.
13.12.060    Installation-Cash deposit required when.
13.12.070    Installation-Payment of costs of construction.
13.12.080    Installation-Reimbursement.
13.12.090    Extension of mains not shown on master plan.
13.12.100    Alternative financing.
13.12.110    Reimbursement of connection fees.

13.12.010 Master plan of water and sewer works-Preparation.
It shall be the duty of the City Engineer to prepare a master plan of water and sewer works for the City, including the source of water supply, reservoirs, disposal works and master distribution and collection lines. The Planning Commission shall then review such master plan and shall certify it to the City Council, together with recommendations and comments. After it has received the advice and recommendation of the Planning Commission, the City Council shall review such master plan making any corrections or additions thereto which it deems appropriate. Failure on the part of the Planning Commission to certify the master plan to the City Council within thirty days from the date received from the City Engineer shall be deemed to mean approval unless a longer time is granted by the City Council. The master plan may be prepared in whole or in part, but each part shall be similarly referred to the Planning Commission for its review and recommendations. No material change to the master plan shall be made unless submitted to the Planning Commission for its review, and no change shall be made unless voted upon and approved by not less than a majority of the entire membership of the City Council. (Prior code § 26-44)

13.12.020 Cost to be borne by city-Exceptions.
Cost of extensions of the master plan mains, as shown on the master plan, shall be borne by the City, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. (Prior code § 26-45)

13.12.030 Installation-Application.
In the event an extension of a water or sewer main is requested which would logically require the installation of a master plan main and the City does not have sufficient funds to construct such mains as determined by the City Council, the person requesting the extension may make an application so to do and may construct the master plan main at his expense. (Prior code § 26-46)

13.12.040 Installation-Approval of plans.
In case an applicant under this chapter desires to construct a master plan line at his expense, he shall submit plans and specifications to the City Engineer. The City Engineer shall review such plans and specifications as to design, location, materials and standards of construction and shall approve the plans or approve them upon alterations or additions thereto as required by the City Engineer. (Prior code § 26-47)

13.12.050 Installation-Taking of bids-Supervision of work.
After all plans and specifications have been approved by the City Engineer as provided in this chapter, the applicant for an extension under this chapter at his own expense may then take construction bids and submit the same to the City, or the applicant may request the City to advertise for construction bids. In either case, the City shall at its expense provide the engineering and supervise the work in order to ensure compliance with city specifications. (Prior code § 26-48)

13.12.060 Installation-Cash deposit required when.
In the event that the City takes the bids under this chapter, the applicant shall post with the City Treasurer cash in an amount equal to the estimated cost of construction. The applicant shall then receive “credit” in the amount of the cost of construction of the master plan main. (Prior code § 26-49)

13.12.070 Installation-Payment of costs of construction.
In the event an applicant for an extension under this chapter at his own expense takes his own bids, the applicant shall be solely responsible to the contractor for payment of all construction work; provided, that the applicant shall receive “credit” only for a fair and equitable construction cost as approved by the City Council after receiving the advice of the City Engineer. (Prior code § 26-50)

13.12.080 Installation-Reimbursement.
Any applicant under this chapter who shall construct a master plan main at his expense shall thereafter receive fifty percent of the gross monthly service charge received from users obtaining water or sewer service from the master plan main so constructed; provided, that no reimbursement shall be made in any year in which such funds would be necessary to meet the principal or interest payments falling due on water and sewer revenue bonds then outstanding. In no case shall the applicant be reimbursed for an amount exceeding his “credit” nor shall the period of reimbursement extend for longer than ten years form date of completion and approval by the City Council of the master plan main. (Prior code § 26-51)

13.12.090 Extension of mains not shown on master plan.
The cost of water and sewer extensions not shown on the master plan shall be borne by the applicant requesting such extension, and the provisions of this chapter shall apply thereto; except, that the period of reimbursement referred to in Section 13.12.080 shall be seven years in lieu of ten years. (Prior code § 26-52)

13.12.100 Alternative financing.
In cases where an application has been made to the City for extension of a water or sewer main, whether a master plan main or not, and the City shall be without funds to accomplish such extension, and such applicant is willing to pay to the City the entire construction cost of the proposed extension, the City Council may in its sole discretion elect to accept such funds, construct the proposed extension and repay the applicant the sum advanced to the City over a five-year period in five equal yearly installments, without interest.
The City Council shall be the sole judge of the availability of city funds with which to accomplish any proposed extension and furthermore shall have the exclusive right to determine if such extension shall be accomplished, if at all, pursuant to this section or the other provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 26-53)

13.12.110 Reimbursement of connection fees.
Any person who shall have applied so to do and who shall have constructed a water or sewer main at his expense shall be reimbursed by the City to the extent of his “credit” (less any moneys received from water and sewer revenues), as follows:
Seventy-five dollars for each water connection and seventy-five dollars for each sewer connection which is made into the mains so constructed at the applicant’s expense; provided, that connection fees for such connection have been paid to the City. Such reimbursement shall be made for a period of seven years from the date of the City Council approval of the construction of the water and sewer main. (Prior code § 26-54)

Chapter 13.16 SERVICE REQUIREMENTS

Sections:
13.16.010    Water meter--Installation.
13.16.020    Water meter--Separate meter required for each premises.
13.16.030    Water meter--Injuring or removing without authority.
13.16.040    More than one premises using single service.
13.16.050    Water service pipes--Installation.
13.16.060    Service line maintenance to be by user.

13.16.010 Water meter--Installation.
Meters of the type approved by the City Council shall be furnished and maintained by the City. All water meters shall be installed in a meter box that is approved by the water superintendent, on the curb, except where in the opinion of the waterworks superintendent it would not be practicable. (Ord. 15-77 (part), 1977: prior code § 26-55)

13.16.020 Water meter--Separate meter required for each premises.
Water service pipes shall be so arranged that the supply to each separate house or premises may be controlled by a separate stopcock and the water meters placed at or near the property line. Before water will be supplied through such service pipe, some person shall agree to be responsible for and pay for all water used through such service. (Prior code § 26-56)

13.16.030 Water meter--Injuring or removing without authority.
No person by himself or his household, servants or agents shall open, interfere with, injure, deface or other wise impair the workings of any water meter. No person other than a duly authorized employee of the water and sewer department of the City shall remove any water meter from any premises. No person shall post on any premises any water meter signs where no water meter has been installed, and no person, with intent thereby to evade assessment of water rates, shall state that a meter has been installed upon the premises where such meter has not been installed. (Ord. 19-13 § 21 (part), 2019; prior code § 26-57)

13.16.040 More than one premises using single service.
No person shall extend water or sewer service from one building to another obtaining a permit therefor from the City so to do. In addition to other action which the City may take, the City shall revoke the license of any plumber who shall make or cause to be made such illegal extension.
Where water is not supplied through one service to two or more houses or persons, the City may either refuse to furnish water until separate services are provided or may continue the supply on condition that one person shall be responsible for and pay for all water used through such service. (Prior code § 26-58)

13.16.050 Water service pipes--Installation.
All culinary water service pipes used underground shall be approved by the City Engineer and waterworks superintendent according to specifications as approved by the City Council. Said water service pipes shall be laid not less than three feet below the ground and of sufficient strength to stand the water pressure. All such work, alterations or extensions thereof, together with the size of the pipe, shall be to the acceptance of the City administrator and the City Engineer in consultation with the waterworks superintendent. No extension of service pipes shall be made without first obtaining a permit therefor from the City administrator and the City Engineer. (Ord. 4-77, 1977: prior code § 26-59)

13.16.060 Service line maintenance to be by user.
All costs connected with the repair or cleaning or service lines form the point of use to the water and sewer mains shall be borne by the user. All water and sewer users shall keep their service pipes and connections and other apparatus in good repair and protected from frost at their own expense, but no person, except under the direction of the water department, shall be allowed to dig into the street for the purpose of laying, removing or repairing any service pipe. (Prior code § 26-60)

Chapter 13.20 GENERAL USE REGULATIONS

Sections:
13.20.010    Pollution of city water supply prohibited.
13.20.020    Use of water from wells.
13.20.030    Water use during shortages--Restrictions.
13.20.040    City not liable for damages due to water shortage.
13.20.050    Waste of water prohibited.
13.20.060    Fire hydrants.
13.20.070    Use of water to propel machinery--Prohibited.
13.20.080    Use of water without payment prohibited.
13.20.090    Unlawful taking of water.
13.20.100    Unauthorized turning on of water.
13.20.110    Injury or tampering with water supply prohibited.
13.20.120    Obstructions prohibited.
13.20.130    Injury to sewer system prohibited.
13.20.140    Opening of manhole covers.
13.20.150    Compliance required prior to occupancy.
13.20.160    Connection to city sewer system required.
13.20.170    Sanitary facilities required.
13.20.180    On-site wastewater system failure and abatement.
13.20.190    Privy--Use unlawful.
13.20.200    Wastewater connection, prohibited discharges, and pretreatment.
13.20.210    Graywater systems permitting.
13.20.220    Enforcement.
Prior legislation: Ord. 05-10 and prior code §§ 26-3 through 26-28 and 26-61.

13.20.010 Pollution of city water supply prohibited.
No person shall cause or allow to occur any release or discharge of pollutants which may contaminate or pollute any surface or subsurface source of water for the City of Moab culinary water supply. (Ord. 17-30 (part), 2017: Ord. 17-25 (part), 2017)

13.20.020 Use of water from wells.
No person shall use or permit to be used for drinking purposes any water from any well, except from a well constructed in accordance with provisions of this code or any other ordinance of the City. The City, after analysis of water of any well used for potable or culinary purposes, may condemn and prevent the use of such water if the same is found to be contaminated or unsafe for human consumption. (Ord. 17-30 (part), 2017: Ord. 17-25 (part), 2017)

13.20.030 Water use during shortages--Restrictions.
In the event of drought or any event in which water supply is deemed inadequate, or whenever, in the judgment of the City Council, it shall be necessary, the City may, upon adoption of a resolution, limit the use of culinary water to such an extent as may be required for the public good. (Ord. 17-30 (part), 2017: Ord. 17-25 (part), 2017)

13.20.040 City not liable for damages due to water shortage.
The City shall not be liable for any damage to a water user by reason of stoppage or interruption of water supply caused by fires; scarcity of water; accident to supply works or mains; construction or repair activities; or from any other unavoidable cause. (Ord. 17-30 (part), 2017: Ord. 17-25 (part), 2017)

13.20.050 Waste of water prohibited.
No water user shall waste water or allow it to be wasted due to defective taps, valves, leaky joints or pipes; allow tanks or watering troughs to leak or overflow; run water wastefully from hydrants, faucets or stops or through basins, water closets, urinals, sinks or other apparatus; use the water for purposes other than those for which he has paid; or use water in violation of the rules and regulations for controlling the water supply. (Ord. 17-30 (part), 2017: Ord. 17-25 (part), 2017)

13.20.060 Fire hydrants.
All public fire hydrants shall be under the control of and shall be kept in repair by the public works department, and in case of fire the fire department shall have free access to such hydrants. No other person shall open or operate any fire hydrant, or attempt to draw water therefrom, without special permission from the City, or obstruct the approach thereto. (Ord. 17-30 (part), 2017: Ord. 17-25 (part), 2017)

13.20.070 Use of water to propel machinery--Prohibited.
No water shall be supplied from the pipes of the City water system for the purpose of driving any motor, siphon, turbine or other wheels, or any hydraulic engines or elevators, or for driving or propelling machinery of any kind. (Ord. 17-30 (part), 2017: Ord. 17-25 (part), 2017)

13.20.080 Use of water without payment prohibited.
No person shall take or use culinary water from the City water system except from an approved connection and upon payment of all applicable rates and charges. Any unauthorized water use shall be unlawful and punishable as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 17-30 (part), 2017: Ord. 17-25 (part), 2017)

13.20.090 Unlawful taking of water.
No person shall knowingly connect or cause to be connected any pipe, tube or other instrument to any city or private water line without authorization, or for the purpose of taking water from such line with the intent to evade payment of water service charges. (Ord. 17-30 (part), 2017: Ord. 17-25 (part), 2017)

13.20.100 Unauthorized turning on of water.
No person, after culinary water has been turned off at any premises due to nonpayment of charges, or for violation(s) of this chapter, shall turn on the water again or allow the water to be used without lawful authority. (Ord. 17-30 (part), 2017: Ord. 17-25 (part), 2017)

13.20.110 Injury or tampering with water supply prohibited.
No person, without authority, shall open any stopcock, valve, water meter or other fixture attached to the culinary water system or water supply, or in any way injure, deface or impair any part or any appurtenance of the water system or deposit any foreign object into any reservoir, tank, or other part of the water system. (Ord. 17-30 (part), 2017: Ord. 17-25 (part), 2017)

13.20.120 Obstructions prohibited.
No person shall stop or obstruct the passage of water in any street, gutter or public sewer, stormwater pipe, culinary water pipe, or hydrant. Approved stormwater detention/retention areas, or other similar structures designed to capture and utilize surface runoff shall not be deemed a violation of this section. (Ord. 17-30 (part), 2017: Ord. 17-25 (part), 2017)

13.20.130 Injury to sewer system prohibited.
No person shall injure, break or remove any part or portion of the City sewer system or any sewer equipment. (Ord. 17-30 (part), 2017: Ord. 17-25 (part), 2017)

13.20.140 Opening of manhole covers.
No person shall open any sewer manhole without permission from the public works director. (Ord. 17-30 (part), 2017: Ord. 17-25 (part), 2017)

13.20.150 Compliance required prior to occupancy.
No person shall occupy any dwelling within the City without complying with the provisions of this chapter pertaining to sewage disposal. Any person who shall occupy or attempt to occupy any dwelling without properly connecting to the public sewer or connecting to a lawful on-site wastewater disposal system shall be subject to a cease and desist order from the City or the building official, who shall prohibit occupancy of any noncomplying dwelling or structure. (Ord. 17-30 (part), 2017: Ord. 17-25 (part), 2017)

13.20.160 Connection to city sewer system required.
Except as otherwise provided for in this section, it is unlawful for the owner or other person in possession of any dwelling, building, or structure intended for occupancy located within two hundred feet of any sewer main, as measured from the sewer main to the nearest boundary of the subject property, to install, use, or permit to exist any on-site wastewater system (septic system), sewage holding tank, privy or other means of storing or disposing of wastewater on such property. The City shall cause appropriate written notice to be served upon the owner or person in possession of such premises to disconnect the building from any such on-site system and to connect the building to the City sewer system no later than ninety days from the date of the notice. It is unlawful for the owner or person in possession of any premises within the area described in this section to fail or refuse to connect to the City sewer system after expiration of the time provided in the notice. The City may approve an exception for connection to the sewer system if such exception is provided for in a duly approved pre-annexation agreement between the City and the owner of the property in question. The pre-annexation agreement shall require that an existing on-site wastewater system for the property is subject to inspection and shall comply with all applicable building codes and State of Utah Department of Environmental Quality regulations. (Ord. 17-30 (part), 2017: Ord. 17-25 (part), 2017)

13.20.170 Sanitary facilities required.
The owner of any dwelling, commercial building, or other structure used for human occupancy shall furnish such premises with bathrooms and sanitary facilities as required by applicable building codes and shall at all times maintain the same in a sanitary condition. No person shall dispose of or deposit any wastewater or human excreta within the City, except in a sanitary sewer, or utilizing a lawful on-site wastewater system (septic system) approved and constructed in accordance with the specifications of the Utah Department of Environmental Quality. (Ord. 17-30 (part), 2017: Ord. 17-25 (part), 2017)

13.20.180 On-site wastewater system failure and abatement.
No property owner, tenant or occupant shall permit or allow any on-site wastewater system or septic tank to overflow upon any portion of the surface of the ground; to have its outlet or overflow into any ditch, canal, water course or surface water body; to become foul and offensive; to emit foul and noxious fumes or odors; or to be or remain in any manner dangerous to health or safety of any person. Any on-site wastewater system or septic tank which is in violation of this section shall be unlawful and may be treated as a nuisance. (Ord. 17-30 (part), 2017: Ord. 17-25 (part), 2017)

13.20.190 Privy--Use unlawful.
The use of pit privies for the land disposal of human waste within the City is unlawful. (Ord. 17-30 (part), 2017: Ord. 17-25 (part), 2017)

13.20.200 Wastewater connection, prohibited discharges, and pretreatment.
A. No person shall install a plumbing connection to the City wastewater treatment system without first submitting a written application to the City and paying all applicable connection fees and impact fees. All new wastewater connections shall be reviewed and are subject to approval by the City, which shall verify compliance with applicable codes and construction standards.
B. Discharges to the City wastewater treatment system are limited to domestic and commercial wastewater and sewage. The discharge of stormwater, surface drainage, ground water, roof runoff, irrigation return flows, or sump pumps into the City wastewater treatment system is unlawful.
C. The discharge into the City wastewater treatment system of the following materials shall be unlawful: lye, alkaline materials (pH of ten or greater), acids (pH of five or lower), oil, gasoline, fertilizers, pesticides, paint, garbage, sand, dirt, grease, chemical or industrial wastes, flammable materials, toxic pollutants as defined by U.A.C. R317-8-7.6, liquids with a temperature of one hundred twenty degrees Fahrenheit or higher, agricultural wastes, or any substances which are deemed by the City to be: (1) injurious to the treatment works; or (2) likely to cause or contribute to a violation of applicable Utah Pollution Discharge Elimination System (UPDES) permits.
D. Food service establishments (FSE) that have a potential to discharge cooking oil or grease into the City wastewater treatment system may be required to install and maintain a grease/oil trap: (1) in conjunction with new construction or remodeling requiring a building permit; or (2) where inspection reveals grease/oil buildup or the plugging of a wastewater pipeline.
E. If deemed necessary pursuant to U.A.C. R317-8-8, this chapter, or other applicable law the City may require commercial or industrial customers to obtain and comply with a city pretreatment permit. Pretreatment permits will be determined on a case-by-case basis, and may require the installation of pretreatment equipment or the adoption of best management processes as needed. The City may establish a fee for a pretreatment permit by resolution.
F. The City has authority to enter private property and periodically inspect for the purposes of verifying compliance with this chapter. Inspections may include effluent sampling, physical inspections, and/or records reviews, as needed. (Ord. 17-30 (part), 2017: Ord. 17-25 (part), 2017)

13.20.210 Graywater systems permitting.
A. Graywater systems may be installed; provided, that the owner of the property where the system is to be located obtains a permit from the City pursuant to this section. “Graywater systems” shall be defined to mean a plumbing system for a single-household dwelling where untreated wastewater which has not come into contact with toilet water or human waste is disposed of on site, and not via connection to the City wastewater treatment system. Graywater includes water from bathtubs, showers, clothes washing machines, and sinks, but does not include: water from kitchen sinks, dishwashers, floor drains, or drains receiving chemicals or industrial wastes.
B. Graywater systems shall not be connected to culinary water systems, except where a backflow prevention device is installed and maintained in working order at all times.
C. Notice of the installation of an approved graywater system must be confirmed in writing, signed by the owner and recorded in the Grand County land records as to the subject property.
D. Graywater shall not be: (1) applied to the land surface; (2) allowed to surface after disposal; (3) applied directly to vegetable gardens; or (4) discharged directly into any ditch, canal, storm sewer, or surface water body. The City has authority to issue a permit variance as to requirements (1) or (3) if the applicant can successfully demonstrate the use of technology which will remove contaminants and render the water safe for those activities. All graywater piping and equipment shall be clearly labelled to show that the water is nonpotable and not safe for drinking.
E. All graywater systems are subject to the design requirements and restrictions contained in U.A.C. R317-401. The City shall review and process all graywater system applications, and may establish a fee for graywater permits by resolution.
F. The City has authority to enter private property and periodically inspect for the purposes of verifying compliance with this section. Inspections may include effluent sampling, physical inspections, and/or records reviews, as needed.
G. The use of any unpermitted graywater system or any graywater system which does not comply with the provisions of this section shall be unlawful. (Ord. 19-13 § 21 (part), 2019; Ord. 17-30 (part), 2017)

13.20.220 Enforcement.
A. Violations of this chapter may be enforced as follows:
    1. The City may assess a civil fine which shall not exceed the sum of five hundred dollars per violation. In the event of continuing or repeat violations, the fine shall be capped at five hundred dollars per day.
    2. The City may commence a civil action to enjoin or abate any violation, or compel any person to come into compliance. In any such proceeding the City need only establish proof of the violation to obtain relief, which shall be granted without the posting of bond.
    3. The City may commence an action for damages, repair costs, or recovery of other losses resulting from the violation.
    4. In conjunction with the above remedies the City may add any sums that are owing to the water/sewer service account which serves the property where the violation(s) occurred. Failure to pay the sums owing may result in disconnection of culinary water service to the subject property until such time as all sums are paid, subject to the procedures specified in Section 13.24.050.
    5. In lieu of civil enforcement, the City may prosecute any violation of this chapter, which shall be punishable as a Class B misdemeanor, as otherwise provided by Utah law.
B. Except in the case of an emergency, prior to invoking any remedies under this chapter the City shall first deliver written notice to the person in violation, who shall be given a reasonable period of time, but not less than ten days, in which to cure or abate the violation, or otherwise come into compliance with this chapter.
C. The City has authority, without resort to legal process, to take any steps it deems necessary to repair or abate any condition as to the culinary water or wastewater system which constitutes an immediate risk to public health or safety.
D. In any judicial enforcement action the City shall be entitled to recover its reasonable attorney fees, in addition to any other relief. (Ord. 17-30 (part), 2017: Ord. 17-25 (part), 2017. Formerly 13.20.210)

Chapter 13.24 RATES AND CHARGES

Sections:
13.24.001    Definitions.
13.24.005    Deposit required--Delinquent accounts policy.
13.24.020    Sewer rate schedule.
13.24.030    Special rates for unusual consumption.
13.24.040    Billing procedure.
13.24.050    Failure to pay charges.
13.24.060    Failure of meter to register.
13.24.070    Water meter re-read charges.
13.24.080    Backflow inspection fees.

13.24.001 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter:
“Average monthly winter water usage rate” is defined as the water usage rate in thousands of gallons, calculated annually by averaging the water usage in the four months of November through February.
“Commercial establishment” is defined as any retail, service or business establishment, including all businesses that provide overnight accommodations.
“Governmental entity” is defined as any legislative, judicial, administrative or regulatory entity.
“Institution” is defined as including schools, churches, hospitals, nursing homes and similar institutional establishments.
“Multiple dwelling” or “multiple unit residential complex” is defined as any group of residential units used for domestic purposes, served by one water meter, including, but not limited to multiple-household dwellings, apartment unit complexes, townhouse and condominium complexes, and trailer and mobile home parks.
“Single-household residential dwelling” is defined as any single-household dwelling unit used for domestic purposes, served by one water meter. (Ord. 19-13 § 21 (part), 2019; Ord. 95-10 (part), 1995)

13.24.005 Deposit required--Delinquent accounts policy.
The City Treasurer will determine the need and amount of deposit required for city water, sewage and trash service for all applicants requesting these services. The following guidelines will be used in the determination of the need for and the amount of deposit:
A. Owners of single-household residential dwelling: twenty-five dollars.
B. Tenant of single-household residential dwelling: seventy-five dollars.
C. Small business and retail establishments having an average monthly service charge: fifty dollars.
D. Large commercial and industrial users will pay a deposit in the amount equal to two times the highest water bill for service location.
E. A deposit may be required from any customer at any time if payment record requires one.
F. All deposits made with the City are non-interest bearing. After one year the account will be reviewed and the deposit refunded if payment history shows twelve current consecutive payments.
G. The City will disconnect service to any accounts sixty days or more delinquent. (Ord. 19-13 § 21 (part), 2019; Res. 12-90, 1990)

13.24.020 Sewer rate schedule.
The sewer rate schedule shall be adopted by resolution of the City Council. If deemed necessary, the City may by resolution specify additional (or excess) sewer rates for users that discharge wastewater in excess of that defined for an equivalent residential user (ERU) as to total dissolved solids (TSS) or biochemical oxygen demand (BOD). Additionally, the City may specify an additional rate for any user which may cause the City to incur increased costs for handling and disposal of excess sewage sludge. Costs associated with treating inflow and infiltration flows into city sewer pipelines will be borne by all rate payers. (Ord. 17-30 (part), 2017: Ord. 17-25 (part), 2017: Ord. 99-17, 1999: Ord. 98-15, 1998)

13.24.030 Special rates for unusual consumption.
A. The City Council may from time to time fix special rates and conditions for water and sewer users who use an exceptionally large or small amount of water upon such terms and conditions as they may deem proper.
B. In the event of a water leak on the property owner’s side of the water meter, the City Treasurer, upon approval of the City Manager, shall issue one half of the dollar amount of the water charge during the period in which the water leak occurred with the following conditions:
    1. The property owner must provide to the City a written statement stating when the leak was discovered and providing evidence that the leak has been fixed.
    2. The City waterworks superintendent must deter--mine that excessive usage was not caused by neglect of water lines by the current property owner.
    3. The leak must have produced water usage at or above twenty thousand gallons per month higher than the previous year’s history. If usage history has not been established, evaluation by City Treasurer on accounts comparable to the resident will be made and submitted to the City Manager.
    4. Refunds will be given for the maximum of two months in which the water leak occurred. (Ord. 01-09, 2001; prior code § 26-64)

13.24.040 Billing procedure.
The City Recorder, at the end of each month, shall mail a written statement to each water and sewer user, stating the amount of the water and sewer bill assessed against him and when and where payable. The water service and sewer service charges shall be separately itemized but shall have a single total. (Prior code § 26-65)

13.24.050 Failure to pay charges.
If any person neglects, refuses or fails to pay his water or sewer service charges within thirty days from the date of billing thereof, the City Recorder shall notify the person in writing that the water will be turned off from his premises after ten days from the date of such notification. The City Recorder shall issue an order to the waterworks superintendent to turn the water off from the premises of such person where such unpaid charges are assessed. Before the water shall be turned on again, all delinquent water and sewer service charges shall be paid in full, plus a turn-on fee of twenty-five dollars if during normal working hours, or a turn-on fee of fifty dollars after working hours. The City Recorder is authorized to enforce the payment of all delinquent water and sewer rates by an action in law in the corporate name of the City. (Ord. 87-04 § 5, 1987: prior code § 26-66)

13.24.060 Failure of meter to register.
If any water meter gets out of order and fails to register, the water user shall be charged for the time it was out of order at the average daily rate as registered by the meter when in order. (Prior code § 26-67)

13.24.070 Water meter re-read charges.
The schedule for water meter re-reads at the customer’s request, and changing of the meters, is as follows:
+----+--------------------------------------------------------+--------+
|    |                                                        | Charge |
+----+--------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| 1. | The customer can re-read his own meter and report      | $ N/C  |
|    | the reading to city hall.                              |        |
+----+--------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| 2. | The City crew will re-read the customer’s meter.       | 10.00  |
+----+--------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| 3. | The City crew will test a customer’s meter.            | 20.00  |
+----+--------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| 4. | The City crew will change a tested customer’s meter,   | 35.00  |
|    | at the customer’s request. an additional               |        |
+----+--------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| 5. | The costs incurred for these requests will be paid     |        |
|    | within thirty days. If that bill is not paid, the      |        |
|    | water will be turned off until the debt is satisfied,  |        |
|    | and or a reconnect charge of twenty-five dollars       |        |
|    | during regular hours, or fifty dollars after hours,    |        |
|    | will be applicable.                                    |        |
+----+--------------------------------------------------------+--------+
| 6. | If the problem proves to be the City’s responsibility, |        |
|    | there will be no charge to the customer.               |        |
+----+--------------------------------------------------------+--------+
(Res. 07-88, 1988)

13.24.080 Backflow inspection fees.
The fee to be charged on all backflow inspections shall be a minimum of twenty-five dollars. This rate is effective as of January, 1991. (Res. 32-91, 1991)

Chapter 13.25 WATER AND SEWER IMPACT FEES

Sections:
13.25.010    Definitions.
13.25.020    Applicability, time of payment, and exemptions.
13.25.030    Service areas.
13.25.040    Impact fee offsets.
13.25.050    Voluntary service upgrades.
13.25.060    Calculation of impact fees.
13.25.070    Collection and expenditure of impact fees.
13.25.080    Refunds.
13.25.090    Extraordinary adjustments.
13.25.100    Appeals, enforcement, and judicial review.

13.25.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:
“Capital facilities plan” means the plan for water and sewer infrastructure as required by U.C.A. Section 11-36-201.
“City” means the City of Moab.
“Connection fee” means the costs reasonably incurred by the City, or any authorized contractor, for labor, equipment, materials, and like expenses associated with the installation and connection of municipal utility services such as water and wastewater.
“Council” means the Moab City Council.
“Development” means the construction of a building, dwelling, structure, or industrial facility; the installation of a mobile or modular home; the construction of a campground, recreational vehicle, or mobile home park; the subdivision of land; an application for a planned unit development “PUD”; a conditional use permit application; a building permit application; or any change in the use of land, buildings, or structures that creates additional demand or impacts upon public facilities.
“Encumbered” or “encumbrance” means the pledging by written instrument of funds or moneys collected pursuant to this chapter for the payment of costs of construction or debt service of system improvements.
“Equivalent residential unit” or “ERU” means the amount of water or wastewater required or generated by a typical single residential unit, as determined by the City based upon accepted engineering standards and specifications.
“Impact fee” means a one-time payment of money imposed by the City on development activity pursuant to this chapter as a condition precedent to the granting of development approval and/or a building permit in order to pay for constructed and planned water and sewer facilities. “Impact fee” does not mean a building permit fee, a business license fee, a connection fee, sales tax, special assessments, or other such charges.
“Policy resolution” means a resolution, duly enacted by the City Council, identifying with reasonable detail types of system improvements to be constructed in the future in specified geographic areas of the City and surrounding lands.
“Project improvements” means those improvements to realty constructed in the development of a project and which primarily benefit and provide service to that lot, development, or use, as opposed to neighboring parcels or other uses. “Project improvements” may include water and sewer infrastructure required to be dedicated to the City as a condition for development approval.
“Qualifying improvements” means system improvements that are planned by the City as part of a capital facilities plan or policy resolution approved by the City Council and which are required to be constructed by a developer as a condition for development approval.
“System improvements” means existing public facilities that are designed to provide service to service areas within the community at large and planned future public facilities identified in a capital facilities plan or policy resolution that are intended to provide service to the community at large, as opposed to individual lots, developments, or uses. (Ord. 98-13 (part), 1998)

13.25.020 Applicability, time of payment, and exemptions.
A. Impact fees shall apply to all new development within the service areas defined by Section 13.25.030 unless expressly exempted by the provisions of this chapter. Impact fees are payable in full upon the following:
    1. At the time a building permit is issued for new construction, redevelopment, or remodeling for a change in use of structures already connected to municipal water or sewer services; or
    2. At the time specified by any impact fee agreement or pre-annexation agreement duly executed and approved between the property owner and the City in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. In no event shall water or sewer service be provided to any property subject to this chapter without payment of all applicable impact fees.
C. The following activities are exempt from the payment of impact fees:
    1. The placement of a moved-on structure or temporary construction trailer, office, or similar temporary structure placed upon property for a period not to exceed one year.
    2. Development, however denominated, that does not include a connection to municipal water or sewer facilities and which will not otherwise impact or impose direct or indirect demand on system improvements.
    3. Replacement of a structure or mobile home, or the remodeling of an existing building where the new structure will:
        a. Not be put to a use substantially differing from the prior use; and
        b. Where there will be no net increase in equivalent residential units of water demand or wastewater treatment demand.
    4. Construction of accessory improvements such as fences, barns, outbuildings, utility lines, pipelines, roads, or similar activities. (Ord. 18-07, 2018; Ord. 98-13 (part), 1998)

13.25.030 Service areas.
A. The service areas for impact fees shall be the entire corporate limits of the City of Moab, including annexations subsequent to the enactment of this chapter, as well as all areas outside of the municipal limits which are served by city water or sewer service.
B. Where impact fees are assessed for areas outside of municipal limits the fees shall be payable pursuant to an impact fee agreement entered into between the City and the person or entity contracting for services.
C. The service area for the North Area Waterline South Loop impact fee shall include properties connecting to the North Area Waterline South Loop. Existing customers with city water service prior to the adoption of this fee that connect to the North Area Waterline South Loop will not be required to pay this impact fee except to the extent that such customers increase their peak instantaneous demand after the adoption of this fee. (Ord. 04-01 (part), 2004; Ord. 98-13 (part), 1998)

13.25.040 Impact fee offsets.
A. The City may elect, by written agreement, to allow an offset for all or a portion the impact fees payable with respect to a particular development to the extent expressly provided under this section. An offset may be permitted where, as a condition for development approval, a person is required to install or construct qualifying improvements in lieu of, or in conjunction with, project improvements necessitated by the development.
B. Offsets shall be limited to the increment of reasonable excess costs for labor, equipment, materials, design or technical services, land, and access incurred by a person in constructing qualifying improvements over and above necessary project improvements.
C. An offset for qualifying improvements shall only be allowed against impact fees otherwise due for the same category and type of improvement.
D. An offset granted by agreement with the City shall attach to and run with the lands included within the development application and subject to impact fees. Offsets shall be valid for a period not to exceed ten years from the date of approval or until the last date of construction within the project, whichever occurs first.
E. A person shall not be entitled to a refund of any offset value where qualifying improvements are constructed, in whole or in part, but connection or service by city water or sewer systems is not accomplished due to the abandonment or lapse of the development.
F. Claims, for offsets shall be made in writing within thirty days of development plan approval. Any request for offsets not made within that thirty-day period shall be denied.
G. All qualifying improvements shall be subject to inspection by the City public works director and shall be constructed in accordance with all applicable city design and construction specifications. No credit for an offset shall be given until such time as the qualifying improvements are accepted by the public works director. (Ord. 98-13 (part), 1998)

13.25.050 Voluntary service upgrades.
Any person desiring a water service upgrade to a larger size meter shall be entitled to credit for the value of the existing meter, based upon meter size, and shall only be assessed a water impact fee equalling the difference between the larger meter size and the credit amount, together with applicable connection fees. (Ord. 98-13 (part), 1998)

13.25.060 Calculation of impact fees.
A. Water impact fees for residential and commercial uses shall be calculated based upon meter size and an equivalent residential unit (ERU) basis.
    1. The following schedule applies to residential and commercial water impact fees:
    +----------------------+----------------------+--------------+------------+
    | Meter Size in Inches | Meter Capacity (GPM) | ERU Capacity | Impact Fee |
    +----------------------+----------------------+--------------+------------+
    | 5/8 × 3/4 (std)      | 10                   | 1.0          | $ 478.00   |
    +----------------------+----------------------+--------------+------------+
    | 3/4                  | 15                   | 1.7          | 813.00     |
    +----------------------+----------------------+--------------+------------+
    | 1                    | 25                   | 3.7          | 1,769.00   |
    +----------------------+----------------------+--------------+------------+
    | 1 1/2                | 50                   | 11.0         | 5,528.00   |
    +----------------------+----------------------+--------------+------------+
    | 2                    | 80                   | 22.9         | 10,946.00  |
    +----------------------+----------------------+--------------+------------+
    2. Nonresidential water impact fees for transient lodging including motels, inns, bed and breakfast establishments, and hotels shall be calculated pursuant to the following schedule:
    +-------------------------------------------------------+
    | Impact fee per room for lodging without a restaurant: |
    +-------------------------------------------------------+
    | Number of Rooms × $229.00 = Impact Fee                |
    +-------------------------------------------------------+
    | Impact fee per room for lodging with a restaurant:    |
    +-------------------------------------------------------+
    | Number of Rooms × $330.00 = Impact fee                |
    +-------------------------------------------------------+
B. Sewer impact fees shall be calculated per equivalent residential unit (ERU).
    1. Residential sewer impact fees shall be calculated at one thousand five hundred sixty-six dollars per single-household residence, and other permanent and overnight accommodations calculated per ERU pursuant to the following “Sewer Impact Fee Schedule--City of Moab” table.
    2. Sewer impact fees for business and commercial uses shall be calculated at one thousand five hundred sixty-six dollars per ERU pursuant to the following “Sewer Impact Fee Schedule--City of Moab” table:
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
    |       Customer Type        |   Units   | Minimum | Allowable Units | Fee per Additional |
    |                            |           |   Fee   |  Under Minimum  | Unit Above Minimum |
    |                            |           |         |       Fee       |                    |
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
    | Permanent Residential      |           |         |                 |                    |
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
    | Single-Household           | Residence | $1,566  | 1 Residence     | $1,566/Residence   |
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
    | Multihousehold, 2 Bedrooms | Unit      | $3,132  | 2 Units         | $1,566/Unit        |
    | or Larger                  |           |         |                 |                    |
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
    | Multihousehold, 1 Bedroom  | Unit      | $1,754  | 2 Units         | $877/Unit          |
    | or Smaller                 |           |         |                 |                    |
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
    | Overnight Accommodations   |           |         |                 |                    |
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
    | Per Unit with Kitchen,     | Unit      | $1,879  | 1 Unit          | $1,879/Unit        |
    | 2 Bedrooms or Larger       |           |         |                 |                    |
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
    | Per Unit with Kitchen,     | Unit      | $1,566  | 1 Unit          | $1,566/Unit        |
    | 1 Bedroom or Smaller       |           |         |                 |                    |
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
    | Hotel/Motel (No Kitchen)   | Unit      | $2,452  | 2 Units         | $1,226/Unit        |
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
    | Other                      |           |         |                 |                    |
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
    | Auto Repair                | 1,000 ft2 | $1,768  | 7,000 ft2       | $253/1,000 ft2     |
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
    | Bakery                     | 1,000 ft2 | $1,793  | 500 ft2         | $3,585/1,000 ft2   |
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
    | Bank                       | 1,000 ft2 | $1,566  | 2,000 ft2       | $783/1,000 ft2     |
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
    | Beauty/Barber Shop         | Chair     | $1,566  | 4 Chairs        | $392/Chair         |
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
    | Campground                 | Campsite  | $2,463  | 2 Campsites     | $1,231/Campsite    |
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
    | Car Wash--Auto             | Each      | $12,575 | 1 Each          | $12,575/Each       |
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
    | Car Wash--Wand             | Wand      | $6,288  | 1 Wand          | $6,288/Wand        |
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
    | Commercial                 | 1,000 ft2 | $1,687  | 7,000 ft2       | $241/1,000 ft2     |
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
    | Dry Cleaner                | 1,000 ft2 | $1,574  | 2,000 ft2       | $787/1,000 ft2     |
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
    | Fast Food                  | 1,000 ft2 | $2,825  | 500 ft2         | $5,650/1,000 ft2   |
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
    | Gas Station/Convenience    | 1,000 ft2 | $1,740  | 4,000 ft2       | $435/1,000 ft2     |
    | Store                      |           |         |                 |                    |
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
    | Grocery Store              | 1,000 ft2 | $2,021  | 4,000 ft2       | $505/1,000 ft2     |
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
    | Laundromat                 | Washer    | $1,767  | 2 Washers       | $884/Washer        |
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
    | Office                     | 1,000 ft2 | $1,566  | 4,000 ft2       | $392/1,000 ft2     |
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
    | Restaurant                 | Seat      | $2,650  | 12 Seats        | $221/Seat          |
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
    | Retail                     | 1,000 ft2 | $1,687  | 7,000 ft2       | $241/1,000 ft2     |
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
    | Schools                    | Students  | $1,566  | 15 Students     | $104/Student       |
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
    | Theater                    | Seat      | $1,620  | 150 Seats       | $11/Seat           |
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
    | Warehouse                  | 1,000 ft2 | $1,649  | 10,000 ft2      | $165/1,000 ft2     |
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
C. Sewer impact fees for development with the Spanish Valley Water and Sewer Improvement District, the Grand Water and Sewer Service Agency, or any other service agency outside of the City of Moab service area shall be as provided by interlocal agreement by the service agency and the City, and shall be calculated per equivalent residential unit (ERU).
    1. Residential sewer impact fees for connections in other service agencies outside the City of Moab service area shall be calculated at one thousand three hundred sixty-one dollars per single-household residence, and other permanent and overnight accommodations calculated per ERU pursuant to the following “Sewer Impact Fee Schedule--Other Agencies” table.
    2. Sewer impact fees for business and commercial uses in other service agencies outside the City of Moab service area shall be calculated at one thousand three hundred sixty-one dollars per ERU pursuant to the following “Sewer Impact Fee Schedule--Other Agencies” table:
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
    |       Customer Type        |   Units   | Minimum | Allowable Units | Fee per Additional |
    |                            |           |   Fee   |  Under Minimum  | Unit Above Minimum |
    |                            |           |         |       Fee       |                    |
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
    | Permanent Residential      |           |         |                 |                    |
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
    | Single-Household           | Residence | $1,361  | 1 Residence     | $1,361/Residence   |
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
    | Multihousehold, 2 Bedrooms | Unit      | $2,721  | 2 Units         | $1,361/Unit        |
    | or Larger                  |           |         |                 |                    |
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
    | Multihousehold, 1 Bedroom  | Unit      | $1,524  | 2 Units         | $762/Unit          |
    | or Smaller                 |           |         |                 |                    |
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
    | Overnight Accommodations   |           |         |                 |                    |
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
    | Per Unit with Kitchen,     | Unit      | $1,633  | 1 Unit          | $1,633/Unit        |
    | 2 Bedrooms or Larger       |           |         |                 |                    |
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
    | Per Unit with Kitchen,     | Unit      | $1,361  | 1 Unit          | $1,361/Unit        |
    | 1 Bedroom or Smaller       |           |         |                 |                    |
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
    | Hotel/Motel (No Kitchen)   | Unit      | $2,130  | 2 Units         | $1,065/Unit        |
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
    | Other                      |           |         |                 |                    |
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
    | Auto Repair                | 1,000 ft2 | $1,536  | 7,000 ft2       | $219/1,000 ft2     |
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
    | Bakery                     | 1,000 ft2 | $2,190  | 500 ft2         | $4,380/1,000 ft2   |
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
    | Bank                       | 1,000 ft2 | $1,361  | 2,000 ft2       | $680/1,000 ft2     |
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
    | Beauty/Barber Shop         | Chair     | $1,361  | 4 Chairs        | $340/Chair         |
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
    | Campground                 | Campsite  | $2,139  | 2 Campsites     | $1,070/Campsite    |
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
    | Car Wash--Auto             | Each      | $9,510  | 1 Each          | $9,510/Each        |
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
    | Car Wash--Wand             | Wand      | $4,755  | 1 Wand          | $4,755/Wand        |
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
    | Commercial                 | 1,000 ft2 | $1,465  | 7,000 ft2       | $209/1,000 ft2     |
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
    | Dry Cleaner                | 1,000 ft2 | $1,866  | 2,000 ft2       | $622/1,000 ft2     |
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
    | Fast Food                  | 1,000 ft2 | $2,724  | 500 ft2         | $5,447/1,000 ft2   |
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
    | Gas Station/Convenience    | 1,000 ft2 | $1,512  | 4,000 ft2       | $378/1,000 ft2     |
    | Store                      |           |         |                 |                    |
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
    | Grocery Store              | 1,000 ft2 | $1,756  | 4,000 ft2       | $439/1,000 ft2     |
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
    | Laundromat                 | Washer    | $1,320  | 2 Washers       | $660/Washer        |
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
    | Office                     | 1,000 ft2 | $1,361  | 4,000 ft2       | $340/1,000 ft2     |
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
    | Restaurant                 | Seat      | $2,704  | 12 Seats        | $225/Seat          |
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
    | Retail                     | 1,000 ft2 | $1,465  | 7,000 ft2       | $209/1,000 ft2     |
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
    | Schools                    | Students  | $1,361  | 15 Students     | $91/Student        |
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
    | Theater                    | Seat      | $1,407  | 150 Seats       | $9/Seat            |
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
    | Warehouse                  | 1,000 ft2 | $1,432  | 10,000 ft2      | $143/1,000 ft2     |
    +----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------------+--------------------+
D. Water impact fees for properties connecting to the North Area Waterline South Loop shall be as follows:
[IMAGE: <13.25.060.jpg>]
This fee shall remain in effect until ten years after adoption.
Peak instantaneous demand shall be calculated using State of Utah Administrative Rules for Public Drinking Water Systems. (Ord. 19-13 § 21 (part), 2019; Ord. 18-08, 2018; Ord. 17-16, 2017; Ord. 16-08, 2016; Ord. 04-01 (part), 2004; Ord. 98-13 (part), 1998)

13.25.070 Collection and expenditure of impact fees.
A. Water and sewer impact fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited in separate interest bearing accounts. Interest and principal from such accounts shall be expended only for existing and future system improvements of the type for which the fee is collected.
B. The City shall maintain financial records for each fund showing the source, amount, and date received of all moneys collected pursuant to this chapter. At the end of each fiscal year the City shall prepare a report identifying the source and amount of all moneys received and identifying all expenditures from each account. Such records shall be open for public inspection to the extent all other City financial records are public documents.
C. Impact fees collected under this chapter may be expended or encumbered immediately upon receipt, provided the action is reasonably calculated to meet known and anticipated demands for new system improvements or debt service payments, including payments on principal for existing system improvements. Fees expended or pledged pursuant to this subsection are not subject to refund pursuant to Section 13.25.080.
D. Impact fees shall be expended or encumbered within six years of receipt, unless the City Council identifies by resolution extraordinary and compelling reasons why such funds should be held longer than six years and specifies a date certain upon which such funds will be used.
E. Impact fees shall not be used for maintenance or operation expenses of system improvements.
F. Impact fees may be used for the construction, design and acquisition of new system improvements identified in a capital facilities plan or policy resolution. In addition, such fees may be expended to retire debt previously incurred to finance existing water and sewer system improvements. (Ord. 98-13 (part), 1998)

13.25.080 Refunds.
A. A refund of any paid impact fee, plus interest earned, may be obtained upon written application by the person owning a parcel subject to the fee upon satisfaction of all of the following conditions:
    1. The application is made within one year of the lapse of plat or abandonment of the development proposal;
    2. The fees have not been spent or encumbered by the City; and
    3. None of the lands subject to the fee have been connected into the water or sewer system of the City.
B. Payment of a refund of impact fees constitutes an express revocation of all prior permit approval or plat approvals and the City shall record an affidavit of lapse of approval in the Grand County land records contemporaneous with the payment of any refund.
    1. Persons engaging in development or otherwise attempting to sell or convey property subject to impact fees following a refund and lapse of approval do so in violation of this chapter and are subject to the remedies and penalties as defined in Section 13.25.100(B).
C. If a refund is denied pursuant to this section or Section 13.25.070(C) and an applicant or successor owner submits an application within three years of the denial for the same or a substantially similar development the City may grant an offset, as provided under Section 13.25.040. (Ord. 98-13 (part), 1998)

13.25.090 Extraordinary adjustments.
A. Where application of the standard impact fees would result in arbitrary, unfair, or unjustified fees the City may, in its discretion, adjust the impact fee to respond to site specific circumstances.
B. Upon request by any person subject to an impact fee, the City Manager is empowered to receive and review data and studies submitted by that person for the purposes of considering an adjustment to the fee. The applicant shall pay a review fee of one hundred fifty dollars upon request of a review and shall be additionally responsible for staff review time and reasonable costs for consultant review services, if deemed necessary by the City. The City shall notify the applicant in writing of anticipated review expenses prior to incurring any costs.
C. The City Manager is empowered to review the data submitted by the applicant, accept the calculations, reject the calculations, or accept the calculations in part. Review shall be based upon the standards mandated by this chapter and the Utah Impact Fee Act, U.C.A. Section 11-36-201 et seq., as well as site specific factors and accepted engineering practices. Notice of decision shall be mailed to the applicant. Review of the determinations by the City Manager may be had via the procedures set forth in Section 13.25.100.
D. The City may elect to waive impact fees, in whole or in part, for development activities with broad based charitable and public purposes, including the construction of affordable and low income housing by nonprofit and for-profit entities, as follows:
    1. Application must be made in writing to the City Council prior to connection to city services and shall provide the following:
        a. A description of the project and its purpose, together with the applicant’s nonprofit tax identification number (if applicable), and a statement of the reasons why waiver of fees is appropriate and in the public interest;
        b. For affordable housing projects, proof that the project will meet affordable housing cost criteria, as established from time to time by city housing studies; and
        c. The fee amount requested to be waived and such other relevant information as may be requested by the Council.
    2. The Council shall hear the application and rule upon the requested fee waiver. It may grant the waiver, in whole or in part, provided that the requirements of subsection D of this section are met and provided that there is available another source of public funds to account for the deficiency in the impact fund account as a result of the waiver. Any aggrieved party may seek judicial review of the Council decision as provided under Section 13.25.100. (Ord. 98-13 (part), 1998)

13.25.100 Appeals, enforcement, and judicial review.
A. A person wishing to challenge the legality of any impact fee, the legality of any offset, denial of exemption, or any other challenge to an administrative decision pursuant to this chapter may appeal to the City Council, by delivering written notice to the City Manager within thirty days of payment of the fee. Payment of the applicable impact fee is a prerequisite to any appeal.
    1. The Council shall receive any evidence and arguments with regard to the appeal, which shall be conducted on the record. The proceedings may be conducted informally and shall not be subject to the rules of evidence. The Council shall render a decision based upon the evidence provided at the hearing and, upon a majority vote, shall decide whether the decision of the City Manager is sustained or reversed.
    2. The hearing shall be chaired by the Mayor. The City Attorney shall represent the City and the City Manager or other staff may present evidence in support of the City’s position.
    3. The hearing shall be held and a decision rendered no later than thirty days from the delivery of written notice of appeal. If the City Manager’s decision is reversed there shall be no right of judicial review.
    4. Exhaustion of all administrative remedies shall be a jurisdictional prerequisite to judicial review. Any party wishing to appeal and adverse decision by the Council may seek judicial review by filing a civil action with the Grand County District Court no later than ninety days from the date of the decision by the Council. Review shall be limited to the record established before the Council and the court shall affirm the decision if it is supported by substantial evidence.
B. Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable, at the option of the City, either as a class C misdemeanor, or by appropriate civil action to enjoin or abate the violation. In any such civil action the violator shall be liable for civil damages derived from the violation, together with fines not to exceed five hundred dollars per violation and reasonable attorney’s fees and court costs.
    1. To obtain injunctive relief it shall only be necessary that the City establish satisfactory proof of the violation of this chapter. Evidence of irreparable harm shall not be required.
    2. Jurisdiction and venue for any action to enforce this chapter shall be in the district court, Grand County, Utah.
C. The provisions of this chapter are severable and if any portion shall be held invalid, unenforceable, or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 98-13 (part), 1998)

Chapter 13.26 WASTEWATER AND SEPTAGE HAULING AND DISCHARGE INTO MUNICIPAL TREATMENT WORKS

Sections:
13.26.010    Discharge prohibited except by agreement-Application denial.
13.26.020    Fees and charges.
13.26.030    Prohibited discharge-Duty of inquiry.
13.26.040    Inspection, rejection of loads.
13.26.050    Termination of agreement or permit.
13.26.060    Civil and criminal enforcement.
            Appendix.

13.26.010 Discharge prohibited except by agreement-Application denial.
A. No person shall discharge any wastewater, sewerage, septage, or other material into city sewage treatment works without first entering into a wastewater hauling agreement with the City, obtaining a discharge permit from the treatment plant operator, and paying all applicable fees.
B. The public works director shall have discretion to deny a contract/permit application if:
    1. The discharge would exceed the capacity of the treatment facilities;
    2. The discharge is reasonably believed to include materials prohibited to be discharged into the municipal treatment works pursuant to this chapter or applicable state or federal discharge permits for the facility; or
    3. The applicant has previously been found to have discharged materials in violation of this chapter, any city permit, or the provisions of state or federal law.
C. The City Manager is authorized to enter into wastewater hauling agreements consistent with the provisions of this chapter without further City Council action. (Ord. 98-12 (part), 1998)

13.26.020 Fees and charges.
Fees for discharge shall be based upon the volume of material deposited into the system, as established from time to time by resolution of the City. (Ord. 98-12 (part), 1998)

13.26.030 Prohibited discharge-Duty of inquiry.
A. No person shall discharge or cause to be released into city treatment works any pollutant, hazardous material, or toxic substance, regulated or identified under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (FWPCA), the Utah Water Quality Act (UWCA), the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), the Federal Insecticide Fungicide and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA), the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA) or regulations promulgated under the authority of any of the foregoing statutes. This section shall also prohibit discharge of any oil, gasoline, petroleum derivatives, radio isotopes, and radioactive wastes into city treatment works.
B. Every applicant and permittee shall have an affirmative duty to inquire and, if necessary, inspect any materials to be discharged into city treatment works to assure compliance with this chapter. Each applicant shall truthfully disclose the type or material to be discharged in the permit application and shall be charged with knowledge of the type of material to be treated. (Ord. 98-12 (part), 1998)

13.26.040 Inspection, rejection of loads.
A. The City shall be entitled to inspect any material, or may require of the permittee satisfactory proof of composition, by laboratory tests or otherwise, prior to accepting material for treatment in city treatment works.
B. The public works director is authorized to reject for treatment any shipment by a permittee reasonably believed to be in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 98-12 (part), 1998)

13.26.050 Termination of agreement or permit.
Any agreement entered into between the City and a waste hauler pursuant to this chapter shall be for an indefinite term and may be revoked, at will, upon delivery of written notice to the permittee. Grounds for revocation include, but shall not be permitted to:
A. Violation of any permit or contract condition or the provisions of this chapter;
B. Nonpayment of sums due pursuant to this chapter or applicable resolution;
C. Inadequate capacity of the treatment works; or
D. Other good cause, including modification of permit conditions or state or federal operating regulations; similar changes in city policy; or violations of state or federal law by the permittee. (Ord. 98-12 (part), 1998)

13.26.060 Civil and criminal enforcement.
A. Any person who violates this chapter or any permit or order promulgated under it shall be subject to civil penalties not to exceed one thousand dollars per violation, together with reasonable attorney’s fees and court costs.
B. At the option of the City, a person who knowingly or with gross negligence violates the provisions of this chapter may be subject to criminal prosecution. Upon conviction any such person shall be subject to fines not to exceed five thousand dollars per violation and such other criminal penalties as are provided under Utah law for conviction of a class B misdemeanor. (Ord. 98-12 (part), 1998)

Appendix.
SPECIFICATIONS FOR CULINARY WATER LINES
City of Moab, Utah
April 19, 1977
A. PIPE MATERIALS:
    1.1. GENERAL: Pipe used in culinary water line construction in the City of Moab shall be ductile iron or PVC plastic.
    1.2. DUCTILE IRON: Ductile iron pipe shall conform to all requirements of ANSI A 21.51 “Ductile Iron Pipe, Centrifugally Cast in Metal Molds or Sand Lined Molds, for Water or Other Liquids.” Minimum thickness shall be Class 51 with a 350 psi pressure rating.
        1. JOINTS:
            a. Mechanical Joints. All mechanical joints shall meet requirements of Specifications ANSI 21.6 and ANSI 21.11. All gasket surfaces shall be smooth and free from imperfections. Gaskets shall conform to tests in accordance with specifications and shall be less than one year old.
            Bolts shall meet all requirements of the above specification, honoring all characteristics, tolerances and tests.
            b. Push-On-Joints. All push-on joints shall meet the requirements of ANSI 21.11. Gaskets shall be free from defects and not over one year old.
            c. Flanged Joints. Flanged joints shall be bolted firmly with machine, stud or cap bolts of proper size. Flanges may be cast integrally with the pipe or may be screwed on threaded pipe. Flanges shall be faced and drilled and of proper dimensions for size and pressure required. All flanges shall meet requirements of ANSI A 21.10 “American Standard for Cast Iron Fittings.”
            Bolts and nuts, unless otherwise specified, shall be made of the best quality refined iron or metal steel and have clean well fitting threads. Bolts will be provided with standard hexagonal nuts and standard hexagonal heads. Bolts shall be of the diameter required for each flange and when installed shall be of length so that no more than 3/8 inch or less than 1/8 inch extends past face of nut.
            Gaskets shall be 1/16 inch thick made of best quality asbestos sheet gasket material or equal. A gasket for each flanged joint of proper size, ring type or full face.
            d. Compression Joints. Compression joints shall be mechanical joint sleeve, Smith Blair 441 or Flanged adapter Smith Blair Type 900 or equal.
        2. FITTINGS:
            a. Mechanical Joint Fittings. Mechanical joint fittings shall conform to ANSI A 21.10 “American Standard for Cast Iron Fittings.”
            b. Push On Fittings. Push on fittings shall conform to ANSI A 21.10 with bells, sockets and plain ends per ANSI A 21.11.
            c. Flanged Fittings. Flanged fittings shall conform to ANSI A 21.1, “American Standard for Cast Iron Fittings.”
            All flanges shall be faced and drilled. Where cap screws or stud bolts are needed, flanges shall be tapped to support cap screws or stud bolts.
        3. 
            LAYING PIPE: Ductile iron pipe shall be laid as specified in AWWA Standard for “Installation of Cast Iron Water Mains” C-600.
            Tees, elbows, crosses, and reducers shall be used for changes in direction and outlet.
            Anchor and thrust blocks shall be placed at valves, elbows, tees, etc.
            All compression couplings, mechanical joints, flanged joints, and valves exposed to soil shall be wrapped with 8 mil thick polyethylene film adhesive tape equal to Polyken No. 900 or Scotchrap No. 50. The tape shall be installed to adhere securely to both the pipe and polyethylene. Enough film shall be used to overlap the adjoining pipe a minimum of one foot.
            Valves shall be wrapped by bringing the wrap on the adjacent pipe over the bells or flanges of the valve and sealing with the adhesive tape. The valve bodies are then wrapped with a flat sheet of the film passed under the valve bottom and brought up around the body to the stem and fastened in place with the adhesive tape.
            All fittings that require concrete blocking should be completely wrapped prior to pouring the concrete backing block.
            Polyethylene wrap shall be protected from the sun and weathering prior to use. Care shall be exercised during back-filling of the protected areas to prevent puncturing the film. Bottom of trench shall be shaped to give substantial uniform circumferential support of lower third of each pipe.
    1.3. PVC PLASTIC PIPE: PVC Plastic Pipe shall be made from clean virgin, Type I, Grade 1, unplasticized polyvinyl chloride (PVC) and shall meet the requirements of the latest revision of ASTM D-1784, ASTM D-2241, with standard dimension ratio of 18 (Class 150 psi) for all pipe. All pipe and fittings shall be NSF approved. Pipe shall also meet the requirements of AWWA C-900.
        Pipe and fitting joints shall be socket weld type or rubber gasket bell and spigot type.
        Fittings shall be of the same PVC material as the pipe where possible and shall in no case have walls thinner than the pipe used. Fittings shall be capable of sustaining pressures equal to those defined by ASTM 1599 and ASTM 1598 for quick-burst and sustained pressure tests. Fittings shall be specifically designed to be compatible with the pipe joint.
        Service connections to PVC plastic lines shall be through either tapped couplings (AWWA thread) or bronzed service saddles specifically designed for plastic pipe (equal to Christy) or polypropylene saddles with stainless steel reinforcing caps (equal to Smith-Blair). Reducing bushings shall be of nylon.
    1.4. When PVC plastic pipe or other nonmetallic materials are used in the installation of pipe for culinary water lines in the City, said materials will require an electrically conductive wire be installed with the piping to facilitate locating it with an electronic pipe locator. Other suitable material or means for accomplishing this purpose may be employed. Said wire or material must be installed at the expense of the contractor installing the line, and installation shall be supervised and inspected by the City Utilities Superintendent, or his authorized inspector.

Chapter 13.28 DRINKING WATER SOURCE PROTECTION

Sections:
13.28.010    Purpose.
13.28.020    Definitions.
13.28.030    Establishment of drinking water source protection zones.
13.28.040    Permitted uses.
13.28.050    Prohibited uses.
13.28.060    Administration.

13.28.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to insure the provision of a safe and sanitary drinking water supply for the City by the establishing drinking water source protection zones surrounding wellheads and springs for all wells and springs that are supply sources for the City water system and by designating and regulating property uses and conditions within such zones. (Ord. 01-10 (part), 2001)

13.28.020 Definitions.
“Design standard” means a control which is implemented by the property owner of a property on which a potential contamination source exists, in order to prevent discharges to the ground water.
“Land management strategies” means zoning and non-zoning controls which include, but are not limited to, the following: zoning and subdivision ordinances, site plan reviews, design and operating standards, source prohibitions, purchase of property and development rights, public education programs, ground-water monitoring, household hazardous waste collection programs, water conservation programs, memoranda of understanding, written contracts and agreements and so forth.
“Pollution source” means point source discharges of contaminants to ground water or potential discharges of the liquid forms of “extremely hazardous substances” which are stored in containers in excess of “applicable threshold planning quantities” as specified in SARA Title III. Examples of possible pollution sources include, but are not limited to, the following: storage facilities that store the liquid forms of extremely hazardous substances, septic tanks, drain fields, Class V underground injection wells, landfills, open dumps, landfilling of sludge and septage, manure piles, pit privies and animal feeding operations with more than ten animal units. The following clarify the definition of pollution source:
    1. “Animal feeding operation” means a lot or facility where the following conditions are met: animals have been or will be stabled or confined and fed or maintained for a total of forty-five days or more in any twelve month period, and crops, vegetation forage growth, or post-harvest residues are not sustained in the normal growing season over any portion of the lot or facility. Two or more animal feeding operations under common ownership are considered to be a single feeding operation if they adjoin each other, if they use a common area, or if they use a common system for the disposal of wastes.
    2. “Animal unit” means a unit of measurement for any animal feeding operation calculated by adding the following numbers: the number of slaughter and feeder cattle multi--plied by 1.0, plus the number of mature dairy cattle multi--plied by 1.4, plus the number of swine weighing fifty-five pounds multiplied by 0.4, plus the number of sheep multiplied by 0.1, plus the number of horses multiplied by 2.0.
    3. “Extremely hazardous substances” means those substances which are identified in the Section 302(EHS) column of the “TITLE III LIST OF LISTS--Consolidated List of Chemicals Subject to Reporting Under SARA Title III.” (EPA 560/4-91-011).
“Potential contamination source” means any facility or site which employs an activity or procedure which may potentially contaminate ground water. A pollution source is also a potential contamination source.
“Regulatory agency” means any governmental agency with jurisdiction over hazardous waste as defined herein.
“Sanitary landfill” means a disposal site where solid wastes, including putrescible wastes, or hazardous wastes, are disposed of on land by placing earth cover thereon.
“Septic tank/drain-field systems” means a system which is comprised of a septic tank and a drain-field which accepts domestic wastewater from buildings or facilities for subsurface treatment and disposal. By their design, septic tank/drain-field system discharges cannot be con--trolled with design standards.
“Wellhead” means the upper terminal of a well, including adapters, ports, seals, valves and other attachments.
“Spring” means the location of the water source and all attachments. (Ord. 01-10 (part), 2001)

13.28.030 Establishment of drinking water source protection zones.
There is established use districts to be known as zones one, two, three and four of the drinking water source protection area, identified and described as follows:
A. Zone one is the area within a hundred-foot radius from the wellhead or spring.
B. Zone two is the area within a two hundred and fifty-day ground-water time of travel to the wellhead or spring, the boundary of the aquifer(s) which supplies water to the ground-water source, or the ground-water divide, whichever is closer.
C. Zone three (waiver criteria zone) is the area within a three-year ground-water time of travel to the wellhead or spring or the margin of the collection area, the boundary of the aquifer(s) which supplies water to the ground-water source, or the ground-water divide, whichever is closer.
D. Zone four is the area within a fifteen-year ground-water time of travel to the wellhead or spring, the boundary of the aquifer(s) which supplies water to the ground-water source, or the ground-water divide, whichever is closer. (Ord. 01-10 (part), 2001)

13.28.040 Permitted uses.
The following uses shall be permitted within drinking water source protection zones: Any use permitted within existing agricultural, single household residential, multi-household residential and commercial zoning districts so long as uses conform to the rules and regulations of the regulatory agencies. (Ord. 19-13 § 21 (part), 2019; Ord. 01-10 (part), 2001)

13.28.050 Prohibited uses.
The following uses or conditions are prohibited within drinking water source protection zones, whether or not such use or condition may otherwise be ordinarily included as a part of a use permitted under Section 13.28.040 of this chapter:
A. Zone one-The location of any potential contamination source as defined in this chapter, unless it can be controlled with design standards.
B. Zone two-The location of a pollution source as defined in this chapter, unless its contaminated discharges can be controlled with design standards.
C. Zones three and four-The location of a potential contamination source unless it can be controlled through land management strategies. (Ord. 01-10 (part), 2001)

13.28.060 Administration.
The policies and procedures for administration of the source protection zones established under this chapter, including without limitation those applicable to nonconforming uses, exception, enforcement and penalties, shall be the same as provided in the existing zoning ordinance for the City, as the same is presently enacted or may from time to time be amended. (Ord. 01-10 (part), 2001)

Title 14 (RESERVED)

Title 15 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION

Chapters:
15.03        Interpretation of Codes
15.04        Building Code
15.25        Building Conservation Code
15.26        Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code
15.27        Administrative Code
15.36        Mobile Homes
15.40        Flood Damage Prevention
15.44        Sign Code
15.48        Reserved

Chapter 15.03 INTERPRETATION OF CODES

Sections:
15.03.010    Interpretation of codes.

15.03.010 Interpretation of codes.
To the extent that any uniform code adopted under this title conflicts with, or is contrary to, other specific provisions of the Moab Municipal Code, the specific section of the Moab Municipal Code shall be deemed to supersede and take precedence over the uniform code provision. In all such cases the section of the Moab Municipal Code shall supply the effective standard, rule, or specification to which construction shall adhere. (Ord. 98-08 (part), 1998)

Chapter 15.04 BUILDING CODE

Sections:
15.04.010    Adoption.
15.04.020    Violation.
15.04.030    Repealer.
15.04.040    Severability.

15.04.010 Adoption.
Certain documents, copies of which are on file and are open for inspection of the public in the office of the building inspector and designated as the currently adopted edition of the building codes and amendments under Utah State Rule 156-56 of the Utah Uniform Building Standards Act.
The above mentioned are hereby adopted as the building code of the City of Moab, Utah, for regulating the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of all buildings or structures in the City of Moab providing for issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor. (Ord. 16-10 § 1, 2016: Ord. 14-07 § 1, 2014: Ord. 10-21 (part), 2010: Ord. 04-02 § 1, 2004)

15.04.020 Violation.
A violation of any provision of this chapter is a Class B misdemeanor, unless otherwise provided. (Ord. 14-07 § 2, 2014: Ord. 04-02 § 2, 2004)

15.04.030 Repealer.
All other ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. (Ord. 14-07 § 3, 2014: Ord. 04-02 § 3, 2004)

15.04.040 Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is, for any reason, held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of the remaining portions of this chapter. The Moab City Council hereby declares that if one or more of these sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases shall be declared unconstitutional, that all other sections, etc., shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 14-07 § 4, 2014: Ord. 04-02 § 4, 2004)

Chapter 15.25 BUILDING CONSERVATION CODE

Sections:
15.25.010    Adoption.

15.25.010 Adoption.
That certain code establishing rules and regulations for the continued use or reuse of legally existing buildings and structures constituting the minimum standards for change of occupancy, alteration or repair of existing buildings and structures entitled “Uniform Code for Building Conservation,” 1991 Edition, published by the International Conference of Building Officials is adopted as the building conservation code of the City, and by this reference is made a part of this chapter to the same extent and effect as though such code were copied herein in full. Three copies of the Uniform Code for Building Conservation are filed for use and examination by the public in the office of the City Recorder. (Ord. 94-17 (part), 1994)

Chapter 15.26 SWIMMING POOL, SPA AND HOT TUB CODE

Sections:
15.26.010    Adoption.

15.26.010 Adoption.
That certain code establishing rules and regulations for the erection, installation, alteration, addition, repair, relocation, replacement, maintenance, or use of any swimming pool, spa, or hot tub plumbing system entitled “Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code,” 1991 Edition, published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials is adopted by the City, and by this reference is made a part of this chapter to the same extent and effect as though such code were copied herein in full. Three copies of the Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code are filed for use and examination by the public in the office of the City Recorder. (Ord. 94-17 (part), 1994)

Chapter 15.27 ADMINISTRATIVE CODE

Sections:
15.27.010    Adoption.

15.27.010 Adoption.
That certain code establishing the administration and enforcement of the technical codes adopted by the City entitled “Uniform Administrative Code,” 1994 Edition, published by the International Conference of Building Officials is adopted by the City, and by this reference is made a part of this chapter to the same extent and effect as though such code were copied herein in full. Three copies of the Uniform Administrative Code are filed for use and examination by the public in the office of the City Recorder. (Ord. 95-24 (part), 1995: Ord. 94-17 (part), 1994)

Chapter 15.36 MOBILE HOMES1

Sections:
Article I.  General Provisions
    15.36.010    Definitions.
    15.36.020    Conditions for placement.
Article II. Mobile Home Parks
    15.36.030    Intent.
    15.36.040    Regulations-Generally.
    15.36.050    Approval of plans and documents.
    15.36.060    Preliminary plans and documents-Generally.
    15.36.070    Plan requirements.
    15.36.080    Development standards.
    15.36.090    Documentation required.
    15.36.100    Performance guarantee.
    15.36.110    Bond duration.
    15.36.120    Default.
    15.36.130    Final disposition and release.
    15.36.140    Continuing obligation.
    15.36.150    Review and approval of plan.
    15.36.160    Final site plan.
    15.36.170    Operational requirements.
Article III. Reserved
Article IV. Mobile Manufactured/Modular Home Subdivisions
    15.36.220    Intent.
    15.36.230    Regulations--Generally.
    15.36.240    Plan approval.
    15.36.250    Additional requirements and standards.
Article V.  Numbering of Mobile Home Lots
    15.36.260    Intent.
    15.36.270    Standards.
    15.36.280    Sequence-Selection authority.
Article VI. Building Inspector Authority
    15.36.290    Adoption of rules and regulations.
Article VII. Manufactured Homes
    15.36.300    Definitions.
    15.36.310    Regulations--Generally.
    15.36.320    Code compliance.
    15.36.330    Development standards.
    15.36.340    Application procedure.

Article I. General Provisions

15.36.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
“Manufactured home” means a structure that is transportable in two or more modules which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with a permanent foundation and footing when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and electrical systems contained therein. For the purposes of this chapter, the definition of a manufactured home shall be construed to include mobile homes that are at least twenty-four feet in body width and thirty-five feet in body length and consists of two or more modules and is attached permanently to an approved foundation and footing, provided the units are manufactured after June 16, 1976, in accordance with the standards adopted pursuant to the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 and stamped approved by HUD (S 5402-6) and contains the State Insignia of Approval.
“Mobile home” means a vehicular, portable structure more than eight feet in width and thirty-two feet in length, built on a chassis and designed to be used without a permanent foundation as a dwelling when connected to indicated utilities.
“Mobile home park” means an area or tract of land used to accommodate two or more occupied mobile homes.
“Mobile home subdivision” means a described tract of land which has been divided into three or more lots, tracts or parcels of five acres each or less in area and which lots, tracts or parcels of land are used exclusively as sites for mobile homes.
“Motor home” means a self-propelled vehicular unit, primarily designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation use.
“Park trailer” means a vehicle that:
    1. Is designed as a temporary living quarters for seasonal or a destination residence which may be connected to utilities necessary for operation of installed fixtures and appliances;
    2. Is built on a single chassis and mounted on wheels; and
    3. Has a gross trailer area not exceeding four hundred square feet in the set up mode.
“Recreational vehicle,” “camper,” “travel trailer,” “motor home,” and “vacation vehicle” means a vehicular unit, other than a mobile home, primarily designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation use, which is either self-propelled or is mounted on or pulled by another vehicle; including but not limited to: a travel trailer, a camping trailer, a truck camper, a motor home, a fifth wheel trailer and a van.
“Recreational vehicle court” means an area or tract of land used to accommodate two or more occupied recreational vehicles.
“Travel trailer” means a vehicular, portable unit, mounted on wheels, not requiring special highway permits when drawn by a motorized vehicle:
    1. Designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational, and vacation use; and
    2. When factory-equipped for the road, having a body width of not more than eight feet or a body length of not more than forty feet. (Ord. 94-24 (part), 1994; prior code § 24-1)

15.36.020 Conditions for placement.
No occupied mobile home or recreational vehicle shall hereafter be placed on a lot or be located in the City except under the following conditions:
A. When temporarily located on a lot on which a building is being constructed, but not to exceed one year; provided that a bond or mortgage on a recreational vehicle in the amount of two hundred dollars or mobile home or other property in the amount of five hundred dollars shall first be posted with the City, guaranteeing the removal of the mobile home or recreational vehicle from the lot upon the completion of construction of the building or at the end of one year from the placement on the lot, whichever is the lesser of time.
B. When placed in a licensed mobile home park, recreational vehicle court or else in an approved mobile home subdivision.
C. When placed on a zoning lot that complies with the regulations of the zone in which the mobile home is located in accordance with city zoning ordinance Section 17.12.100, owner-occupied mobile home constituting a nonconforming use. (Ord. 94-23, 1994; prior code § 24-2)

Article II. Mobile Home Parks

15.36.030 Intent.
The intent of this article is to promulgate minimum regulations which are designed to produce a healthy, safe and attractive living environment for the occupants of the mobile homes. (Prior code § 24-3(A))

15.36.040 Regulations-Generally.
All mobile home parks hereafter constructed or enlarged within the City shall be located only in zones in which they are listed as a permitted use under the terms of Chapter 17.60, Mobile Home Parks, and shall conform to the requirements and standards set out in Sections 15.36.050 through 15.36.170. (Prior code § 24-3(B) (part))

15.36.050 Approval of plans and documents.
Any person wishing to construct a mobile home park shall obtain, from the building inspector, information pertaining to the City’s plan of land use, streets, public facilities and other requirements affecting the land within the development. Before a permit can be issued for any construction connected with a mobile home park, the preliminary plans, required documents pertaining to the development and the final plan shall have been approved as hereinafter set forth. (Prior code § 24-3(B)(1))

15.36.060 Preliminary plans and documents-Generally.
The preliminary plan and documents shall be prepared and submitted as set forth in Sections 15.36.070 through 15.36.090. (Prior code § 24-3(B)(2) (part))

15.36.070 Plan requirements.
Three copies of the preliminary plan must be submitted to the building inspector at least two weeks prior to the meeting of the City Planning Commission at which time the plan will be considered.
The preliminary plan shall be drawn to a scale not smaller than one inch equals one hundred feet or as recommended by the building inspector and shall show the following information:
A. The topography represented by contours shown at no greater intervals than two feet when required by the Planning Commission;
B. The proposed street and mobile home space layout;
C. Proposed reservations for parks, playgrounds and open spaces;
D. Size and character of recreation buildings and other structures associated with land and facilities to be used by the mobile home park occupants;
E. Layout of typical mobile home spaces;
F. Tabulations showing:
    1. Area of land within the mobile home park,
    2. Number of mobile homes permitted,
    3. Number of mobile homes provided for in a mobile home park,
    4. Percent of area to be devoted to parks and playgrounds; and
    5. Number of off-street parking spaces;
G. Proposed location of off-street parking spaces;
H. Proposed landscape planting plan, including type and location of plant materials;
I. Location of existing and proposed utility lines and easements, water and sewer lines, fire hydrants and other improvements;
J. Draft of proposed documents, including:
    1. Management policies, covenants and restrictions, and
    2. Maintenance agreement;
K. Typical street cross-sections. (Prior code § 243(B)(2)(a))

15.36.080 Development standards.
The development of a mobile home park shall conform to the following regulations and standards:
A. The area shall be in one ownership and the same shall not be subdivided.
B. The preliminary plan must be prepared by an engineer, land surveyor, architect or landscape architect licensed to practice in the state.
C. The minimum site size for a mobile home park shall be ten acres.
D. Mobile homes may be clustered and individual mobile home sites may be reduced below that required for single-household dwellings within the zone in which the development is located; provided, that the gross density of mobile home units within the development does not exceed nine units per acre.
E. Not less than fifteen percent of the gross area of the mobile home park shall be developed into a park and playspace for common use of the occupants. Such park shall be located as near to the center of the mobile home park as good design will allow. Also, the land area not contained in a park, mobile home site, road or vehicular parking space shall be landscaped for the common use and enjoyment of the occupants of the mobile home park. The land covered by vehicular roadways, sidewalks, off-street parking and landscaped areas surrounding mobile home spaces which are pertinent to each mobile home, and area devoted to service facilities shall not be construed as being part of the area required for parks and playgrounds.
F. An area of at least one hundred square feet for each mobile home space contained within the park shall be provided for the storage of boats, trailers and campers. Such storage space shall be enclosed with a sight-obscuring fence of not less than six feet and not more than eight feet in height.
G. No mobile home, modular home or add-on shall be located closer than ten feet from the nearest portion of any other mobile home or add-on.
H. All mobile homes, modular homes and add-ons shall be set back at least six feet from all roadways. Also a strip of land at least ten feet wide surrounding the mobile home park shall be left unoccupied by mobile homes shall be enclosed with a sight-obscuring fence of not less than six feet and not more than eight feet in height, and shall be planted and maintained in lawn, shrubs or trees designed to afford privacy to the development.
I. All mobile home sites that front directly on a public street shall have a width of at least ninety feet and an area of at least four thousand five hundred feet.
J. All mobile homes shall be located at least twenty feet back from any public street and at least seventy percent of the resulting setback space shall be landscaped.
K. All storage and solid waste receptacles outside of the confines of a mobile home must be housed in a closed structure compatible with in design and construction to the mobile homes and to any service buildings within the mobile home park; all patios, garages, carports and other add-ons must also be compatible as to design and construction with the mobile home and with the service buildings as approved by the building inspector.
L. All roadways shall be hard-surfaced and of adequate width to accommodate anticipated traffic as follows:
    1. For one-way with no parking, twenty feet in width, plus extra width as necessary for maneuvering mobile homes;
    2. For two-way with no parking, twenty-four feet in width;
    3. For entrance streets, minimum of thirty-six feet in width.
M. There shall be no more than two entrances from the mobile home park into any one street, which entrances shall be no closer than seventy-five feet from each other, nor closer than seventy feet to the corner of an intersection.
N. Access shall be provided to each mobile home stand by means of an accessway reserved for maneuvering mobile homes into position and shall be kept free from trees and other immovable obstructions. Paving the accessway shall not be required. Use of planks, steel mats or other means during placement of a mobile home shall be allowed as long as the same are removed immediately after placement of the mobile home.
O. Off-street parking shall be provided at the rate of two parking spaces per mobile home space contained within the mobile home park, and shall be contained within each mobile home space served.
P. Yard Lighting. A minimum of two-tenths foot-candles of light shall be required for protective yard lighting the full length of all driveways and walkways.
Q. The mobile home stand must be depressed or otherwise constructed so that the floor of the front half of the mobile home will not be more than twenty-four inches above the adjacent ground.
R. All mobile homes shall be served by a water system, a sewage disposal system, and solid waste disposal facilities which have been approved by the State Health Department.
S. In addition to meeting the above requirements and conforming to all other laws of the City, all mobile home parks shall also conform to requirements set forth in the Code of Camp-Trailer Courts, Hotel, Motel and Resort Sanitary Regulations adopted by the Utah State Board of Health, and to the City’s fire prevention code, which codes are adopted by reference, three copies of which are filed with the office of the City clerk for use by the public and all restrictions, regulations and notations contained therein shall be made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein. In the event of any conflict between such regulations or codes and this chapter, this chapter shall take precedence.
T. Mobile home parks containing not less than fifty mobile homes may include a launderette for convenience of the occupants of the park, but not for the general public.
U. All landscaped areas shall be provided with permanent sprinkler irrigation systems as approved by the building inspector.
V. Development may be carried out in progressive stages, in which event each stage shall be so planned that the requirements and intent of this chapter shall be complied with at the completion of each stage. No final plan for the initial stage shall cover less than ten acres. (Ord. 19-13 § 21 (part), 2019; Ord. 95-23, 1995: prior code § 24-3(B)(2)(b))

15.36.090 Documentation required.
Documents shall also be submitted with the preliminary plan consisting of:
A. A declaration of management policies, covenants and restrictions. Such documents shall set forth, among other things:
    1. The responsibilities and duties of the renters or occupants relating to the maintenance of premises and other conditions of occupancy; and
    2. An assertion that the park and playspace for the common use of the occupants will be protected against building development, except for that which is consistent with landscaped open space.
The purpose of this document is to facilitate proper maintenance of the mobile home park.
B. An agreement between the developers and the City stating among other things:
    1. That the developer will construct the project in accordance with approved plans;
    2. That in the event of failure or neglect on the part of the owners, successors or assigns to enforce the provisions of the declaration of management policies, covenants and restrictions as approved by the City Council or to maintain the common areas, landscaping and other improvements in a condition comparable to the maintenance performed in city parks, the City may perform the necessary work and for the purpose may enter in upon the land and do such work and charge the cost thereof, including reasonable attorney’s fees, against the owners or their successors or assigns;
    3. That the owners, successors or assigns will agree to reimburse the City for all work and expenses incurred in the enforcement of this agreement, including reasonable attorney’s fees; and
    4. That the agreement shall be binding upon the heirs, assigns, receivers, successors of the project for the life of the project. (Prior code § 24-3(B)(2)(c))

15.36.100 Performance guarantee.
In order to ensure that the mobile home park will be constructed in an acceptable manner, developers shall post a bond, mortgage or other assurance acceptable to the City Council in an amount equal to the estimated cost, plus fifty percent of constructing all required landscaping, road improvements, lighting, pedestrian ways, hard-surfacing, water and sewer lines, storage enclosures and common facilities as shown on the final plan. (Prior code § 24-3(B)(3)(a)(1))

15.36.110 Bond duration.
The duration of the bond or other assurance shall be for one year from the date of approval of the development by the City Council. An extension of time may be granted by the City Council upon application by the developer; provided, that such application is submitted at least sixty days prior to the expiration of the bond or other assurance; and provided, that the issuer of the bond is willing to extend the time of the assurance. (Prior code § 24-3(B)(3)(a)(2))

15.36.120 Default.
In the event that the developer defaults or fails or neglects to satisfactorily install the required improvements within one year from the date of approval of the development by the City Council, the City Council may declare the bond or other assurance forfeited and the City may install or cause the required improvements to be installed using the proceeds from the collection of the bond or other assurance to defray the expense thereof. (Prior code § 24-3(B)(3)(a)(3))

15.36.130 Final disposition and release.
The developer shall be responsible for the quality of all materials and workmanship. At the completion of the work, or not less than ten days prior to the release date of the bond or other assurance, the building inspector shall make a preliminary inspection of the improvements and shall submit a report to the City Council setting forth the conditions of such facilities. If the conditions of such facilities is found to be satisfactory, the City Council shall release the bond or other assurance. If the conditions of material or workmanship show unusual depreciation or does not comply with the acceptable standards of durability, the City Council may declare the developer in default. (Prior code § 243(B)(3)(a)(4))

15.36.140 Continuing obligation.
Any failure on the part of the developer or his assigns to maintain the mobile home park in accordance with the approved management policies, covenants, conditions and restrictions and agreements shall be, and the same is declared to be a public nuisance endangering the health, safety and general welfare of the public and a detriment to the surrounding area and that in addition to any other remedy provided by law for the abatement or removal of such public nuisance, the City may remove or abate the nuisance and charge the cost thereof, including reasonable attorney’s fees to the owners as provided by Chapter 11 of the Title 10, Utah Code Annotated, as amended. (Prior code § 24-3(B)(3)(b))

15.36.150 Review and approval of plan.
A. The Planning Commission shall review the plan and proposed documents to determine compliance with all portions of the City’s master plan. In considering such plan, the Planning Commission, among other things, shall make sure that such developments shall constitute a residential environment of sustained desirability and stability and that it will not adversely affect amenities in the surrounding area. The Planning Commission may require changes to be made in the plan. They may also require additional yards or buffers or other improvements to be installed along with greater amounts of landscaping or parking spaces. Such changes may be imposed as conditions of approval where it is determined by the City Council that such changes are necessary to ensure that the development will mix harmoniously with adjoining or nearby uses.
B. Application for approval of a mobile home park shall be granted or denied only after recommendation by the Planning Commission and after a public hearing has been held by the City Council. Notice of the hearing shall be given in a newspaper of general circulation at least five days prior to such hearing. An application denied by the Planning Commission may be appealed to the City Council. Such appeal must be made in writing within ten days after the denial has been made by the Planning Commission. Approval of the preliminary plan shall be valid for a period of one year. (Prior code § 24-3(B)(3)(c))

15.36.160 Final site plan.
A. Upon approval of the preliminary plan by the City Council, the developer shall submit to the Planning Commission a final site plan of either the entire mobile home park or the first stage of such development that is to be constructed.
B. The final site plan must be prepared by an engineer, land surveyor, architect or landscape architect licensed to practice in the state. Such final site plan shall show the information contained on the approved preliminary plan along with a place for the approving signatures of the Planning Commission and City Council.
C. Copies of the final approved documents shall also be recorded in the office of the county recorder. No building permit shall be issued for such mobile home park until final plans have been approved by the City Council and the required documents have been recorded in the office of the county recorder and until the bond required under this article of this chapter has been properly posted. (Prior code § 24-3(B)(3)(d))

15.36.170 Operational requirements.
A. No mobile home space shall be occupied until all improvements which are required under this chapter, or which are shown on the final plat, shall have been constructed; provided, however, that occupancy of individual spaces prior to completion of all required improvements may be temporarily permitted for a period not to exceed ninety days from the date of the approval of the mobile home park by the City Council, provided further, that:
    1. The final site plan, the declaration of management policies, covenants and restrictions, and the agreement required under this chapter shall have been submitted to the Planning Commission and City Council and approved;
    2. All lots to be occupied are served with approved water, sewer and utility systems, and all roads are graded and graveled and required surface drainage improvements constructed;
    3. A bond, mortgage or other guarantee, sufficient in amount to cover the cost of the remaining required improvements, shall have been received by the City. Such remaining required improvements shall include hard-surfacing of streets and parking spaces, landscaping of all mobile home sites and common areas, installation of lighting, construction of auxiliary storage area and any other required improvements as shown on the final plan; and
    4. A license permitting temporary occupancy has been issued by the City Council.
B. Prerequisite to the occupancy of any mobile home park shall be the obtaining of an annual license which shall be issued only after inspection by the building inspector. It is unlawful to operate a mobile home park without first obtaining a license and such license shall be refused or revoked upon failure of the owner and/or operator to maintain the park in accordance with the standards and requirements as herein set forth.
C. Occupancy shall be written lease, which lease shall be made available to the officials of the City upon demand. The terms of such lease shall be consistent with the declaration of management policies, covenants and restrictions, as required by this chapter.
D. No mobile home space shall be rented for a period of less than thirty days. (Prior code § 24-3(B)(3)(e))

Article III. Reserved2

Article IV. Mobile Manufactured/Modular Home Subdivisions

15.36.220 Intent.
The intent of this article is to promulgate minimum regulations which are designed to produce and maintain healthy, safe, and attractive living conditions within subdivisions containing lots on which mobile homes are situated. (Prior code § 24-5(A))

15.36.230 Regulations--Generally.
All mobile home subdivisions hereafter subdivided within the City shall be located only in zones in which they are listed as a permitted use under the terms of Title 17, and shall conform to the requirements and standards set out in Sections 15.36.240 through 15.36.250. (Ord. 94-18 (part), 1994: prior code § 24-5(B) (part))

15.36.240 Plan approval.
Any person wishing to make a mobile home subdivision shall conform to all of the provisions of Title 16, pertaining to subdivisions. (Prior code § 24-5(B)(1))

15.36.250 Additional requirements and standards.
A. All lots within mobile home subdivisions shall have a width of at least ninety lineal feet and an area of at least seven thousand five hundred square feet.
B. All regulations pertaining to yards, setbacks, buildings and improvements as set forth in Sections 17.48.030 and 17.48.050 of the R-3 zone shall be complied with.
C. All mobile homes placed in mobile home subdivisions within the City shall conform to the HUD Manufactured Home Standards and have the Utah Seal of Approval.
D. After the Planning Commission has reviewed the preliminary plan of a mobile home subdivision and before such mobile home subdivision has received final approval from the City Council, a public hearing shall be called on the proposed subdivision by the City Council as provided in Section 17.12.130, General Provisions, Amendments to ordinance and map, relating to amendments to the zoning ordinance.
E. Upon approval of the location of the mobile home subdivision and the layout and development plans by the City Council, the subdivider may prepare final plans and upon approval thereof by the Planning Commission and City Council as provided in Title 16, Subdivisions, the subdivider may provide in accordance with the laws and ordinances of the City pertaining to subdivisions and developments therein. (Ord. 94-18 (part), 1994; prior code § 24-5(B)(2))

Article V. Numbering of Mobile Home Lots

15.36.260 Intent.
The intent of this article is to provide ease of identifying locations within a mobile home subdivision, park or court for emergency vehicles, such as police, firemen, ambulance. (Prior code § 24-6 (part))

15.36.270 Standards.
Each lot within a mobile home park, court or subdivision shall have an identifying number of reflector material no smaller than four inches in height. In the event there are curbs and gutters, said identifying number may be placed on the curb in front of each lot. In the event there are no curbs and gutters, a post at least four feet high with said identifying number shall be so placed on each lot so as to be easily seen from the access road in front of each lot. (Prior code § 24-6(A))

15.36.280 Sequence-Selection authority.
The building inspector will select the numbering sequence for said mobile home subdivision, park or court. (Prior code § 24-6(B))

Article VI. Building Inspector Authority

15.36.290 Adoption of rules and regulations.
The building inspector is authorized to make and to adopt such written regulations as may be necessary for the proper enforcement of the provisions of this chapter; provided, that such regulations shall not be in conflict with the provisions of this chapter, and the penalty for violation of the provisions thereof shall be the same as the penalty for violation of the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 24-7)

Article VII. Manufactured Homes

15.36.300 Definitions.
A. A “manufactured house” is a structure transportable in two or more modules which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with a permanent foundation and footing when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and electrical systems contained therein. For the purpose of this chapter, the definitions of a manufactured home shall be construed to include mobile homes that are at least twenty-four feet in body width and thirty-five feet in body length and consists of two or more modules and is attached permanently to an approved foundation and footing, provided the units are manufactured after June 16, 1976, in accordance with the standards adopted pursuant to the National Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 and stamped approved by HUD (S 5402-6) and contains the state seal of approval.
B. A “module” is a unit of a manufactured house not less than twelve feet in body width and not less than thirty-five feet in body length. (Prior code § 24-8)

15.36.310 Regulations--Generally.
Manufactured homes shall be allowed in all zones allowing residential development provided the unit was manufactured after June 16, 1976, and is appropriately stamped and complies with Sections 15.36.310 through 15.36.340. (Prior code § 24-9 (part))

15.36.320 Code compliance.
A. All manufactured houses shall possess necessary building permits as required by the City building, plumbing, electrical and mechanical codes and this chapter including those required for site preparation, provision of utilities and the construction of accessory structures;
B. Foundations. All manufactured houses to be developed on city lots shall be placed on permanent firm foundations, footings and proper blocking support as approved by the City;
C. Roof Load. This requirement for manufactured homes is 20 psf roof load; wind load is 15 psf;
D. Site Preparation. Properly graded and sloped compacted to ninety percent maximum relative density;
E. Firm Foundation. May be set on concrete pier and footing, or other method approved by the City. (Prior code § 24-9(A))

15.36.330 Development standards.
Prior to the issuance of a building permit for placement of a manufactured house on a permanent foundation, all such houses must meet the following development standards:
A. Have exterior siding extending to within six inches of dirt or two inches of concrete and consisting of a conventional dwelling type exterior material, finished before occupancy;
B. Have a shingled, pitched roof with eaves;
C. Meet all setback and area requirements of this chapter;
D. Improved permanent access entrance or exits must be installed according to city standards (steps, porch and deck, patios, etc.);
E. They do not violate deed restrictions in the area where the unit is to be located. (Prior code § 24-9(B))

15.36.340 Application procedure.
Any person desiring to place a manufactured house on a permanent foundation within city limits shall make application for a building permit for that purpose with the City building inspector and then shall deliver to the building inspector an affidavit to have the manufactured house appurtenance to the real property. Upon completion of the installation of the manufactured house on a permanent foundation, the building inspector shall cause the affidavit to be filed with the county assessor. (Prior code § 24-9(C))
1Prior ordinance history: Ord. 20-77.
2 Editor’s note: Ord. No. 10-13, adopted September 14, 2010, repealed Article III, §§ 15.36.180--15.36.210, which pertained to recreational vehicle courts and derived from prior code §§ 24-4(A)--24-4(B)(2); Ord. No. 94-18 and Ord. No. 07-06, 2007.

Chapter 15.40 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION1

Sections:
Article I.  Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose and Methods
    15.40.010    Statutory authorization.
    15.40.020    Findings.
    15.40.030    Purpose.
    15.40.040    Methods of reducing flood losses.
Article II. Definitions
    15.40.050    Definitions.
Article III. General Provisions
    15.40.060    Applicability.
    15.40.070    Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
    15.40.080    Compliance.
    15.40.090    Abrogation and greater restrictions.
    15.40.100    Interpretation.
    15.40.110    Warning and disclaimer of liability.
Article IV. Administration
    15.40.120    Designation of the floodplain administrator.
    15.40.130    Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator.
    15.40.140    Floodplain development permit.
    15.40.150    Permit procedures.
    15.40.160    Variance procedures.
Article V.  Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
    15.40.170    General standards.
    15.40.180    Specific standards.
    15.40.190    Standards for subdivision proposals.
    15.40.200    Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones).
    15.40.210    Floodways.
Article VI. Penalties for Noncompliance
    15.40.220    Violation--Penalty.

Article I. Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose and Methods

15.40.010 Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the State of Utah has in U.S.C., Title 65A chapter 1,1, and Title 10, Chapter 10-9a-505 Subsection 1(c)1, delegated the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the City Council of the City of Moab, Utah, does ordain as follows. (Ord. 09-09, 2009)

15.40.020 Findings.
A. The flood hazard areas of the City of Moab are subject to periodic inundation that may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
B. These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains that cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazards areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. (Ord. 09-09, 2009)

15.40.030 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
A. Protect human life and health and prevent substantial loss or damage to real property;
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains;
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas;
G. Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area; and
H. To ensure that those persons who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. (Ord. 09-09, 2009)

15.40.040 Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following methods:
A. Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities;
B. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
C. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters;
D. Control filling, grading, dredging and other development that may increase flood damage;
E. Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands.

Article II. Definitions

15.40.050 Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted to provide the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
“Alluvial fan flooding” means flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths.
“Apex” means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur.
“Area of shallow flooding” means a designated AO, AH, or VO zone on a community’s flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
“Area of special flood hazard” is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-99, VO, V1-30, VE or V.
“Base flood” means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
“Basement” means any area of the building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides.
“Critical feature” means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised.
“Development” means any man-made change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.
“Elevated building” means a non-basement building (i) built, in the case of a building in zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, to have the top of the elevated floor, or in the case of a building in zones V1-30, VE, or V, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure member of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the floor of the water and (ii) adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, “elevated building” also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of flood waters. In the case of zones V1-30, VE, or V, “elevated building” also includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of “elevated building,” even though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls if the breakaway walls met the standards of Section 60.3(e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.
“Existing construction” means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the “start of construction” commenced before the effective date of June 4, 1980. “Existing construction” may also be referred to as “existing structures.”
“Existing manufactured home park” or “subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
“Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
“FEMA” means the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
“Flood” or “flooding” means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
    1. The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
    2. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
“Flood insurance rate map (FIRM)” means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
“Flood insurance study” is the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, water surface elevation of the base flood, as well as the flood boundary-floodway map.
“Floodplain” or “flood-prone area” means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of flooding).
“Floodplain management” means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations.
“Floodplain management regulations” means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
“Flood protection system” means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas within a community subject to a “special flood hazard” and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
“Flood proofing” means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures that reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
“Floodway (regulatory floodway)” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. This area is delineated as the FW zone as indicated on the City of Moab official zoning map.
“Functionally dependent use” means a use that cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
“Highest adjacent grade” means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
“Historic structure” means any structure that is:
    1. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
    2. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
    3. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
    4. Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
        a. By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
        b. Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
“Letters of map revision” established administrative procedures to change the designation for properties that are located on the FIRM in special flood hazard areas (SFHA). These processes are referred to as:
    1. Letter of map amendment, or LOMA;
    2. Letter of map revision based on fill, or LOMR-F;
    3. Conditional letter of map revision, or CLOMR.
“Levee” means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.
“Levee system” means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
“Lowest floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.
“Manufactured home” means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term “manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle.”
“Manufactured home park” or “subdivision” means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
“Mean sea level” means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community’s flood insurance rate map are referenced.
“New construction” means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, “new construction” means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
“New manufactured home park” or “subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
“Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle that is:
    1. Built on a single chassis;
    2. Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections;
    3. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
    4. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
“Special flood hazard area (SFHA)” means an area or areas shown on the FIRM that has a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year; this area is also referred to by some as the one-percent-annual-chance floodplain, base floodplain, or the one hundred-year floodplain.
“Start of construction” (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348)), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
“Structure” means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
“Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
“Substantial improvement” means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent of the market value of the structure before “start of construction” of the improvement. This includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage”, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
    1. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary conditions; or
    2. Any alteration of a “historic structure”, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a “historic structure.”
“Variance” is a grant of relief to a person from the requirement of this chapter when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. (For full requirements see Section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations and Moab Municipal Code Title 17.)
“Violation” means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in Section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
“Water surface elevation” means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. (Ord. 09-09, 2009)

Article III. General Provisions

15.40.060 Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the City of Moab, Utah. Current special flood hazard areas are also indicated on the City of Moab official zoning map. (Ord. 09-09, 2009)

15.40.070 Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled, “The Flood Insurance Study for Grand County, Utah, unincorporated and incorporated areas” dated April 2, 2009, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps and flood boundary-floodway maps (FIRM and FBFM) and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. The flood insurance study and associated FIRMs and the City of Moab official zoning map are on file at 217 East Center Street. (Ord. 09-09, 2009)

15.40.080 Compliance.
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. (Ord. 09-09, 2009)

15.40.090 Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 09-09, 2009)

15.40.100 Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
A. Considered as minimum requirements;
B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. (Ord. 09-09, 2009)

15.40.110 Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 09-09, 2009)

Article IV. Administration

15.40.120 Designation of the floodplain administrator.
The zoning administrator is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. (Ord. 09-09, 2009)

15.40.130 Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator.
Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
A. Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter.
B. Review permit application to determine whether proposed building site, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding.
C. Review, approve or deny all applications for floodplain development permits required by adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter.
D. Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required.
E. Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation.
F. Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the Utah Division of Natural Resources, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
G. Assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained.
H. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 15.40.070, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of Article V.
I. When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and AE on the community’s FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community.
J. Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve certain development in Zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community’s FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot, provided that the community first applies for a conditional FIRM revision through FEMA (conditional letter of map revision). (Ord. 09-09, 2009)

15.40.140 Floodplain development permit.
A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 09-09, 2009)

15.40.150 Permit procedures.
A. Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by the City of Moab planning department and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required:
    1. Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures;
    2. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed;
    3. A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of Article V, Section 15.40.180(B);
    4. Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development;
    5. Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with Article IV, Section 15.40.130(A).
B. Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the following relevant factors:
    1. The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
    2. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
    3. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
    4. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
    5. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
    6. The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems;
    7. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site;
    8. The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
    9. The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
    10. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area. (Ord. 09-09, 2009)

15.40.160 Variance procedures.
A. The appeal authority as established by the community, shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.
B. The appeal authority shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
C. Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal authority may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction.
D. The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request.
E. Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this chapter.
F. Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in Section 15.40.150 of this article have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
G. Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this chapter, the appeal authority may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this chapter (Article I, Section 15.40.030).
H. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
I. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
J. Prerequisites for granting variances:
    1. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
    2. Variances shall only be issued upon:
        a. Showing a good and sufficient cause;
        b. A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
        c. A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
    3. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
K. Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
    1. The criteria outlined in Article IV, Section 15.40.160(A) through (I) are met; and
    2. The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. (Ord. 10-06, 2010)

Article V. Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction

15.40.170 General standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements:
A. All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
B. All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
C. All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage;
D. All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding;
E. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system;
F. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharge from the systems into flood waters; and
G. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. (Ord. 09-09, 2009)

15.40.180 Specific standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in (i) Article III, Section 15.40.070, (ii) Article IV, Section 15.40.150, or (iii) Article V, Section 15.40.200, the following provisions are required. Properties located in the FW zone shall abide by separate regulations as described elsewhere in this chapter.
A. Residential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated to or above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in Article IV, Section 15.40.150, is satisfied.
B. Nonresidential Construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator.
C. Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
    1. A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
    2. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one-foot above grade.
    3. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
D. Manufactured Homes. 
    1. Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on a community’s FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
    2. Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community’s FIRM on sites (i) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, (ii) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, (iii) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or (iv) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage” as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
    3. Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision with zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community’s FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of subsection D of this section be elevated so that either:
        a. The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation; or
        b. The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
E. Recreational Vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community’s FIRM either:
    1. Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty consecutive days;
    2. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
    3. Meet the permit requirements of Article IV, Section 15.40.150(A), and the elevation and anchoring requirements for “manufactured homes” in subsection D of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. (Ord. 09-09, 2009)

15.40.190 Standards for subdivision proposals.
A. All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with Sections 15.40.020, 15.40.030, and 15.40.040 of this chapter.
B. All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet floodplain development permit requirements of Sections 15.40.140, 15.40.130, 15.40.150, and the provisions of Article V of this chapter.
C. Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which are greater than 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to Section 15.40.070, or 15.40.130(H) of this chapter.
D. All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
E. All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. (Ord. 09-09, 2009)

15.40.200 Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones).
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in Article III, Section 15.40.070, are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply:
A. All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community’s FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified).
B. All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential structures;
    1. Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community’s FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified); or
    2. Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy.
C. A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed in Article IV, Section 15.40.150, are satisfied.
D. Require within zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures. (Ord. 09-09, 2009)

15.40.210 Floodways.
Floodways located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 15.40.070, are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters that carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, all of the following minimal provisions shall apply:
A. Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
B. The proposed use is an allowed use as permitted in the regulations of the FW zone in Chapter 17.33.
C. If Section 15.40.210 above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Article V.
D. Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first applies for a conditional FIRM and floodway revision through FEMA. (Ord. 09-09, 2009)

Article VI. Penalties for Noncompliance

15.40.220 Violation--Penalty.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than one thousand dollars or imprisoned for not more than ninety days, or both, for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. In addition, removal of all prohibited barriers, structures, or fill shall be completed at the expense of the violator. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Moab from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord. 09-09, 2009)
1 Editor’s note: Ord. No. 09-09, adopted October 13, 2009, repealed the former Chapter 15.40, §§ 15.40.010--15.40.310, and enacted a new Chapter 15.40 as set out herein. The former Chapter 15.40 pertained to flood damage prevention and derived from Ord. No. 1-80, 1980; Ord. No. 89-02, 1989; Ord. No. 90-03, 1990; Ord. No. 92-10, 1992 and Ord. No. 09-03, adopted March 24, 2009.

Chapter 15.44 SIGN CODE

Sections:
15.44.010    Purpose.
15.44.020    Scope.
15.44.030    General provisions.
15.44.040    Size and height limitations.
15.44.050    Projecting and suspended signs.
15.44.060    Roof signs.
15.44.070    Intermittent light, flashing or moving lights prohibited.
15.44.080    Signs in residential zones.
15.44.090    Public and religious signs in residential zones.
15.44.100    Flags.
15.44.110    Computations.
15.44.120    Height-Computation.
15.44.130    Area of individual signs-Computation.
15.44.140    Area of multifaced signs-Computation.
15.44.150    Number of freestanding signs per lot-Computation.
15.44.160    Setbacks-Computation.
15.44.170    Shopping centers/office building complexes-Sign allowance.
15.44.180    Off-premises signs.
15.44.190    Prohibited signs.
15.44.200    Temporary signs.
15.44.210    Exempt signs.
15.44.220    Design, construction, maintenance and liability.
15.44.230    Abandoned signs.
15.44.240    Permit procedures and enforcement.
15.44.250    Permit--Required.
15.44.260    Applications.
15.44.270    Fees.
15.44.280    Action on application.
15.44.290    Inspections.
15.44.300    Renewal of sign permits.
15.44.310    Lapse of sign permit.
15.44.320    Registration of existing signs.
15.44.330    Nonconforming sign.
15.44.340    Violations.
15.44.350    Notice, enforcement and penalties.
15.44.360    Unsafe, illegal and nonmaintained signs.
15.44.370    Removal of signs.
15.44.380    Right of appeal/variance.
15.44.390    Definitions.

15.44.010 Purpose.
A. Signs are an important issue for the City, its business owners and local residents. When abused, signs can create a visual blight which detracts from the quality of the environment and the experience of visitors to Moab. When signs are unduly restricted, however, it may create a hardship for merchants who rely on effective signage to identify their establishments and thus be successful in their business venture. All signs and lighting impact the economics, aesthetic value and character of a community. It is thus in the City’s best interest to adopt a sign code which protects the public health, safety and welfare of its citizens and business community. It is the intent of the City to create an atmosphere of partnership with the business community in order to achieve economic stability of Moab while at the same time protecting residential areas and resources that draw visitors to Moab.
B. It is the purpose of the sign ordinance to:
    1. Promote traffic and pedestrian safety;
    2. Reduce visual clutter;
    3. Increase the readability and effectiveness of signs;
    4. Encourage individuality and creativity;
    5. Promote city beautification;
    6. Encourage fair business representation through signage; and
    7. Enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these sign provisions. (Ord. 00-03 (part), 2000: Ord. 92-02 § 1, 1992)

15.44.020 Scope.
This chapter shall govern and control the erection, remodeling, enlarging, moving, alteration, operation and maintenance of all signs within all zones. It also provides penalties for violations of this code. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed a waiver or variance of the provisions of any other articles or sections in this code applicable to signs. Signs located in areas governed by several sections of this code shall comply with all such sections. In the case of contradicting requirements or provisions, the more restrictive shall apply. (Ord. 00-03 (part), 2000: Ord. 92-02 § 2, 1992)

15.44.030 General provisions.
A sign permit shall be required for the placement, construction, and/or alterations of all signs, unless a sign qualifies as an exempt sign or an identified temporary sign. The provisions in Sections 15.44.040 through 15.44.100 are required before a permit shall be granted. (Ord. 00-03 (part), 2000: Ord. 92-02 § 3, 1992)

15.44.040 Size and height limitations.
A. On Highway. 
    1. Height Limitations. There shall be a twenty-eight-foot height limitation for all signs that front on a highway (includes freestanding, wall and roof signs).
    2. Size Limitations. The size limitations for signs fronting a highway are as follows:
        a. Two hundred fifty-six square feet maximum square footage per lot;
        b. One hundred sixty square feet per individual sign face;
        c. Formula for maximum square footage is two square feet for each linear foot of frontage along a public right-of-way;
        d. The total square footage on a lot with two tenants must be divided between the tenants with proportions decided by the tenants and/or landlord(s).
B. Off Highway. 
    1. Height Limitations. There shall be a twenty-foot height limitation for all signs that front off of a highway (includes freestanding, wall and roof signs).
    2. Size Limitations. The size limitations for signs that do not front a highway are as follows:
        a. One hundred sixty square feet maximum square footage per lot;
        b. Formula for maximum square footage is one square foot for each linear foot of frontage along a public right-of-way;
        c. The total square footage on a lot with two tenants must be divided between the tenants with proportions decided by the tenants and/or landlord(s). (Ord. 00-03 (part), 2000: Ord. 92-02 § 3.01--3.04, 1992)

15.44.050 Projecting and suspended signs.
A. Projecting and suspended signs shall have a height limit maximum of twenty-eight feet or the height of the wall of the building, whichever is lower.
B. They shall have an eight-foot minimum vertical clearance above sidewalks, walking areas, or rights-of-way and thirty-six square feet maximum size per sign face.
C. Owners of projecting signs that project over public rights-of-way must furnish proof of liability insurance for such signs before being issued a permit. (Ord. 00-03 (part), 2000: Ord. 92-02 § 3.05, 1992)

15.44.060 Roof signs.
A. No roof sign shall exceed four feet above the wall line or top of the exterior wall; however, if the peak of the roof is over four feet above the wall line, roof signs cannot exceed the height of the peak.
B. All roof signs must adhere to a twenty-eight-foot overall height limitation. (Ord. 00-03 (part), 2000: Ord. 92-02 § 3.06, 1992)

15.44.070 Intermittent light, flashing or moving lights prohibited.
A. Lighted signs that flash, blink, create the appearance of movement, have moving light elements, or which otherwise change brightness, color, or lighting intensity, including intermittent display, lampbanks that change electronically, including time and temperature signs, are strictly prohibited. Christmas lights that are displayed during the month of December are exempt from this provision.
B. Electronic variable message signs (EVMS) are prohibited.
C. Real time video projected on outdoor display screens, outdoor video projection screens, and outdoor LED screens or outdoor display screens of any type are prohibited for use as signs, including in windows.
D. Lighted signs on property near a residential area shall be subdued and shall not be allowed to penetrate beyond the property in such a manner as to annoy or interfere with nearby residential properties. (Ord. 14-10 (part), 2014; Ord. 00-03 (part), 2000: Ord. 92-02 §§ 3.07, 3.08, 1992)

15.44.080 Signs in residential zones.
A. No advertising signs of any kind shall be allowed in any residential zone, except signs pertaining to the sale or lease of residential property, name plates, institutional signs, or signs indicating the existence of an office of a professional person, a home occupation, guest apartment and/or bed and breakfast establishment.
B. Lighted signs in residential zones must be indirect and no more than twenty-five watts total.
C. Residential signs, except for apartments and public and religious institutional signs, shall not exceed four square feet.
D. Apartments and guest apartments may be allowed up to sixteen square feet of signage if they have more than four units; four-plexes, tri-plexes and two-household dwellings may be allowed up to eight square feet of signage. (See Sections 15.44.200 and 15.44.210 for exceptions to the four square feet rule).
E. Political signs in residential zones may not exceed four square feet and are subject to all other restrictions as listed in Section 15.44.200(E).
F. Freestanding signs in residential zones may not exceed five feet in height measured from grade. (Ord. 19-13 § 21 (part), 2019; Ord. 00-03 (part), 2000: Ord. 92-02 § 3.09, 1992)

15.44.090 Public and religious signs in residential zones.
A. Public, public educational or religious institutional signs shall be located entirely upon the premises of that institution, shall not exceed an area of fifty square feet per frontage and shall require indirect lighting if lighted.
B. If mounted on a building, these signs shall be flat wall signs and shall not project above the roof line; if ground mounted, the top shall be no more than five feet above ground level.
C. Nonprofit, charitable and private institutional signs in residential zones shall not exceed four square feet. (Ord. 00-03 (part), 2000: Ord. 92-02 § 3.10, 1992)

15.44.100 Flags.
Flags other than government flags, i.e., country and state, shall be added towards the maximum allowable signage. Flag poles that display government flags shall not exceed thirty-five feet in height in commercial zones. (Ord. 00-03 (part), 2000: Ord. 92-02 § 3.11, 1992)

15.44.110 Computations.
The following principles set out in Sections 15.44.120 through 15.44.180 shall control the computation of signs. (Ord. 00-03 (part), 2000: Ord. 92-02 § 4, 1992)

15.44.120 Height-Computation.
The height of a sign shall be computed as the distance from the highest attached component or the sign to the nearest sidewalk, curb, or street crown, whichever is highest. (Ord. 00-03 (part), 2000: Ord. 92-02 § 4.01, 1992)

15.44.130 Area of individual signs-Computation.
The area of a sign face (which is also the sign area of a wall sign or other sign with only one face) shall be computed by means of the smallest square, circle, rectangle, triangle, or combination thereof that will encompass the extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem, or other display, together with any material or color forming an integral part of the background of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed, but not including any supporting framework, bracing, or decorative fence or wall when such fence or wall otherwise meets zoning ordinance regulations and is clearly incidental to the display itself. (Ord. 00-03 (part), 2000: Ord. 92-02 § 4.02, 1992)

15.44.140 Area of multifaced signs-Computation.
The sign area for a sign with more than one face shall be computed by adding together the area of all sign faces visible from any one point. When two identical sign faces are placed back-to-back, so that both faces cannot be viewed from any point at the same time, and when such sign faces are part of the same sign structure and are not more than forty-two inches apart, the sign area shall be computed by the measurement of one of the faces. (Ord. 00-03 (part), 2000: Ord. 92-02 § 4.03, 1992)

15.44.150 Number of freestanding signs per lot-Computation.
A. Primary Frontage. One freestanding sign per lot; one additional freestanding sign is permitted if property has more than two hundred feet of frontage (for exceptions, see Section 15.44.170). Two freestanding signs on one property must be separated by one hundred feet and the second sign shall not be higher than fifty percent of the allowed height.
B. Secondary Frontage. One freestanding sign is allowed on each additional frontage and shall not be higher than fifty percent of the allowed height. Two freestanding signs on one property must be separated by one hundred feet, and the second sign shall not be higher than the fifty percent of the allowed height. (Ord. 00-03 (part), 2000: Ord. 92-02 § 4.04, 1992)

15.44.160 Setbacks-Computation.
Signs may not block traffic visibility.
If a sign is located at an intersection, the following rules apply:
A. Signs located within a twenty-five-foot triangle (measured twenty-five feet from the street corner both ways) must be under two and one-half feet tall, or should have over eight feet of clearance to the bottom of the sign. This triangle shall be maintained in an open manner so as to provide proper clear view area.
B. All advertising signs shall be set back from public streets a distance at least equal to the distance that buildings are required to be set back within the zone in which the signs are located. Signs in C-4 zones have a twenty-five-foot setback with the exception of monument signs, which shall be set back at least two feet from the City right-of-way. (Ord. 00-03 (part), 2000: Ord. 92-02 § 4.05, 1992)

15.44.170 Shopping centers/office building complexes-Sign allowance.
Only one freestanding sign is allowed for shopping centers and office building complexes which lease to three or more businesses on one lot of record. The group freestanding sign identifying the shopping center/office building complexes and its businesses may use all sign area allowed for that lot. In addition, individual businesses may have one square foot of signage for each front line of building up to a maximum of one hundred twenty-eight square feet per business to identify their building. (Ord. 00-03 (part), 2000: Ord. 92-02 § 4.06, 1992)

15.44.180 Off-premises signs.
Off-premises signs shall be regulated the same as on-premises signs. The total allowable square footage of signage per lot for both off-premises and on-premises signs is determined according to the total linear street frontage of the lot upon which the sign is located. (Ord. 00-03 (part), 2000: Ord. 92-02 § 4.07, 1992)

15.44.190 Prohibited signs.
Signs which are erected after the adoption of this code and do not comply with the provisions of this chapter are prohibited. Other prohibited signs include the following:
A. Parked Vehicle Signs. Parked vehicles with a sign painted or placed on them and parked for the expressed intent of directing attention to a business are prohibited. This provision does not include vehicles used regularly in the course of conducting daily business activities.
B. Signs On Public Rights-of-Way. No private sign shall be placed on public rights-of-way.
C. Signs Attached to Public Property. No private sign shall be attached to public property or public utility poles.
D. Signs are not permitted on benches or other public service fixtures except bicycle racks. Signs on bicycle racks may not exceed one square foot in size. (Ord. 00-03 (part), 2000: Ord. 92-02 § 5-5.03, 1992)

15.44.200 Temporary signs.
A. General Provisions. 
    1. Temporary signs shall be figured in the total square footage allowed per lot.
    2. Sign owners must, designate areas where temporary signs will be displayed.
    3. Temporary signs displayed outside of designated areas require a permit.
    4. Temporary signs must be maintained and in good condition while being displayed.
    5. Signs less than six square feet in size and associated with an event do not require a permit.
B. Mobile Changeable Copy Signs. Mobile changeable copy signs shall not exceed thirty-two square feet and shall not be displayed for more than thirty consecutive days.
C. Balloon Signs. Balloon signs are allowed to be displayed for up to thirty days per lot per year.
D. Construction Signs. 
    1. No more than one construction sign identifying a project to be built and the project participants shall be allowed per lot.
    2. Construction signs in residential zones shall not exceed six square feet in area and five feet in height. In commercial zones the sign area shall not exceed fifty square feet and shall not exceed eight feet in height.
    3. Construction signs must not exceed the time period of construction and/or the day the business opens, whichever comes first, and shall be counted into the square footage of the total footage allowed for the lot.
    4. An additional thirty-two square feet is allowed in commercial zones for artist renditions of the project.
    5. Proposed development signs may be allowed for ninety days prior to ground breaking.
E. Political Campaign Signs. 
    1. Political campaign signs require a fifteen-dollar permit, shall pertain to a specific election and shall be displayed not earlier than forty-five calendar days prior to that election.
    2. Political campaign signs shall not be located closer than one hundred fifty feet to any designated polling place.
    3. Political campaign signs shall not exceed thirty-two square feet in commercial zones and four square feet in residential zones.
    4. Political campaign signs shall be removed within one day after the election day. The candidate or persons responsible for the placement of a political campaign sign shall be responsible for its removal.
F. Real Estate Signs. 
    1. In residential zones, real estate signs shall not exceed six square feet and shall not exceed five feet in height.
    2. In commercial zones, real estate signs shall not exceed thirty-two square feet.
    3. Real estate signs must be placed on the premises of the property being sold.
    4. Only one real estate sign per street frontage, per real estate company is allowed. (Ord. 00-03 (part), 2000: Ord. 92-02 § 6-6.05, 1992)

15.44.210 Exempt signs.
Sign permits are not required for the following signs unless the limitations and requirements of this section cannot be met. In such cases a sign permit is required.
A. Public Signs. Signs era noncommercial nature, erected by, or on the order of, a public officer in the performance of his duty, such as, but not limited to safety signs, danger signs, trespassing signs, traffic signs, memorial plaques, signs of historical interest, informational signs and the like.
B. Integral Signs. Names of buildings, dates of erection, monumental citations, commemorative tablets and the like when carved into stone, concrete or similar material or made of metal or other permanent-type construction and made an integral part of the structure.
C. Private Traffic Direction Signs. Signs directing traffic movement into a premises or within a premises not exceeding two square feet in area for each sign. Horizontal directional signs on paved areas and flush with paved areas are exempt from these standards. Only one exempt directional sign is allowed per frontage, per lot.
D. Service Sign. A sign that is incidental to a use lawfully occupying the property upon which the sign is located, and which sign is necessary to provide information to the public, such as direction to parking lots, location of restrooms, entrance and exits, etc. These signs shall not exceed two square feet in size.
E. Name Plates. A nameplate shall contain only the name and address of a resident.
F. Temporary Decorations. Temporary decorations or displays clearly incidental and associated with national or local holiday celebrations for a period not to exceed ninety days per year, per lot.
G. Nonbusiness Temporary Signs. Temporary signs not associated with businesses may be displayed not more than thirty days per year or exceed six square feet in size. Examples include garage sale signs, puppies-for-sale signs, agricultural produce sales, etc.
H. Rear Entrance Signs. Rear entrance signs, when associated with pedestrian walk-through buildings. These signs shall not exceed sixteen square feet in area and shall be flush-mounted, identifying only the name of the establishment and containing directional information.
I. Menu Signs. Menu signs at drive-in restaurants which are not readable from the nearest public right-of-way; and signs not visible beyond the boundaries of the lot or parcel upon which they are located or from any public right-of-way.
J. Private Warning or Instructional Signs. Private warning or instructional signs such as “No Soliciting,” “No Trespassing,” “Beware of Dog,” or other similar types of signs not exceeding two square feet per sign.
K. Murals. Murals must be painted or attached to the walls of buildings and are exempt from this chapter except for the lettering and logo portion of the mural.
L. Pennants, Window Dressings and Window Banners. Pennants, window dressings and window banners are exempt from the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 00-03 (part), 2000: Ord. 92-02 § 7-7.12, 1992)

15.44.220 Design, construction, maintenance and liability.
A. All signs shall be designed, constructed, and maintained to comply with applicable provisions of the Uniform Building Code, electrical code and all other codes of the City.
B. All signs shall be maintained and in good structural condition.
C. Sign owners are liable for their signs.
D. The City, the official and other agents of the City shall in no way be liable for damages caused by signs. (Ord. 00-03 (part), 2000: Ord. 92-02 § 8, 1992)

15.44.230 Abandoned signs.
A sign which meets the following criteria shall be considered an abandoned sign:
A. A sign which identifies an establishment, service(s), goods, or product(s) which are no longer provided on the premises where the sign is located. A sign which remains in such condition for a period of one month and which sign is otherwise conforming, shall have its copy vacated within thirty days from when the stated circumstances commenced. If the copy remains vacant for a period of six months or more from the date the stated circumstances commenced, the sign structure shall be removed by the sign owner. Removal shall be within five working days following the expiration of the six-month period.
B. A sign which identifies a time, event or purpose which has passed or no longer applies. Such sign shall be removed by the sign owner within three working days from time the event or purpose has passed or no longer applies.
C. An off-premises advertising sign which is vacant of copy or which advertises an establishment, service(s), goods or product(s) which no longer exist. Such sign which remains in the defined condition for a period of one month, shall be removed by the sign owner within five working days of the end of the one-month period.
D. When building mounted and painted wall signs or murals are removed, the face of the structure shall be treated to conform to surrounding building conditions. Such removal shall not leave any evidence of the sign’s existence. (Ord. 00-03 (part), 2000: Ord. 92-02 § 9, 1992)

15.44.240 Permit procedures and enforcement.
The following procedures set out in Sections 15.44.250 through 15.44.330 are required to obtain a sign permit in the City. (Ord. 00-03 (part), 2000: Ord. 92-02 § 10, 1992)

15.44.250 Permit--Required.
If a sign requiring a permit under the provisions of this chapter is to be placed, constructed, erected or altered on a lot, the sign owner shall secure a sign permit from the official prior to the construction, placement, erection or alteration of such a sign. (Ord. 00-03 (part), 2000: Ord. 92-02 § 10.01, 1992)

15.44.260 Applications.
A. All applications for sign permits of any kind and for approval shall be submitted to the official.
B. One application and permit may include multiple signs on the same lot.
C. An application for construction, creation, or installation of a new sign or for the structural alteration of an existing sign shall be accompanied by detailed drawings to scale of all existing and proposed signs on a lot and must show:
    1. The height of all signs on a lot;
    2. The square footage of all individual signs on a lot;
    3. The total combined square footage of all signs on a lot;
    4. A site plan indicating length of street frontage, location of buildings, parking lots, driveways, landscaped areas and all existing and proposed signs on the site--includes wall signs, projecting signs, suspended signs, roof signs, freestanding signs, window signs, murals, flags, etc.;
    5. The overall dimensions, design, structure, materials, proposed copy and illumination specifications of all signs requiring a permit on a lot; and
    6. Photograph(s) of the lot. (Ord. 00-03 (part), 2000: Ord. 92-02 § 10.02, 1992)

15.44.270 Fees.
A. Each application for a sign permit shall be accompanied by the applicable fee, which shall be established by resolution by the City Council. (Ord. 06-11 (part), 2006; Ord. 00-03 (part), 2000: Ord. 92-02 § 10.03, 1992)

15.44.280 Action on application.
Within five days of the date of submittal of an application the official shall review it for completeness and compliance. If the applicant complies to all the sign ordinance regulations, the official shall issue a permit to erect or alter such sign according to specifications in the application within fifteen days upon receipt of a completed application. If the official finds the application incomplete, the official shall send to the applicant a written notice of the application’s deficiencies, with appropriate corrections or references to the applicable section of this chapter. (Ord. 00-03 (part), 2000: Ord. 92-02 § 10.04, 1992)

15.44.290 Inspections.
The official shall cause an inspection for each permit issued for the erection of new signs and the structural alteration of existing signs. If the signs do not comply, the official shall issue the applicant written notice of the deficiencies and shall allow thirty days from the date of notice for the deficiencies to be corrected. If the deficiencies are not corrected by such date, the permit shall lapse. If sign(s) comply upon final inspection, the official shall sign a final inspection notice and the permit becomes binding until changes are made to the permitted sign or ownership of the sign changes. The official may also periodically inspect lots to see that sign owners comply to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 00-03 (part), 2000: Ord. 92-02 § 10.05, 1992)

15.44.300 Renewal of sign permits.
It is the intent of this chapter for the renewal sign permitting process to be tied in with yearly business license renewal. If sign owners comply to the provisions of this chapter and make no structural alterations or changes to their existing registered and permitted signs, the City shall automatically renew sign permits every year by June 30th. The renewal sign permit fee shall be waived if the sign owner has not constructed, placed, erected, or structurally altered existing registered signage to a lot. A new application must be processed and an applicable fee shall be charged for signs constructed, placed, erected, or structurally altered to existing registered signage to a lot. (Ord. 00-03 (part), 2000: Ord. 92-02 § 10.06, 1992)

15.44.310 Lapse of sign permit.
A. A sign permit shall lapse automatically if the permit is not renewed or if the business license for the premises lapses or is revoked.
B. Sign permits shall lapse for abandoned signs.
C. Once a sign permit lapses, a new sign permit is required with the appropriate fees. (Ord. 00-03 (part), 2000: Ord. 92-02 § 10.07, 1992)

15.44.320 Registration of existing signs.
A. After the ordinance codified in this chapter is approved, all signs (including previously permitted signs) must be registered with the City by the sign owner within a two-year period.
B. Sign owners that have not received a previous permit for their sign(s) must obtain a sign permit.
C. Existing nonconforming signs that do not comply with this chapter shall be kept on record with the City. (Ord. 00-03 (part), 2000: Ord. 92-02 § 10.08, 1992)

15.44.330 Nonconforming sign.
A nonconforming sign may not be moved to a new location, structurally altered, enlarged, or replaced unless it is made to comply with the provisions of this chapter. If a nonconforming sign changes ownership, the sign(s) must comply with the provisions of this chapter within six months of close of purchase. (Ord. 00-03 (part), 2000: Ord. 92-02 § 10.09, 1992)

15.44.340 Violations.
A. The following constitute violations of this chapter:
    1. The installation, maintenance, operation or alteration of any sign which is not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter or this municipal code.
    2. The installation, maintenance, operation, or alteration of any sign in a manner contrary to any plan or permit issued by the City.
    3. The installation, operation, maintenance or alteration of any sign requiring a permit without first obtaining a permit or after a permit has been revoked.
    4. Failure to remove a sign that is installed, operated, maintained or altered in violation of this chapter or this municipal code.
    5. Failure to renew a sign permit upon expiration. (Ord. 00-03 (part), 2000: Ord. 92-02 § 10.10, 1992)

15.44.350 Notice, enforcement and penalties.
A. For purposes of enforcement, each day that a sign is maintained or operated in violation of this chapter or this municipal code shall constitute a separate offense, punishable as provided under this section.
B. Prior to any enforcement action, the City code enforcement officer shall issue a written notice of violation to any person, firm or entity owning or operating a sign in violation of this chapter or the provisions of this municipal code, which notice shall allow the sign owner or operator thirty calendar days in which to correct or abate any violation.
C. Any violation which is not corrected within thirty calendars days of written notice from the City shall be subject, at the option of the City, to administrative, civil and criminal enforcement as provided in this chapter.
D. The City may commence a civil action to enjoin or abate any ongoing or continuing violation of this chapter or this municipal code. In any civil action an injunction may issue upon proof of a violation of this chapter or this municipal code and without further showing of irreparable harm. Violations of this chapter constitute a Class B misdemeanor, as defined under the Utah Code, as amended, and as such, the court may attach a fine up to one thousand dollars for each violation. Additionally, the City is entitled to recover its reasonable attorney fees and court costs in any civil action where a violation is established.
E. In addition to all other remedies for violations, any business that fails or refuses to abate or correct any sign violation under this chapter or this municipal code following the issuance of a written notice of violation shall be subject to a business license revocation, as provided under Chapter 5.04 of this municipal code.
F. City code enforcement personnel shall have no authority to issue or renew a sign permit for a sign which is not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter or this municipal code. The official may suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this chapter if it is discovered that the permit was issued in error as a result of incorrect, incomplete, or inaccurate information supplied by the applicant or its agent, or where the permit is otherwise found to have been wrongfully issued as a result of misrepresentation by the permittee. A permit issued in violation of law or under a mistake of fact made by the permittee shall not confer any vested property right upon the applicant. Prior to revocation under this section, the official shall deliver written notice to the applicant explaining the basis for the revocation.
G. Upon final inspection by code enforcement personnel, the issued permit is binding until such time changes are made to the permitted sign or ownership of the sign changes. (Ord. 00-03 (part), 2000: Ord. 92-02 § 10.11, 1992)

15.44.360 Unsafe, illegal and nonmaintained signs.
The official shall issue written notice of violation to the sign owner found in violation of this code or any sign found unsafe, illegal or not maintained. (Ord. 00-03 (part), 2000: Ord. 92-02 § 10.12, 1992)

15.44.370 Removal of signs.
If any unsafe sign is not repaired or made safe within five days after giving such written notice, the official shall remove the sign. If any sign is found in violation of this code, illegal, or not maintained and is not made conforming to this code within thirty days after given written notice, the official may remove such sign(s). The sign owner shall pay the City within thirty days after written notice the cost incurred to remove such sign(s). (Ord. 00-03 (part), 2000: Ord. 92-02 § 10.13, 1992)

15.44.380 Right of appeal/variance.
A. Any person who is issued a written notice of violation, or any person who is denied a sign permit, or who objects to the conditions attached to a sign permit, or any interpretation of this chapter or this municipal code by the code enforcement officer may appeal that decision or seek a variance before the appeal authority by filing a written notice of application within thirty calendar days of any adverse decision, notice or order. Failure to appeal or apply for a variance within the time provided shall render the decision final and result in waiver of any further rights to contest or review the decision.
    1. Hearings before the appeal authority shall be conducted informally. The appeal authority shall be empowered to hear all relevant testimony and review all documents and items of physical evidence in reaching its decision. The appeal authority in Utah has jurisdiction only in variances for minor departures from the regulation. Persons seeking a variance are entitled to see the By-Laws of the Appeal Authority, Land Use Development and Management Act, Title 10, Chapter 9, Cities and Towns, which outlines procedures for a variance.
    2. The appeal authority’s authority to render decisions is limited to the following:
        a. Appeals of staff decisions concerning the application or interpretation of this chapter or this municipal code to a sign permit, permit application or written notice of violation.
        b. Variances to the strict application of this chapter or this municipal code where an applicant can show extreme or unreasonable hardship, special circumstances due to site constraints or surrounding land uses, or where a variance is essential to the enjoyment of a substantial property right associated with the parcel.
        c. The applicant bears the burden of proof in showing an error of interpretation of this code by the staff, and in showing entitlement to a variance. Variances shall be permitted only where consistent with the spirit of this municipal code. A variance cannot substantially affect the General Plan nor be contrary to public interest. In no case shall the appeal authority issue a variance resulting in the expansion in scope of a nonconforming use.
    3. The appeal authority may attach conditions to any variance to mitigate the harmful effects of the variance, address concerns of neighboring property owners or otherwise promote the policies contained in this chapter and this municipal code. A sign variance shall run with the property to which it attaches for so long as the sign shall remain in use. An interruption in use for a period of six consecutive months or more shall result in the lapse of the variance.
    4. The appeal authority shall have thirty calendar days to hear and render their binding decision. The decision of the appeal authority can be contested and/or appealed only through the judicial system per Utah State Law. (Ord. 10-06, 2010; Ord. 00-03 (part), 2000: Ord. 92-02 § 11, 1992)

15.44.390 Definitions.
A. General Definitions. 
    1. “Alteration” means a change or rearrangement in the structural part of design whether by extending on a side, by increasing in area or height, or by relocating or change in position. Alterations shall include changes to all support and frame members including panels. Alterations shall not be interpreted to include changing outdoor bulletin or other similar signs which are designed to accommodate changeable copy.
    2. Building, Front Line of. “Front line of building” means the line of that face of the building or structure nearest the front line of the lot. This face includes sun parlors, bay windows, covered and/or uncovered porches whether enclosed or unenclosed, but does not include uncovered steps less than four feet above grade and eaves overhanging less than two feet.
    3. “Clear view area” means a triangular area formed by the intersection of lines extended from the front facet of the curb and a line connecting them at points twenty-five feet from the intersection of the lines.
    4. “Frontage” means the distance for which a lot line of a zone lot adjoins a public street, from one lot line intersecting such street to the furthest distant lot line intersecting the same street.
    5. “Illegal sign” means any sign erected or altered after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter governing signs from which this chapter was derived, not complying with the provisions thereof, unless such provision was expressly waived or granted a variance, is an illegal sign.
    6. “Lot” means any piece or parcel of land, the boundaries of which have been established by some legal instrument of record, that is recognized and intended as a unit for the purpose of transfer of ownership.
    7. “Nonconforming sign or sign structure” means a sign or sign structure or portion thereof lawfully existing at the time of its construction which does not conform to all height, area, yard spacing, animation, lighting or other regulations prescribed in the zone in which it is located.
    8. “Official” means the City’s designated official to enforce this chapter.
    9. “Shopping center” means any group of three or more businesses on one lot of record.
    10. “Sign” means any device, fixture, placard or structure that uses any color, form, graphic, illumination, symbol or writing to advertise, announce the purpose of, or identify the purpose of a person or entity, or to communicate information of any kind to the public.
    11. “Sign face” means one continuous surface with no visual breaks separated from any other sign face by at least six inches.
    12. “Sign owner” means the owner, user, property owner, applicant or person having charge or control of a sign.
    13. “Sign setback” means the minimum distance that any portion of a sign or sign structure shall be from any street right-of-way line.
    14. “Sign structure” means anything constructed or erected supporting a sign which requires locations on or below the ground or attached to something having locations on or below ground.
B. The following are individual sign definitions which are specific types of signs included within the general definitions above.
    1. “Animated sign” means a sign which involves motion or rotation of any part, created by artificial means, or which displays flashing, revolving or intermittent lights, including EVMS or other electric, electronic or computer changeable signs, including time and temperature signs.
    2. “Balloon sign” means advertisement supported by a balloon anchored to the premises where the advertised use is conducted, product or commodity sold, service performed, or business name is located.
    3. “Banner sign” means any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material. National, state or municipal flags are not considered banners.
    4. “Beacon” means any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the same zone lot as the light source; also, any light with one or more beams that rotates or moves.
    5. “Changeable copy sign” means a sign, or portion thereof, on which copy is changed manually in the field; e.g., readerboards with changeable letters.
    6. “Construction sign” means a sign identifying an existing or proposed development project which may contain the name of the project, name and address of construction firms, architects, engineers, developers, etc.
    7. “Electronic variable message sign (EVMS)” means a sign using electronics to display copy or graphics with changeable message where the lettering is made up of lights or matrix elements.
    8. “Flag” means any fabric, banner or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns, or symbols, used as a symbol of a government, political subdivision or other entity.
    9. “Flashing sign” means a sign which has or appears to have motion or rotation of the lighting elements, or displays flashing or intermittent light including EVMS and time and temperature signs.
    10. “Freestanding sign” means a permanent sign supported by structures or supports that are placed on, or anchored in, the ground and that are independent from any building or other structure.
    11. “Illuminated sign” means a sign in which a source of light is used in order to make the message readable. This definition shall include internally and externally lighted signs.
    12. “Monument sign” means a sign less than six feet in height above the curb. It is to be flush to the ground or a gap less than twelve inches from the ground permanently affixed, and is to be incorporated into the landscape or architectural design scheme and has to display the name of the building, occupants and/or business.
    13. “Name plate” means a sign indicating the name and/or address of a person legally occupying the premises.
    14. “Off-premises sign” means an advertising sign which directs attention to a use, product, commodity or service not related to the premises on which the sign is located.
    15. “On-premises sign” means a sign directing attention to a use conducted, product, commodity sold, service performed or business name upon the premises on which it is located.
    16. “Pennant sign” means any lightweight plastic, fabric or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire or string, usually in series, designated to move in the wind.
    17. “Portable sign” means a sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported, including, but not limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of wheels, signs converted to sidewalk signs, balloons used as signs and umbrellas used for advertising.
    18. “Projecting sign” means a sign which is affixed to an exterior wall or building or structure solely supported by and projecting away from the building.
    19. “Property sign” means a sign related to the property upon which it is located and offering such information as address, name of occupancy for residential uses, sale or lease of the property, warning against trespassing, any hazard, or other danger on the property.
    20. “Proposed development sign” means a sign announcing intent to construct a new development project.
    21. “Real time video” or “video players” means projection of real time video footage, or any video footage, to an LED or any other display screen.
    22. “Roof sign” means a sign which is erected partly or wholly on the roof of the building. This includes any sign mounted to a building which extends above the highest portion of the roof structure. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a sign structure having main supports embedded in the ground shall not be considered to be a roof sign even if the sign’s supports pass through a roof, canopy, or parapet of a building.
    23. “Suspended sign” means a sign that is suspended from the underside of a horizontal plane surface and is supported by such surface.
    24. “Temporary sign” means any sign, banner, pennant, valance or advertising display constructed of paper, cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wallboard or other light materials, with or without frames, intended to be displayed outdoors for a limited period of time.
    25. “Wall sign” means a sign that is either painted on a wall or its facing; or a sign which is affixed to an extension wall or building or structure and which does not project more than eighteen inches from the building or structure wall.
    26. “Window sign” means any sign, picture, symbol or combination thereof, designed to communicate information about an activity, business, commodity, event, sale or service, that is placed inside a window or upon the window panes or glass and is visible from the exterior of the window. (Ord. 14-10 (part), 2014; Ord. 00-03 (part), 2000: Ord. 92-02 § 12, 1992)

Chapter 15.48 RESERVED1
1 Editor’s note: Ord. No. 10-21, § 1, adopted November 9, 2010, repealed Chapter 15.48, §§ 15.48.010--15.48.060, which pertained to the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings Code and derived from Ord. No. 91-12, 1991.

Title 16 SUBDIVISIONS

Chapters:
16.04        Definitions
16.08        Procedure
16.12        Preliminary Plat
16.16        Final Plat
16.20        Required Improvements
16.24        Design Standards
16.28        Administration and Enforcement

Chapter 16.04 DEFINITIONS

Sections:
16.04.010    Definitions.

16.04.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
Refer to Section 17.06.020, definitions, for terms beginning with the letters A through E.
“Final plat” means a map or chart of a subdivision which has been accurately surveyed by a registered surveyor and such survey is marked on the ground so that streets, alleys, blocks, lots and other divisions thereof can be identified.
“Lot” means a portion of a subdivision or parcel of land intended as a unit for building development or transfer of ownership.
“Lot width” is the width of the lot measured along the minimum building setback line.
“Major street” means one of the principal thoroughfares, as shown or designated on the master street plan.
“Marginal access street” means a minor street which is parallel to and adjacent to a major street and which provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic.
“Master street plan” means a plan labeled “Master Street Plan of Moab City,” including maps or reports or both, which have been approved by the Planning Commission and City Council as required by law.
“Minor streets” means any dedicated street serving as the principal means of access to property, which street is not shown on the master street plan as a principal thoroughfare.
“Official map” means any map adopted by the City Council under the provisions of Title 10, Chapter 9, Section 7, Utah Code Annotated, 1953, as amended.
“Other public dedication” means parks, playgrounds, drainage channels or other areas of land to be dedicated to public use.
“Preliminary approval” means an approval, with or without recommended alterations, given to a preliminary plat by the Planning Commission and provides the necessary authority to proceed with the preparations of the final plat.
“Preliminary plat” means a map or chart of a proposed subdivision.
“Setback lines” means the shortest distance between the property line and the foundation, wall or main frame of the building.
“Subdivider” means any person laying out or making subdivision for the purposes of first sale, offering for sale or first selling for himself or others of the subdivision or any part thereof.
“Subdivision” means a described tract of land which has been divided into three or more lots, tracts or parcels of five acres or less in area. (Ord. 11-07, 2011; Ord. 13-81 (part), 1981: prior code § 22-1-1)

Chapter 16.08 PROCEDURE

Sections:
16.08.010    Preliminary procedure.
16.08.020    Exceptions--Final plat.
16.08.030    Exceptions--Exceptional conditions.
16.08.040    One main dwelling structure to a lot.
16.08.050    Vacating or changing a subdivision plat.

16.08.010 Preliminary procedure.
Before dividing any tract of land into two or more lots, a subdivider shall:
A. Prior to or coincident with the submission of the preliminary plat, file with the zoning administrator a completed subdivision information form or forms to be furnished by the zoning administrator;
B. File with the zoning administrator for examination and subsequent approval or disapproval by the Planning Commission, after a public hearing noticed according to Utah State Code 10-9a-207, eight black and white prints of the preliminary plat prepared in conformance with the provisions of this title. Prints shall be filed at least thirty days prior to the Planning Commission meeting at which time the plat may be considered, and shall be accompanied by a filing fee in conformance with the following schedule:
    1. The fee schedule for subdivisions shall be established by resolution;
C. Within one year after receiving approval of the preliminary plat by the Planning Commission, unless such time is extended by the Planning Commission, submit the original and three copies of the final plat to the Planning Commission for final approval or disapproval, as the case may be;
D. The City administrator shall present, after the Planning Commission has given approval to the plat, the original of the final plat to the City Council for their decision;
E. Following final approval by the City Council, the final plat bearing all official signatures and/or approvals as herein required shall be submitted to the office of the county recorder for recording by the subdivider. A sepia, autopositive, CD disc or other reproducible copy together with two standard prints of the final plat shall be supplied to the zoning administrator. The final plat of a subdivision shall be recorded within a period of one hundred eighty days following approval by the City Council. A one-time extension of an additional thirty days may be granted at the discretion of the City Council. Failure on the part of the subdivider to record a final plat of a subdivision within the time period above shall render the plat invalid and reconsideration by both the City Planning Commission and the City Council will be required before its acceptance. (Ord. 13-12, 2013: Ord. 06-11 (part), 2006; Ord. 06-01 (part), 2006: Ord. 13-81 (part), 1981: prior code §22-2-1)

16.08.020 Exceptions--Final plat.
In subdivisions of less than five lots, land may be sold after recording of a plat, if all the following conditions are met:
A. The subdivision plan shall have been approved by the Planning Commission, the planning coordinator, the City Engineer, the City Attorney, other agencies the zoning administrator deems necessary, and the City Council;
B. The subdivision is not traversed by lines of a proposed street, and does not require the dedication of any land for street or other purposes;
C. Each lot within the subdivision meets the frontage width and area requirements of the zoning title or has been granted a variance from such requirements by the appeal authority;
D. All final plat requirements shall be complied with;
E. All provisions of Chapter 16.20 of this title shall be complied with; and
F. The water supply and sewage disposal shall have been approved by the utility supervisor. (Ord. 10-06, 2010; Ord. 13-81 (part), 1981: prior code §22-2-2)

16.08.030 Exceptions--Exceptional conditions.
In cases where unusual topographic or other exceptional conditions exist, variations and exceptions from this title may be made by the City Council, after the recommendation of the Planning Commission, provided that such variation and exceptions may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing the intent and purpose of this title. (Ord. 13-81 (part), 1981: prior code §22-2-3)

16.08.040 One main dwelling structure to a lot.
Except for a guest house or group dwelling permitted in the zoning title, not more than one main dwelling structure shall occupy any one lot. (Ord. 13-81 (part), 1981: prior code §22-2-4)

16.08.050 Vacating or changing a subdivision plat.
Any proposed vacation, alteration, change or amendment to a subdivision plat must comply with the Utah State Code noticing requirements of 10-9a-205 and the requirements of vacation or change in platted subdivision outlined by the Utah State Code 10-9a-608.
+--------------------+---------------------+---------------------+------------------+-----------------+
| Application/Action |    Advisory Body    | Land Use Authority  |   Appeal Body    | Required Public |
|                    |                     |                     |                  |     Hearing     |
+--------------------+---------------------+---------------------+------------------+-----------------+
| Prelim Plat        |                     | Planning Commission | AA               | Yes PC          |
+--------------------+---------------------+---------------------+------------------+-----------------+
| Final Plat         | Planning Commission | City Council        | District Court   | No              |
+--------------------+---------------------+---------------------+------------------+-----------------+
| Amend Plat*        |                     | City Council        | District Court   | No              |
+--------------------+---------------------+---------------------+------------------+-----------------+
| Amend Plat         | Planning Commission | City Council        | District Court   | Yes PC & CC     |
+--------------------+---------------------+---------------------+------------------+-----------------+
| Modify Lot Lines   |                     | City Council        | District Court   | No              |
+--------------------+---------------------+---------------------+------------------+-----------------+
| Subd Ord/ Amend    | Planning Commission | City Council        | District Court   | Yes PC          |
+--------------------+---------------------+---------------------+------------------+-----------------+
| Condo. Conversion  | Staff               | Planning Commission | Appeal Authority | No              |
+--------------------+---------------------+---------------------+------------------+-----------------+
| New Condo. App.    | (See procedures for site plan, subdivision, or planned developments,           |
|                    | as applicable)                                                                 |
+--------------------+---------------------+---------------------+------------------+-----------------+
*If all owners within the plat sign to permit amendment and it is not (1) a multi-residential, industrial or commercial subdivision nor does it (2) involve vacation of a public R-O-W, CC can approve without public hearings by PC or CC.
Proof of sewer or water availability for noncity authorities. Developer is required to submit a letter from a sewer and water authority stating that the authority can and will provide water or sewer or both, to any subdivision, multi-residential or industrial development located with the Moab City where the City is not the provider of such services. The required letter shall be submitted prior to preliminary plat approval and shall provide size, condition and capacity of water and sewer lines that are intended to provide such services to the development. (Ord. 10-06, 2010; Ord. 06-10 (part), 2006; Ord. 06-01 (part), 2006; Ord. 92-04, 1992)

Chapter 16.12 PRELIMINARY PLAT

Sections:
16.12.010    Preparation--Generally.
16.12.020    Description and delineation.
16.12.030    Existing conditions.
16.12.040    Proposed subdivision plan.
16.12.050    Preliminary plan approval.

16.12.010 Preparation--Generally.
The preliminary plat, prepared on tracing paper twenty-four inches by thirty inches, shall contain the information herein specified and comply with the requirements set out in Sections 16.12.020 through 16.12.040. (Ord. 13-81 (part), 1981: prior code §22-3-1 (part))

16.12.020 Description and delineation.
In a title block located in the lower right-hand corner the following shall appear:
A. The proposed name of the subdivision;
B. The location of the subdivision, including:
    1. Address,
    2. Section, township and range;
C. The names and addresses of the owner, the subdivider, if different than the owner, and of the designer of the subdivision;
D. The date of preparation, scale (no less than one inch to equal one hundred feet) and the north point. (Ord. 13-81 (part), 1981: prior code §22-3-1(1))

16.12.030 Existing conditions.
The plat shall show:
A. The location of and dimensions to the nearest benchmark or monument;
B. The boundary line of the proposed subdivision indicated by a solid heavy line and the total acreage encompassed thereby;
C. All property under the control of the subdivider, even though only a portion is being subdivided. Where the plat submitted covers only a part of the subdivider’s tract, a sketch of the prospective street system of the unplatted parts of the subdivider’s land shall be submitted, and the street system shall be considered in the light of existing master street plans or other Planning Commission studies;
D. The location, width and names of all existing streets within two hundred feet of the subdivision and of all prior platted streets or other public ways, utility rights-of-way, parks, and other public open spaces, permanent buildings and structures, houses or permanent easements, within and adjacent to the tract;
E. The location of all wells, proposed or active and abandoned within the tract and to a distance of at least one hundred feet beyond the tract boundaries;
F. Existing sewers, water mains, culverts or other underground facilities within the tract and the distance of at least one hundred feet beyond the tract boundaries including pipe sizes, grades, manholes and their exact location;
G. Existing ditches, canals, natural drainage channels and open waterways and proposed realignments;
H. Boundary lines of adjacent tracts or unsubdivided land, showing ownership where possible;
I. Contours at vertical intervals of not more than two feet, high water levels of all watercourses, if any, shall be indicated in the same datum for contour elevations and, without exception, shall be shown in the most current North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) available. (Ord. 13-02, 2013; Ord. 13-81 (part), 1981: prior code §22-3-1(2))

16.12.040 Proposed subdivision plan.
The subdivision plan shall show:
A. The layout of streets, showing location, widths and other dimensions of (designated by actual or proposed names and numbers) proposed streets, crosswalks, alleys and easements;
B. The layout, numbers and typical dimensions of lots;
C. Parcels of land intended to be dedicated or temporarily reserved for public use or set aside for use of property owners in the subdivision;
D. A tentative plan or method by which the subdivider proposes to handle storm drainage for the subdivision. (Ord. 13-81 (part), 1981: prior code §22-3-1(3))

16.12.050 Preliminary plan approval.
Following a review of the preliminary plat by the Planning Commission, the planning coordinator, the City Engineer, the utility supervisor, the utility companies and other agencies as required by the zoning administrator, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing before acting on the plat as submitted or modified. If the plat is approved, the Planning Commission shall express its written approval with whatever conditions are attached, by returning one copy of the preliminary plat, signed by the zoning administrator to the subdivider. One signed copy shall be given to the City Engineer and one copy retained by the zoning administrator; other copies to be distributed as determined by the zoning administrator. If the preliminary plat is disapproved, the Planning Commission shall indicate its disapproval in writing and give reason for such disapproval by means of signed copies. The Planning Commission action can be appealed to the appeal authority within thirty days of written notice to the subdivider. The receipt of a signed copy of the approved preliminary plat shall be authorization for the subdivider to proceed with the preparation of the final plat. No construction of the subdivision shall commence until final approval has been given and the plat recorded. (Ord. 10-06, 2010; Ord. 06-01 (part), 2006: Ord. 13-81 (part), 1981: prior code §22-3-2)

Chapter 16.16 FINAL PLAT

Sections:
16.16.010    Preparation-Generally.
16.16.020    Description and delineation.
16.16.030    Standard forms to be included.
16.16.040    Reserved.

16.16.010 Preparation-Generally.
The final plat, which must be prepared by a licensed land surveyor on a sheet of tracing linen twenty-four inches by thirty inches and made with approved waterproof black drawing ink, shall be so drawn that the top of the sheet faces either north or east, whichever accommodates the drawing best and shall comply with the provisions set out in Sections 16.16.020 through 16.16.040. (Ord. 13-81 (part), 1981: prior code § 22-4-1 (part))

16.16.020 Description and delineation.
The final plat shall show the following:
A. The name of the subdivision;
B. Accurate angular and linear dimensions for all lines, angles and curves used to describe boundaries, streets, alleys, easements, areas to be reserved for public use and any other important features;
C. An identification system for all lots and blocks and names of streets. Lot lines shall show dimensions in feet and hundredths. Actual house numbers, as assigned by the City Engineer, shall be shown;
D. True angles and distances to the nearest established street lines or official monuments, which shall be accurately described on the final plat and shown by appropriate symbols;
E. Radii, internal angles, points and curvatures, tangent bearings and the length of all curves;
F. The accurate location of all monuments and fire hydrants to be installed shown by the appropriate symbol. All United States, state, city or other official benchmarks, monuments or triangulation stations in or adjacent to the property, shall be preserved in precise position;
G. Dedicate to the City all streets, highways, and other public lands included in the proposed subdivision;
H. Pipes or other such physical monuments as shall be placed at each lot corner;
I. Where it is proposed that streets be constructed on property controlled by a public agent or utility company, approval for the location, improvement and maintenance of such streets be obtained from the public agency or utility company and entered on the final plat in a form approved by the City Attorney. (Ord. 13-81 (part), 1981: prior code § 22-4-1(1))

16.16.030 Standard forms to be included.
The final plat shall contain the following:
A. A registered professional engineer or land surveyors’ “Certificate of Survey”;
B. The owners’ “Certificate of Dedication”;
C. A notary public’s “Acknowledgement”;
D. The City Planning Commission’s “Certificate of Approval”;
E. The City Engineers’ “Certificate of Approval”;
F. The utility supervisors’ “Certificate of Approval”;
G. The City Attorney’s “Certificate of Approval”;
H. The City Council’s “Certificate of Approval”;
I. Certificate of filing to be completed by county recorder;
J. The planning coordinator’s “Certificate of Approval.” (Ord. 13-81 (part), 1981: prior code § 22-4-1(2))

16.16.040 Reserved.
Editor’s note: Ord. No. 17-11, adopted May 9, 2017, repealed § 16.16.040, which pertained to the time limit for final plat recordation and derived from prior code § 22-4-1(3) and Ord. No. 13-81, 1981.

Chapter 16.20 REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS

Sections:
16.20.010    Certification required.
16.20.020    Sewers and sewerage facilities.
16.20.030    Stormwater drainage.
16.20.040    Storm drainage.
16.20.050    Street improvements.
16.20.060    Performance bonds.

16.20.010 Certification required.
No final plat of a subdivision of land shall be recorded, except as provided in Section 16.08.020, without receiving a statement signed by the City zoning administrator certifying that the improvements described in the subdivider’s plans and specifications meet the minimum requirements of all ordinances of the City, that they comply with the recommendations of the City Engineer, the Planning Commission, the planning coordinator, the fire department, the utility supervisor, and other applicable agencies. (Ord. 13-81 (part), 1981: prior code § 22-55-1 (part))

16.20.020 Sewers and sewerage facilities.
Where a public sanitary sewer is reasonably accessible (within two hundred feet from the outside boundary of a subdivision), the subdivider shall connect with such sanitary sewer and provide adequate sewer lines accessible to the property line of each lot. The subdivider shall install a wye connection for each lot in the subdivision at the time the sewer main is laid. The sewer line will be stubbed in to all lots of record fronting the street before any paving is installed. When a subdivider is required to make connections to lots not in his subdivisions, the City shall credit the subdivider one hundred fifty dollars per lot. When service is late requested for said lots, the property owner will pay fees as stipulated in Section 13.08.070, Fees. Sewer connections and subdivision sewer systems shall be installed in accordance with the City specifications under the direction of the City Engineer. Where a public sewer is not reasonably accessible, the subdivider, upon approval of the City Council, may either install individual sewer facilities at his expense or require that builders provide such facilities as part of the construction of buildings or structures. Where individual sewerage facilities are to be installed, the City Council shall be assured that the sanitary condition of the land will be fully safeguarded. (Ord. 13-81 (part), 1981: prior code § 22-5-1(1))

16.20.030 Stormwater drainage.
A stormwater drainage system subject to review by the City Engineer and the approval of the public works director and city planner, shall be required by the City and e the responsibility of the project applicant. The system shall be separate and independent of the sanitary sewer system. The plans for the drainage system shall be prepared by a licensed engineer. The costs associated for this study shall be the sold responsibility of the project applicant. (Ord. 95-20 (part), 1995: Ord. 13-81 (part), 1981: prior code § 22-5-1(2))

16.20.040 Storm drainage.
No ditch or canal shall be approved as suitable for the use of storm drainage water without the written permission of the appropriate ditch or canal company or of the water users for such use. No ditch or canal shall be used for stormwater unless adequately improved to handle such water as might be reasonably expected to flow from canal and ditch water, subdivision runoff, and other water expected to reach such canal or ditch. No ditch, canal or other waterway shall be permitted within properly dedicated or to be dedicated for public use. (Ord. 13-81 (part), 1981: prior code § 22-5-1(3))

16.20.050 Street improvements.
At least ten days prior to the commencement of construction, the subdivider shall furnish to the City Engineer a complete set of construction plans and profiles of all streets, existing and proposed, within the subdivision. The City Engineer shall, within a reasonable time not to exceed thirty days from the receipt of the plans, notify the subdivider of approval or disapproval, and in case of disapproval of the reasons therefor. Such plans and profiles shall include:
A. The designation of limits of work to be done;
B. The location of the benchmark and its true elevation according to city datum, all profiles to be referred to that datum;
C. Profiles which indicate the finished and existing grades for each side of the street. Separate profiles, clearly designated, shall be made for each side of the street;
D. Construction plans which include the details of curb and gutter and street cross-sections, location and elevation of manholes, catchbasins and storm sewers, elevations and location of fire hydrants and any other detail necessary to simplify construction;
E. Complete data for field layout and office checking;
F. On curb returns, at least two additional control points for elevation besides those at points of curvature. Control points shall be staked in the field to insure drainage at intersections;
G. The street address of the project;
H. Grades of streets shall be as follows:
    1. Arterial street: minimum grade 0.5%, maximum grade 5.0%,
    2. Collector street: minimum grade 0.5%, maximum grade 7.0%,
    3. Minor street: minimum grade 0.5%, maximum grade 12.0%;
I. All streets within the City shall be improved with pavements bounded by integral concrete curbs and gutters to an overall width in accordance with the standards, rules and regulations adopted by the City Council;
J. Pavements shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of the standards, rules and regulations adopted by the City Council;
K. All curbs and gutters on all streets shall be concrete of the standard high-back-type unit, not less than two feet, six inches in overall width, and not less than seven inches thick where the curb abuts the street pavement;
L. Stormwater inlets and catchbasins shall be provided within the roadway improvements at points specified by the City Engineer;
M. All curb corners shall have a radius of not less than twenty-four feet and at intersections involving collector or major streets of not less than twenty-five feet. However, if in the opinion of the City Engineer, a smaller radius would suffice, he may grant an exception therefrom;
N. The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make provision for the continuation of the existing streets in adjoining areas and shall provide access to unsubdivided adjoining areas insofar as such continuation or access shall be deemed necessary by the Planning Commission. New streets must connect with existing public streets;
O. Minor streets shall approach the arterial or collector streets at an angle of not less than eighty degrees;
P. Fire hydrants shall be installed in all subdivisions in accordance with the regulations of the fire department;
Q. Street lights shall be installed in all subdivisions in the number and location specified by the City. Installation shall be in accordance with the regulations of the power company;
R. Open ditches or canals shall not be allowed within or adjoining a subdivision except along rear or side lot lines. The subdivider shall work with the irrigation, drainage or ditch companies as to:
    1. Methods of covering, realigning or eliminating ditches or canals within or adjoining the subdivision,
    2. The size of pipe and culverts required,
    3. The responsibility for the periodic inspection, cleaning and maintenance of such ditches, pipes and culverts. In cases where canals or ditches cross public roads or proposed public roads, specifications and grades for pipe or culvert must be approved by the City Engineer;
S. The subdivider shall install a six-foot, nonclimbable chain-link fence, or its equivalent along all open ditches, canals or waterways, nonaccess streets, open reservoirs or bodies of water, and other such features of potentially hazardous nature, on crossing or contiguous to the property being subdivided, except on those features which the Planning Commission shall determine would not be a hazard to life, or where the conforming structure would not create a hazard to the safety of the public;
T. The subdivider shall install curbs, gutter, and sidewalks on existing and proposed streets in all subdivisions, including on the rear of such lots as back on arterial streets when the Planning Commission determines that pedestrian access along said arterial street is necessary;
U. Street name signs, conforming to the design and specifications and in the number provided by the standards, rules and regulations of the City, shall be provided by the developer at all street intersections. Installation shall be made by the developer and inspected by the City. (Ord. 13-81 (part), 1981: prior code § 22-5-1(4))

16.20.060 Performance bonds.
A. After final approval but before recordation of the final plat, the developer must complete all improvements required in the subdivision agreement with the City or in lieu thereof, the subdivider may guarantee the installation thereof with a bond and sureties guaranteeing the standards of improvements. The bond shall be approved by the City Council and the City Attorney.
    1. The subdivider may furnish and file with the City Council a bond in an amount equal to one and one-half times the cost of the improvements not previously installed as determined by the City Engineer to assure the installation of such improvements within a two-year period. The bond will be guaranteed by a collateral pledge of property, tangible or intangible, satisfactory to the City Council and the City Attorney.
    2. The subdivider may deposit in escrow with an escrow holder approved by the City Council an amount of money equal to one and one-half times the cost of the improvements not previously installed as determined by the City Engineer to assure the installation of such improvements within a two-year period or, if otherwise provided by the City Council, a shorter or longer period. The escrow agreement aforesaid shall be approved by the City Council and the City Attorney.
B. Whenever the subdivider develops a subdivision a portion at a time, such development shall be in an orderly manner and in such a way that the required improvements will be continuous and all of the improvements will be made available for the full, effective and practical use and enjoyment thereof by the lessees or grantees of any of the lands subdivided within the time hereinbefore specified. (Ord. 13-81 (part), 1981: prior code § 22-5-2)

Chapter 16.24 DESIGN STANDARDS

Sections:
16.24.010    Departmental standards.
16.24.020    Design standards specified.
16.24.030    Reserved.

16.24.010 Departmental standards.
Standards for design, construction, specification, and inspections of street improvements, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, storm drainage and flood control facilities and street lighting shall be prepared by the City Engineer, highway department and the building inspector; standards for water distribution and sewage disposal by the water and sewer departments; and similar standards for fire hydrants by the fire department. All subdividers shall comply with the standards established by such departments and agencies of the City, provided that such standards shall be approved by the City Council. (Ord. 13-81 (part), 1981: prior code § 22-6-1)

16.24.020 Design standards specified.
The design of the preliminary and final plats of the subdivision in relation to streets, blocks, lots, open spaces and other design factors shall be in harmony with design standards recommended by the Planning Commission, the highway department and other departments and agencies of city government. Design standards shall be approved by the City Council and shall include provisions as follows:
A. Blocks shall not exceed one thousand feet in length;
B. Blocks shall be wide enough to adequately accommodate two tiers of lots;
C. Dedicated easements for non-motorized trails throughout a development are required to provide access to existing trails and future trails indicated on the Grand County non-motorized master trails plan as adopted by council.
    1. Specific trail alignments shall be negotiated and as individual properties develop, proposed trail routes shown in the plan may be reconfigured to the proposed or greater level of connectivity to adjacent properties.
    2. Such easements shall be a minimum of ten feet in width, but may be required to be wider for slopes in areas requiring fill as determined necessary by the Planning Commission with the recommendation of the City Engineer.
    3. The subdivider shall provide, at a minimum, a compacted road base surface of four inches in thickness and spanning the full width of the trail in accordance with the design standards for trails as established by the community development director.
    4. The finish surface material shall include but not be limited to asphalt concrete, pavers, or cobbles as recommended by the community development director and approved by council.
    5. Design and construction shall be approved, in writing, by the community development director, public works director, and the City Engineer.
    6. Appropriate barriers shall be installed at each walkway entrance to prevent the use of the walkway by any motor vehicle or by any non-motorized vehicle wider than three feet;
D. Side lines of lots shall be approximately at right angles, or radial to the street lines. However, if energy design conditions dictate otherwise, the Planning Commission may permit exemptions;
E. All remnants of lots below minimum size must be added to adjacent lots, rather than allowed to remain as unusable parcels;
F. Minimum street widths shall be as follows:
    1. Arterial streets shall be eighty feet wide; sixty-six feet curb to curb;
    2. Secondary streets shall be sixty feet wide; forty feet curb to curb;
    3. Minor streets shall be fifty feet wide; thirty feet curb to curb;
G. Dead end streets shall not exceed four hundred feet in length and must have a cul-de-sac with a minimum radius of fifty feet and a diameter of eighty feet curb to curb;
H. The subdivider shall install the following improvements in all streets within the subdivision in accordance with the construction design standards as established by the public works director and the City Engineer:
    1. Street grading and surfacing;
    2. Curbs and gutters;
    3. Street lighting;
    4. Drive approaches;
    5. Fire hydrants;
    6. Sidewalks.
    All sidewalks shall be constructed with the widths indicated in the table below along both sides of public streets in accordance with the City construction standards for public works projects. Other standards exist for sidewalks and trails in specific types of developments as found elsewhere in this code and in the construction standards.
    +------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
    |          Zoning District           |          Minimum Width*           |
    +------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
    | R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4                 | 5 feet (wider if schools present) |
    +------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
    | C-1, C-2, C-5                      | 9 feet                            |
    +------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
    | C-3                                | 9 feet                            |
    +------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
    | C-4                                | 6 feet                            |
    +------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
    | I                                  | 6 feet                            |
    +------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
    | MH/RV-1                            | 5 feet                            |
    +------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
    | A-2                                | N/A                               |
    +------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
    | RA-1                               | 5 feet                            |
    +------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
    | Resort Commercial (RC)**           | Refer to Chapter 17.31.           |
    +------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
    | Sensitive Area Resort Zone (SAR)** | Refer to Chapter 17.32.           |
    +------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
    | Master Planned Developments**      | Refer to Chapter 17.65.           |
    +------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
    | Planned Unit Developments**        | Refer to Chapter 17.66.           |
    +------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
    *The minimum width of any sidewalk shall be approved by the public works director.
    **Upon the recommendation by the Planning Commission and the discretionary approval by council, sidewalks may be eliminated if a comprehensive trail plan providing access to and from all structures and adjacent properties is proposed.
(Ord. 13-10, 2013: Ord. 13-81 (part), 1981: prior code § 22-6-2)

16.24.030 Reserved.
Editor’s note: Ord. No. 17-15, adopted May 9, 2017, repealed § 16.24.030, which pertained to subdivision protection strips and derived from prior code § 22-6-3 and Ord. No. 13-81, 1981.

Chapter 16.28 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT

Sections:
16.28.010    Enforcement authority.
16.28.020    Inspection.
16.28.030    Permits.
16.28.040    Weed and debris abatement.
16.28.050    Compliance required.
16.28.060    Violation-Penalty.

16.28.010 Enforcement authority.
The fire department, the highway department, the Planning Commission, the City Engineer and the building inspector and such other departments and agencies of city government as are specified under the provisions of this title are designated and authorized as the agencies charged with the enforcement of the provisions of this title and shall enter such actions in court as are necessary. Failure of such departments to pursue appropriate legal remedies shall not legalize any violation of such provisions. (Ord. 13-81 (part), 1981: prior code § 22-7-1)

16.28.020 Inspection.
Appropriate agencies and departments of the City shall inspect or cause to be inspected all buildings, fire hydrants, water supply and sewage disposal systems in the course of construction, installation or repair. Excavations for fire hydrants and water and sewer mains and laterals shall not be covered or backfilled until such installation shall have been approved by the City Engineer. If any such installation is covered before being inspected and approved, it shall be uncovered after notice to uncover has been issued to the responsible person by the inspector. (Ord. 13-81 (part), 1981: prior code § 22-7-2)

16.28.030 Permits.
From the time of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, the building inspector shall not grant a permit, nor shall any city officer grant any license or permit for the use of any land or the construction or alteration of any building or structure on a lot which would be in violation of any provisions of this title until a subdivision plat therefor has been recorded or approved as herein required. Any license or permit issued in conflict with such provisions shall be void. (Ord. 13-81 (part), 1981: prior code § 22-7-3)

16.28.040 Weed and debris abatement.
No owner of any property within an approved or proposed subdivision shall allow or maintain weeds, rank vegetable growth or debris to accumulate on the property. The owner of any property shall, at his own expense, immediately destroy the weeds or vegetable growth and clear his property of any debris. (Ord. 13-81 (part), 1981: prior code § 22-7-6)

16.28.050 Compliance required.
No person shall sub--divide any tract or parcel of land located wholly or in part in the City except in compliance with the provisions of this title. No person shall purchase, sell or exchange any parcel of land which is any part of a subdivision or a proposed subdivision submitted to the Planning Commission, nor offer for recording in the office of the county recorder, any deed conveying such parcel of land or any fee interest therein, unless such subdivision has been created pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions of this title. (Ord. 13-81 (part), 1981: prior code § 22-7-4)

16.28.060 Violation-Penalty.
Whoever shall violate any of the provisions of this title shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction of any violation, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment for not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment, or by the penalty provided in Section 10-9-30, Utah Code Annotated, 1953, as amended, except that in all cases where a corporation would be punishable as for a misdemeanor, and there is not other punishment prescribed by ordinance, such corporation is punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars. (Ord. 86-06 § 16, 1986; Ord. 13-81 (part), 1981: prior code § 22-7-5)

Title 17 ZONING

Chapters:
17.03        Title, Interpretation and Purpose
17.04        Zoning Map Amendments and Text Amendments
17.06        Definitions
17.09        Supplementary Requirements and Procedures Applicable within Zones
17.12        General Provisions
17.15        Establishment of Zones
17.18        A-2 Agricultural Zone
17.20        C-1 Commercial--Residential Zone
17.21        C-2 Commercial--Residential Zone
17.24        C-3 Central Commercial Zone
17.27        C-4 General Commercial Zone
17.30        C-5 Neighborhood Commercial Zone
17.31        RC Resort Commercial Zone
17.32        SAR, Sensitive Area Resort Zone
17.33        FW Floodway Zone
17.35        MH/RV-1 Mobile Home/Recreational Vehicle Parks Zone
17.36        I-1 Industrial Zone
17.37        Reserved
17.42        R-1 Single-Household Residential Zone
17.45        R-2 Single-Household and Two-Household Residential Zone
17.48        R-3 Multi-Household Residential Zone
17.51        R-4 Manufactured Housing Residential Zone
17.52        Keeping Limited Numbers of Fowl for Food Production
17.54        RA-1 Residential--Agricultural Zone
17.55        Hillside Developments
17.57        A Fee Structure for Developers to Underwrite City Staff Expenses for Large-Scale Projects
17.65        Master Planned Developments
17.66        Planned Unit Developments*
17.67        Site Plan Review
17.68        Planned Affordable Development
17.69        Assured Workforce Housing
17.70        Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU)
17.71        Guest Apartments
17.72        Administration and Enforcement
17.74        Noise
17.75        Violations
17.76        Wireless Telecommunications Facilities
17.78        Zoning Violations--Penalties
17.79        Condominium Developments
17.80        Supplementary Regulations for Large-Scale Developments Over Thirty Thousand Square Feet
17.90        Historic Preservation

Chapter 17.03 TITLE, INTERPRETATION AND PURPOSE

Sections:
17.03.010    Title, intent and purpose.
17.03.020    Applicability.
17.03.030    Declaration.
17.03.040    Interpretation.
17.03.050    Commentary.

17.03.010 Title, intent and purpose.
This title shall be known as, and shall be entitled “the zoning ordinance of Moab City, Utah,” and may be so cited and pleaded. It is the intent and purpose of the City Council to promote the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity, and general welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the City of guiding development within the City in accordance with a comprehensive plan, which plan has been designed:
A. To encourage and facilitate orderly growth and development in the area;
B. To promote safety from fires, floods, traffic hazards and other dangers;
C. To promote sanitation and health of the inhabitants;
D. To discourage undue scattering of population and unnecessary expenditures of moneys for excessive streets, water and sewer lines, and other public requirements;
E. To stabilize and improve property values;
F. To protect the residents from objectionable noise, odor, dust, fumes and other deleterious substances or conditions;
G. To promote a more attractive and wholesome environment. (Prior code § 27-1-1)

17.03.020 Applicability.
The regulations and restrictions as set forth in this title shall be so interpreted and applied as to further the purposes of this title. (Prior code § 27-1-2)

17.03.030 Declaration.
In establishing the zones, the boundaries thereof, and regulations and restrictions applying within each of the zones, due and careful consideration was given, among other things, to the suitability of the land for particular uses, and to the character of the zone, with a view to conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the City. (Prior code § 27-1-3)

17.03.040 Interpretation.
In interpreting and applying this title, the provisions thereof shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare. Except as specifically herein provided, it is not intended by the adoption of this title to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way to impair or interfere with any existing provisions of law or ordinance, or any rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to the erection, construction, establishment, moving, alteration or enlargement of any building or improvement; nor is it intended by this title to interfere with or aggregate or annul any easement, covenant or other agreement between parties; provided, however, that in cases in which this title imposes a greater restriction than is imposed or required by other existing provisions of law or ordinance, then in such case the provisions of this title shall control. (Prior code § 27-1-4)

17.03.050 Commentary.
Whenever a provision of the ordinance codified in this chapter requires additional explanation to clarify its intent, a “commentary” is included. They have no regulatory effect, but rather are intended solely as a guide for administrative officials and the public to use in understanding and interpreting the ordinance. (Ord. 02-04 (part), 2002)

Chapter 17.04 ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS AND TEXT AMENDMENTS

Sections:
17.04.010    Initiation of zoning change.
17.04.020    Zoning text amendments.
17.04.030    Zoning map amendments--Purpose.
17.04.040    Application for zoning map amendment or text amendment.
17.04.050    Map amendment policy declaration.
17.04.060    Map amendment approval criteria.
17.04.070    Text amendment approval criteria.
17.04.080    Public hearing required.
17.04.090    Notification requirements for Planning Commission public hearing.
17.04.100    Action by City Council.
17.04.110    Appeals.
17.04.120    Processing matrix.

17.04.010 Initiation of zoning change.
Any person having a proprietary interest in any real property may submit an application for a zoning map amendment or a zoning text amendment, or the Planning Commission can, on its own motion or on request from the City Council, propose, study, and recommend changes to the official zoning map or the text of the Land Use Code. All costs associated with publication and notification requirements are the responsibility of the applicant. (Ord. 08-03 (part), 2008)

17.04.020 Zoning text amendments.
A. Purpose. The zoning text amendment process allows for amendment to the use requirements within zoning districts to allow particular uses which are not otherwise permitted within a specified zone, provided that proposed uses are substantially similar to, and compatible with, the objectives and characteristics of the zone.
B. Uses Not Specified. Uses not specified as authorized within any particular zoning district are prohibited, unless authorized pursuant to the other provisions of this Land Use Code.
C. Similar Use Determination Repealed. Text amendments pursuant to this chapter encompass and shall supersede similar use determinations as previously allowed by various sections of this Land Use Code, all of which are hereby repealed. (Ord. 08-03 (part), 2008)

17.04.030 Zoning map amendments--Purpose.
The purpose of a zoning map amendment shall be to alter, enlarge, or reduce the geographic extent of any zoning district, or to enact a new zoning designation for any particular tract of real property. (Ord. 08-03 (part), 2008)

17.04.040 Application for zoning map amendment or text amendment.
A. Any person having a proprietary interest in any real property within the corporate limits of the City may request a map amendment or text amendment by filing three copies of the application for such change or amendment with the Zoning Administrator. The application shall, at a minimum, include the following information:
    1. The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant;
    2. A description of the requested change or amendment and a description of the property to be affected by such request by a metes and bounds legal description;
    3. A title certificate or report from a licensed title company or attorney listing the name of the property owner(s) and all liens, easements, judgments, and encumbrances of record that affect the title to the subject property;
    4. A statement from the county treasurer showing payment in full of all real property taxes due on such parcel;
    5. A boundary survey of the land area to be rezoned, which shall include a depiction of existing zoning district boundaries, real property boundaries, existing structures, and public roads existing within three hundred feet in all directions of the subject property boundary;
    6. A list of surrounding property owners and their legal mailing addresses for all properties within three hundred feet of the exterior boundary of the parcel proposed for a zoning map amendment;
    7. A statement by the applicant explaining the rationale for the zoning request relative to the standards imposed by this chapter;
    8. A filing fee in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the City Council; and
    9. A narrative or concept plan describing why this property is suited for the intended purposes and stating what development and/or construction is planned by the applicant.
B. Pre-Application Conference. Prior to the filing of an application for a map amendment or zoning text amendment, the applicant shall meet with the planning department to discuss the proposed application. At the pre-application meeting the application contents, review procedures, use and area standards, and the general character of the development may be discussed. At the pre-application conference, the applicant may be represented by a land planner, engineer or surveyor. Applicants are encouraged to submit a conceptual site plan at the pre-application stage.
C. Modifications of Submittals. City staff shall be authorized to waive or modify application submittal requirements as reasonable necessary to address the attributes of a specific application. (Ord. 08-03 (part), 2008)

17.04.050 Map amendment policy declaration.
For the purpose of establishing and maintaining sound, stable and desirable development within the City of Moab, zoning map amendments are to be discouraged. Zoning map amendments shall only be approved if the applicant establishes that one or more of the following standards apply to the subject real property:
A. The land to be zoned was zoned in error and, as presently zoned, is inconsistent with the policies and goals of the City’s General Plan.
B. The area for which a map amendment is requested has changed or is changing to such a degree that it is in the public interest to encourage a redevelopment of the area.
C. The proposed map amendment is necessary in order to provide land for a use which was not anticipated at the time of the adoption of the City’s General Plan, and that such change will be consistent with the policies and goals of the plan. Special consideration shall be given to existing conditions on and around the area in question, including the changing nature of the area, land uses, densities, and the height and scale of both existing and proposed structures. (Ord. 08-03 (part), 2008)

17.04.060 Map amendment approval criteria.
The Planning Commission and City Council shall consider the following criteria in reviewing a proposed map amendment:
A. Was the existing zone for the property adopted in error?
B. Has there been a change of character in the area including, but not limited to: the installation of public facilities or new utilities; other approved zone changes; new growth trends; deterioration of existing development; or the need for development transitions?
C. Is there a need for the proposed zoning within the area or community?
D. Is the proposed zoning classification compatible with the surrounding area or uses; will there be adverse impacts; and/or can any adverse impacts be mitigated?
E. Will benefits be derived by the community or area by granting the proposed zoning?
F. Are adequate facilities available to serve development for the type and scope of development suggested by the proposed zoning classification? If utilities are not available, can they be reasonably extended?
G. Does the application conform with the provisions of the Moab General Plan, the Land Use Code, and applicable agreements with affected governmental entities? (Ord. 08-03 (part), 2008)

17.04.070 Text amendment approval criteria.
It is the burden of the applicant to provide “good cause” to support a proposed text amendment. For the purpose of establishing and maintaining sound, stable and desirable development within the City of Moab, amendments to the Land Use Code are committed to the sound discretion of the City Council based upon the following nonexclusive list of criteria:
A. Is the proposed use substantially similar to other authorized uses permitted within the subject zoning district?
B. Is the proposed use a relatively new use type or development concept that was not anticipated at the time of the adoption of the City’s General Plan?
C. Is the amendment consistent with the policies and goals of the General Plan?
D. Will the amendment create significant adverse impacts upon neighboring properties within or adjacent to the zoning districts which would be affected by the change?
E. Is it in the public interest to approve the proposed amendment?
F. Is the amendment likely to lead to a positive redevelopment of a specific area or zone?
G. Will the amendment provide a variety of options for residents in terms of economic development, affordable housing, or other benefits?
H. Is the amendment appropriate considering the existing conditions in the zoning district, the established relationships between zoning districts, existing land uses and densities, and the scale of both existing and proposed development? (Ord. 08-03 (part), 2008)

17.04.080 Public hearing required.
A. Upon receipt of a complete application under this chapter city staff shall promptly schedule a public hearing before the Planning Commission.
B. Within thirty days following the closing of the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall either recommend approval, approval with modifications, or disapproval of the application to the City Council. The recommendation of the Planning Commission shall be transmitted to the City Council and to the applicant within ten days of the recommendation.
C. City staff may provide a staff report, which shall be provided to the applicant no later than three days prior to the public hearing or public meeting before City Council. (Ord. 08-03 (part), 2008)

17.04.090 Notification requirements for Planning Commission public hearing.
A. The City shall provide notice with respect to the Planning Commission public hearing describing the real property subject to the application order under this chapter; the present and proposed zoning; and the time, date, and location of the hearing as follows:
    1. By publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the City at least fifteen days prior to the hearing;
    2. By mailing to the applicant, affected entities, and real property owners abutting or located within three hundred feet of the subject property at least ten days prior to the hearing; and
    3. By posting on the City’s official website and in at least one public place within the City, which notice shall also include a map showing the land area proposed for rezoning.
B. Property Posting. In addition to the notifications by the City, the applicant shall post signs, in a form acceptable to the City, noticing the public hearing in at least one location every five hundred feet along the perimeter of the land area proposed for map amendment at least three days prior to the hearing. Such notice shall include the present and proposed rezoning; the time, date, and place of the public hearing; and contact information for the Zoning Administrator.
C. Exception for General Amendments. When a zoning map amendment or text amendment is incidental to, or part of a general revision of the official zoning map or the text of this Land Use Code, whether such revision is made by repeal of the existing zoning and/or land use regulations and enactment of a new zoning and/or land use regulations, or otherwise, posting notice on the land area subject to the amendment or mailing to affected property owners or adjoining property owners is not required. (Ord. 08-03 (part), 2008)

17.04.100 Action by City Council.
A. The City Council may authorize any zoning map amendment or text amendment by ordinance adopted at a public meeting, which shall be held promptly following receipt of the Planning Commission recommendation.
B. Notice of the public meeting shall be given to the applicant and by posting in at least one place within the City and by posting on the City’s official website at least twenty-four hours prior to the meeting.
C. In its discretion, the Council may elect to receive testimony or evidence from the applicant, city staff, and the public prior to taking final action on the ordinance.
D. The approval of a zoning map amendment or text amendment is a legislative decision, which is committed to the discretion and judgment of the City Council. (Ord. 08-03 (part), 2008)

17.04.110 Appeals.
A. Any person adversely affected by the final decision of the City Council pursuant to this chapter may appeal that decision to the Grand County district court.
B. An appeal or any other judicial action arising from, or seeking review of, a decision by the City Council under this chapter must be filed no lather than thirty days from the date of the final decision or action that is the subject of the action or legal claim. Any action commenced beyond that time is barred and shall be subject to summary dismissal.
C. Review of any zoning map amendment or text amendment application shall be based upon the record of proceedings before the City Council. Upon the commencement of a judicial appeal challenging any decision under this chapter, the City shall transmit to the district court true and correct copies of all submittals, testimony, orders, and file documents comprising the record pertaining to the application, including any transcript or tape recordings of proceedings. (Ord. 08-03 (part), 2008)

17.04.120 Processing matrix.
This matrix shall be amended to delete review procedures for “similar use” review and to include the following:
+-------------+----------------+----------------+-------------+--------------+
| Application | Advisory Body  | Land Use Auth. | Appeal Body | Pub. Hearing |
+-------------+----------------+----------------+-------------+--------------+
| Map amend.  | Planning Comm. | City Council   | Dist. Ct.   | Yes, P.C.    |
+-------------+----------------+----------------+-------------+--------------+
| Text amend. | Planning Comm. | City Council   | Dist. Ct.   | Yes, P.C.    |
+-------------+----------------+----------------+-------------+--------------+
(Ord. 08-03 (part), 2008)

Chapter 17.06 DEFINITIONS

Sections:
17.06.010    Intent.
17.06.015    Reserved.
17.06.020    Definitions.

17.06.010 Intent.
It is the intent of the City Council to define certain words and phrases as a means of facilitating understanding of terms which may not be universally understood in the sense that the City Council intends that they should be understood. Words used in the present tense include the future, the singular includes the plural and the plural the singular. (Prior code § 27-2-1)

17.06.015 Reserved.
Editor’s note: Ord. No. 10-06, adopted November 9, 2010, repealed § 17.06.015, which pertained to the Board of appeals, authority, designated and derived from Ord. No. 06-01, 2006.

17.06.020 Definitions.
As used in this title:
Accessory Dwelling Unit. See under “Dwelling.”
“Accessory use or structure” means a use or structure located on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or building. Examples include, but are not limited to, garages, arbors, carports, and storage sheds.
Acre, Gross. “Gross acre” means a measure of land containing forty-three thousand five hundred sixty square feet.
Acre, Net. “Net acre” means a gross acre excluding public rights-of-way.
“Agricultural industry or business” means an industry or business involving agricultural products in manufacturing, packaging, treatment, sales, intensive feeding, or storage, including but not limited to animal feed yards, fur farms, food packaging or processing plants, commercial poultry or egg production, and similar uses as determined by the Planning Commission.
“Agriculture” means the growing of soil crops in the customary manner in the open. It shall not include livestock-raising activities, nor shall it include retailing of products on the premises.
“Agriculture buildings” means a structure on agricultural land designed, constructed, and used to house farm implements, livestock, or agricultural produce or products used by the owner for growing and harvesting crops and raising livestock and small animals. Examples include barns, greenhouses, storage buildings for farm equipment, animal supplies or feed, “cold” storage buildings for crops grown and raised on site, and horticultural nursery.
“Alley” means a public access-way not less than twenty feet in width and not greater than twenty-six feet in width, which is designed to give secondary access to lots or abutting properties; an alley shall not be considered a street, for the purposes of this title.
Animals, Livestock. “Livestock animals” may include horses, cows, sheep, and goats and excludes pigs and exotic animals.
“Antenna” means a transmitting or receiving device used in telecommunications that radiates or captures radio frequency waves or signals and includes, but is not limited to, directional antennas, such as panels, microwave dishes, satellite dishes, and omni-directional antennas, such as whip antennas.
“Applicant” means a person who submits an application for development to the City of Moab.
“Architectural projection” means any building or structural projection which is not intended for occupancy and which extends beyond the face of an exterior wall of a building or structure, but does not include signs.
“Automatic car wash” means a facility for automatic or self- service washing and cleaning of automobiles and small trucks not exceeding one and one-half tons capacity.
“Automobile sales area” means an open area used for display, sale, or rental of new or used motor vehicles, recreational coaches, or recreation vehicles in operable condition.
“Automobile service station” means a place where lubricating oil or grease for operating motor vehicles is offered for sale to the public and deliveries are made directly into motor vehicles, and where services performed may include tube and tire repair, battery charging, storage of merchandise, lubricating of automobiles, replacement of spark plugs, lights, fans, and other small parts, but not including major auto repair and are not kept overnight.
“Basement” means a story whose floor is more than twelve inches below the average level of the adjoining ground, but where no more than one-half of its floor-to-ceiling height is above the average contract level of the adjoining ground. A basement shall be counted as a story for purposes of height measurement, and as a half-story for the purpose of side-yard determination.
“Basement house” means a residential structure without a full story structure above grade.
“Bed and breakfast” means a residence containing not more than two kitchens where, for compensation, overnight accommodations and meals are provided, and where retail sales to bed and breakfast patrons are made.
“Beginning of construction” means the placing of concrete footings for a building or structure.
“Benchmark” means a mark affixed to a permanent or semi-permanent object along a line of survey to furnish a datum level.
“Block” means an area enclosed by streets and occupied by or intended for buildings; or if such word is used as a term of measurement, it shall mean the distance along a side of a street between the nearest two streets that intersect such street.
“Block frontage” means all properties fronting on one side of the street between intersecting or intercepting streets, or between a street and a right-of-way, waterway, end of dead-end street, or political subdivision boundary, measured along the street line. An intercepting street shall determine only the boundary of the frontage on the side of the street which it intercepts.
“Boarding house, lodging house” means a building containing not more than one kitchen, where for compensation, meals are provided pursuant to previous arrangements on a daily, weekly or monthly basis as distinguished from a motel, cafe or rooming house.
“Body and fender shop” means a facility for major automobile, truck, mobile home, recreational coach or recreation vehicle repairs to body, frame, or fenders, and including rebuilding.
“Buffering” means a landscaped screen, solid fencing, berms, swales, or other feature that individually or in combination reduces the impact of a land use on adjacent areas, which are of a significantly different character, density, or intensity. A buffer consists of a horizontal distance from a lot line, which may only be occupied by screening, underground utilities, retention areas, and landscaping and fencing materials. The more different the use of the adjoining property, the more dense or extensive the buffer must be.
“Building” means any structure built for the support, shelter and enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or movable property of any kind. When subdivided in a manner sufficient to prevent the spread of fire, each portion so subdivided may be deemed a separate building. “Building” includes yurts, removable sheds, and similar uses, but does not include signs or fences.
“Building height” means the vertical distance as measured from the average finished grade of the building line to the midpoint of the highest plane of the roof.
Building, Main. “Main building” means one or more of the principal buildings upon a lot.
“Buildable area” means the area of a lot remaining after the minimum yard and open space requirements of the applicable zone have been met.
“Building setback” means a line within a lot or other parcel of land, so designated on the plat of the proposed subdivision, between which line the adjacent boundary of the street upon which the lot abuts, the erection of an enclosed structure or portion thereof is prohibited.
“Building official/inspector” means the building inspector charged with the responsibility of issuing permits and enforcing on behalf of the City the currently adopted city construction codes, or other building code adopted by the City, and land use code, including any amendments, or that person’s designee.
“Building permit” means a permit issued by the building official, after approval of a zoning development permit, that allows a developer or property owner to erect, construct, reconstruct, grade, excavate for a foundation, alter or change the use of a building or other structure or improvements of land.
“Business establishment” means a location where business is conducted, goods are made or stored or processed or where services are rendered.
“Campground” means a public area designated by a public agency for camping, or a private area licensed by the City of Moab for camping.
“Camping” means a temporary establishment of living facilities such as tents or recreational coaches as regulated by this Code.
“Carport” means a structure for the shelter of vehicles open on a minimum of two sides. Requires a building permit.
Carport, Permanent. “Permanent carport” means a structure that may or may not be attached to a home or other main building that has an approved foundation.
Carport, Temporary. “Temporary carport” means a structure that may or may not be attached to a home or other main building that does not have an approved foundation but is anchored securely and covered with a tarp or other cloth material.
“Caretaker or guard residence” means dwelling facilities located on a premise occupied by a permitted main use for the housing of persons and their households who are employed on the premises as guards, caretakers or in similar custodial capacity.
“Certificate of occupancy” means an official certificate issued by the City through the enforcing official that indicates conformance with or approved conditional waiver from the zoning regulations and authorizes legal use of the premises for which it is issued.
“Character” means special characteristics of a structure or area that set it apart from surrounding development and that contribute to its interest or individuality. Examples include a grid pattern for residential neighborhoods, tree-lined avenues with alleys for rear parking access and trash collection; a business district with uniformity in building scale, materials, architectural elements, setbacks, street furniture, and sign design; a waterfront walkway with historic elements, fountains, public art, design coordinated furniture, light standards, and trash receptacles. Buildings may exhibit character in density, height, coverage, setback, massing, the placement and design of windows in walls (fenestration), materials, scale of materials, and the use of architectural elements.
“Child care center” means a child care facility licensed by the state of Utah and in compliance with state rules and regulations as established by state law.
“Church or place of worship” means a site used primarily or exclusively for religious worship and related religious services operated by a bona fide religious group for religious activities.
“City Council” means the legislative body of the City of Moab.
“Club, social” means any organization, group, or association supported by its members where the sole purpose is to render a service to said members and their guests.
“City Manager” means the Chief Administrative Officer of the City.
“City” means the City of Moab, Utah.
“City planner” means an administrative officer designated by the City Manager and charged with the responsibilities of planning, leading, analyzing, preparing, negotiating, and commenting on the process of development applications and presenting staff review of applications to decision making boards. The City planner is responsible for the daily administration of the land use code and General Plan and leads and participates in complex current to long range planning assignments.
Clinic, Medical. “Medical clinic” means an ambulatory health care facility in which outpatient treatment is provided by physicians, dentists, other medical personnel, psychologists, or social workers and where examination and treatment require a stay of less than twelve hours.
Clinic, Veterinary. “Veterinary clinic” means a place where animals are given medical care and the Boarding of animals is limited to short-term care incidental to the hospital use.
“Collector street” means a street that carries traffic from minor streets to the major street system, including the principal entrance streets of residential development and the primary circulation streets within such a development.
“Commercial development” means and includes, but is not limited to, expansion or construction of office, retail, wholesale, warehouse, manufacture, commercial recreation, restaurant/bar and/or service commercial operations by the addition of square footage.
“Commercial use” means activity involving the sale of goods or services carried out for profit.
“Commercial wireless telecommunication services” means licensed commercial wireless telecommunication services including cellular, personal communication services (“PCS”), specialized mobilized radio (“SMR”), enhanced specialized mobilized radio (“ESMR”), paging, and similar services that are marketed to the general public.
“Common area” means an area designed to serve two or more dwelling units or separate uses with convenient access to the area.
“Common element” means in a condominium or cooperative, all portions of the condominium other than the units.
“Common open space” means a parcel of usable land, area of water, or a combination of land and water within the site designated for a planned unit development designated and intended primarily for the use or enjoyment of residents, occupants and owners of the planned unit development. “Common open space” may include, but is not limited to, areas devoted to recreation, courts, gardens, parks and walkways. The term shall not include space devoted to streets, parking and loading areas.
“Community center” means a building and grounds owned and operated by a governmental body or homeowners’ association, for the social, recreational health or welfare of the community served.
“Compatible design” means the visual relationship between adjacent and nearby buildings and the immediate streetscape in terms of a consistency of materials, colors, building elements, building mass, and other constructed elements of the urban environment, such that abrupt or severe differences are avoided. Also means consistent with, harmonious with, similar to and/or enhancing the mixture of uses, site placement and/or complimentary architectural styles, either of an individual structure or the character of the surrounding structures.
“Compatible land use” means a use of land and/or buildings that, in terms of development density, building coverage, design, bulk and occupancy, traffic generation, parking requirements, access and circulation, site improvements, and public facilities and service demands, is consistent with and similar to neighboring uses and does not adversely affect the quality of life of persons in surrounding or nearby buildings.
“Complete application” means an application shall not be considered complete unless and until” means (1) all of the required information and submittal materials in the amounts and dimensions required by this code have been submitted to and received by the City department or official specified in this code; and (2) the City planner or a duly-appointed representative, has certified the application as “complete.” The decision of the City planner with respect to completeness and applicability of submittal requirements shall be final. This requirement pertains to all applications for preliminary and/or final plats of a subdivision, a planned unit development, zoning, rezoning, general development plans, and special use permits where such applications are in anticipation of new surface development, or any other similar land use designation that is used by a local government, but does not include building permit applications.
“Comprehensive plan” means the plan of the City and adjoining areas adopted by the Planning Commission and City Council, including all of its revisions. The plan indicates the general locations recommended for various land uses, transportation routes, public and private buildings, streets, parks and other public and private developments and improvements. A coordinated plan, which has been prepared and adopted for the purpose of guiding development, including but not limited to a plan or plans of land use, circulation, housing, and public facilities and grounds.
“Conditional use” means a use which requires approval of the land use authority before the Zoning Administrator may issue a permit. Uses that require individual consideration of surrounding conditions and circumstances to carry out the intent and purpose of the zoning districts; a use for which a conditional use permit is required by this title.
“Context” means the block face in which an affected property is located.
Convalescent Home. See “rest home.”
“Convenience enterprise” means a business catering to an area with sales of easily obtained goods and merchandise. Convenience enterprises include, but are not limited to: stores with extended hours, in a convenient location, stocking a limited range of household goods and groceries and can include sandwich shops, small grocery/convenience stores, food stands, hardware stores, coffee shops, dollar stores, tobacco shops, video stores.
Coop, Chicken. “Chicken coop” means a structure for housing poultry that provides shelter from the elements, rodents, hungry predators, theft, and injury and that consists of at least four square feet of habitable area per laying hen. Coops may have an open front or may be draft free with ventilation openings such as windows. Also includes coop, henhouse, hen coop.
“Cooperative” means a common interest community in which the real property is owned by an association, each member of which is entitled by virtue of such member’s ownership interest in the association an exclusive possession of a unit.
“Corral” means a space, other than a building, less than one acre in area, or less than one hundred feet in width, used for the confinement of animals or fowl.
“Council” means the City Council of the City of Moab, Utah.
“Court” means an open, unoccupied space, other than a yard, on the same lot with a building or group of buildings, and which is bounded on two or more sides by such building or buildings.
“Court apartment (dwelling group)” means one or more dwellings (other than mobile home parks), arranged around two or three sides of a court which opens onto a street, may include single-household, two-household or multiple-household dwellings.
“Crosswalk” means any portion of a roadway distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other surface markings or by a change in surface material.
“Cul-de-sac” means a minor street having one open end and being terminated at the other by a vehicular turnaround. Specific standards can be found in the construction design standards for public improvements.
“Curb cut” means an access cut in the curb line for the passage of vehicles. Curb cuts for sidewalks at intersections or mid-street crossings are necessary to provide a ramped area that allows easy passage in compliance with ADA requirements.
“Custom personal services” means any business with a primary purpose of providing personal services such as law, engineering, design, finance, accounting to an individual or group for compensation.
“Customary household pets” means a domesticated animal that is commonly kept as a household pet, such as a cat, dog, gerbil, hamster, caged birds that are not unreasonably noisy, fish in tanks, or contained reptiles such as lizards and non-poisonous snakes. Other animals, such as horses, pigs, sheep, and goats are considered farm animals. Monkeys are not considered household pets.
“Cut” means land surface that is reshaped by human activity through the removal of soil, rock, or other materials.
“Cut area” means any area where the existing grade is lowered.
“Density” means the number of households, individuals, dwelling units, household units, or housing structures per unit of land.
“Developer” means any public or private person, partnership, association or agency that prepares raw land for the construction of buildings or causes to be built physical building space for use primarily by others, during which preparation of the land or the creation of the building space is in itself a business and is not incidental to another business or activity.
“Development application” means an application for a preliminary or final plat for a subdivision, a planned unit development, or any other similar land use designation that is used in this code. These include applications for zoning, rezoning, general development plans, and special use permits where such applications are in anticipation of new surface development, but does not include building permit applications.
“Development parcel” means any quantity of land described with a definite location and specific boundaries that is designated by its owner or developer as land to be used or developed as a unit or which has been used or developed as a unit.
Development Permit. See zoning development permit.
“Development” means the physical extension and/or construction of urban land uses. Development activities include” means subdivision of land; change in the intensity of use of land; construction, reconstruction, demolition or partial demolition or alteration of buildings, roads, utilities, and other facilities; commencement of drilling (except for a well or to obtain soil samples), mining, or excavation; installation of septic systems; grading; deposit of refuse, debris, or fill materials; and clearing of natural vegetation cover.
“District” means a part, zone, or geographic area within the City of Moab to which certain zoning or developmental regulations apply. Also includes “zone”, and “zoning district”.
“Drive-in use” means an establishment that by design, physical facilities, service, or packaging procedures encourages or permits customers to receive services, obtain goods, or be entertained while remaining in their vehicles.
“Driveway” means a private roadway, the use of which is limited to persons residing, employed, or otherwise using or visiting the parcel on which the driveway is located.
“Dwelling” means a structure or portion of a structure that is designed, occupied or intended to be occupied as living quarters and includes facilities for cooking, sleeping and sanitation; but not including hotels, motels, clubs, boarding houses, or any institution such as an asylum, hospital, or jail where human beings are housed by reason of illness or under legal restraints.
    1. “Accessory dwelling unit” (ADU, granny-flat, mother-in-law-apartment) means a habitable living unit added to, created within, or detached from a primary one-unit single-household dwelling, and includes separate cooking, sleeping, and bathroom facilities. An ADU does not constitute a two-household dwelling. Only one ADU is permitted in addition to the main dwelling on one platted lot of record. ADUs shall not be used for nightly or weekly rentals, and shall not be occupied for periods of less than thirty-one consecutive days. ADUs shall be a permanent structure and travel trailers, boats, or RVs shall not be used.
    2. “Apartment house (multi-household dwelling)” means any building or portion thereof which is designed, built, rented or leased, let or hired out to be occupied or which is occupied as the home or residence of three or more households living independently of each other and doing their own cooking within the premises.
    3. “Court apartment (dwelling group)” means one or more dwellings (other than mobile home parks), arranged around two or three sides of a court which opens onto a street, may include single-household, two-household or multiple-household dwellings.
    4. “Condominium” means a legal form of ownership of real estate and not a specific building style. The purchaser has title to the interior space in the building and an undivided interest in parts of the interior, the exterior, and other common elements. The property is identified in a master deed and recorded on a plat with the local jurisdiction.
    5. Reserved.
    6. “Manufactured home dwelling” means a HUD, UBC, or IRC Standard approved structure designed to be transported after fabrication and equal to or exceeding fourteen feet in width and seven hundred square feet in area, excluding towing gear and bumpers. Such a structure is suitable for human habitation on a year-round basis when equipped with required plumbing, heating and electrical facilities. Manufactured homes may or may not have integral chassis or permanent hitches to allow future movement. The space and width requirements of this definition shall not apply to any manufactured home located within a previously existing manufactured home park.
    7. “Multi-household dwelling” means three or more residential dwelling units within a single building and under a single roof, including apartments, townhouses and attached condominiums. Any building or portion thereof which is designed, built, rented or leased, let or hired out to be occupied or which is occupied as the home or residence of three or more households living independently of each other and doing their own cooking within the premises.
    8. “Single-household dwelling” means a free-standing residential building providing complete independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
    9. “Townhouse (“townhome”)” means a form of multi-unit housing constructed as a single structure or group of structures in which the owner owns the described area of land in the unit and also owns the land on which the unit is located.
Dwelling, Unit. “Unit dwelling” means one or more rooms in a dwelling, apartment hotel or apartment motel, designed for or occupied by one household for living or sleeping purposes and having one but not more than one kitchen or set of fixed cooking facilities, other than hot plates or other portable cooking units.
“Easement” means that portion of a lot or lots reserved for present or future use by a person or agency other than the legal owner(s) of said property(ies). The easement may be for use under, on, or above said lot or lots.
“Eating establishment” means a public place where food and drinks are served for a fee. This use includes restaurants, cafes, drive-throughs, coffee shops, and donut shops.
“Encroachment” means the authorized or unauthorized placement of a structure or part of a structure upon the land or easement of another or a public right-of-way.
“Engineer” means a person duly authorized under applicable provisions of Utah State Code to practice the profession of engineering.
“Environmental analysis statement” means a statement prepared by an engineer, geologist, or other person qualified by training or experience, as determined by the Planning Commission, which indicates or describes the impact that the development will likely have on the natural features of the immediate area, and which describes the measures that will be taken to lessen the occurrence of adverse conditions with respect to:
    1. Control of erosion within the area to be developed;
    2. Reseeding of cuts and fills;
    3. Provision for potable water;
    4. Disposition of any geological hazards or soil conditions which may cause injury or damage to improvements which may be constructed in the development, such as buildings, water and sewer lines and streets;
    5. Provisions for the proper disposal of solid and liquid wastes that will likely come from the occupants of the development when it is fully developed;
    6. Prevention of the destruction of vegetation or else the establishing of new vegetation;
    7. Prevention of the accumulation of weeds and debris;
    8. Disposal of surface water and disposition of flood hazards.
“Essential services” means the development or maintenance of public utilities or city-approved underground, surface or overhead gas, electrical, telephone, steam, fuel or water transmission or distribution systems, including towers, poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm and police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and similar equipment, and sewage pump stations.
“Excavation” means any disturbance to the ground, including but not limited to soil removal, clearing, grubbing, rock removal, cutting, tunneling, drilling, or any other activity which alters the natural ground.
“Fence, sight obscuring” means any fence or wall that is designed to limit visual access to a parcel, or portion of a parcel, in order to shield permitted, yet potential unsightly conditions from public view. All plans for all sight obscuring fences and walls shall first be submitted and approved by the planning department and the Zoning Administrator. All sight obscuring fences and walls shall be constructed of substantial material and the design and construction of said fence or wall shall be consistent with the quality of dwellings and other improvements within the surrounding area as determined by the Zoning Administrator. No fence shall be constructed which prohibits direct and convenient access to a fire hydrant or which obstructs the proper and efficient operations of a hydrant.
“Flag-shaped,” “panhandle lot,” “flag lot,” all mean a lot or building site having its only vehicular access by way of a long narrow drive/entry/access way which serves no other property.
“Flood control structure” means an engineered feature designed to manage storm water, reduce erosion, and prevent or mitigate local flash flooding downstream and may include revetments, dams, diversions, levees, channels or dykes.
“Floor area” means the floor area of a building is the sum of the area of the several floors of the building, including basements, mezzanines, and penthouses of headroom height, measured from the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating buildings. The floor area does not include unoccupied features such as pipe trenches, exterior terraces, or steps, chimneys, roof overhangs, etc.
“Food truck park” means an area on private property designated to accommodate two or more food trucks.
“Fowl” when applied to Code Chapter 17.52, specifically references a domesticated hen “chicken” that is used as food or for laying eggs but does not include any of the other various heavy-bodied largely ground-feeding domestic or game birds of the order Galliformes, such as a duck, goose, turkey, or pheasant, that is used for food or hunted as game.
Fractional Numbers or Measurements. In determining the requirements of this title, whenever a fraction of a number or a unit is one-half or more, said fraction shall not be included in determining requirements.
“Garage, private” means a building or part thereof designed for the parking or temporary storage of automobiles of the occupants of the premises.
“Governing body” means the City Council of Moab City, Utah.
“Grade” shall be as follows:
    1. For the buildings adjoining one street only, the elevation of the sidewalk or centerline of the street, whichever is higher, at right angles to the midpoint of the adjoining wall.
    2. For the buildings adjoining more than one street, the average of the elevation of the sidewalks or centerlines of the street, whichever is higher, at right angles to the midpoint of the adjoining wall.
    3. For the buildings having no wall adjoining the street, the average level of the sidewalk or centerline of surrounding streets, whichever is higher.
    4. Any building wall parallel or nearly parallel to and not more than five feet from a street line is to be considered as adjoining the street.
“Group home” means a residential home where a small number of unrelated people in need of care, support, or supervision can live together, such as those who are in a foster care program or with chronic disabilities.
“Guest” means a person staying or receiving services for compensation at a hotel, motel, boarding house, rooming house or rest home, or similar use.
“Hardware stores” means a store selling tools, fasteners, building materials, hand and power tools, lumber, implements, keys, locks, hinges, chains, plumbing supplies, electrical supplies, cleaning products, housewares, utensils, paint, and lawn and garden products directly to consumers for use at home or for gardening, construction or business. Many hardware stores have specialty departments that include hunting and fishing supplies, plants and nursery products, marine and boating supplies, pet food and supplies, farm and ranch supplies (including animal feed), swimming pool chemicals, home brewing supplies and canning supplies.
“Home occupation” means any occupation conducted within a dwelling and carried on by persons residing in the dwelling.
“Household” means one or more persons related or unrelated who live in the same dwelling and share meals or living accommodation, and may consist of a single family or some other grouping of people.
“Junkyard” means a place where scrap, waste, discarded or salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged, baled, packed, disassembled, or handled or stored, including auto wrecking yards, house wrecking yards, used lumberyards and places or yards for storage of salvaged house wrecking and structural steel materials and equipment; but not including such places where such uses are conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building or where salvaged materials are kept incidental to manufacturing operations conducted on the premises.
“Kennel” means land or buildings used in the keeping of four or more dogs over four months old.
“Land use plan” means a plan adopted and maintained by the City Council which shows how the land should be used-an element of the master plan.
“Landscaping” means some combination of planted trees, shrubs, vines, groundcover, flowers or lawns. In addition, the combination or design may include rocks and such structural features as foundations, pools, art works, screens, walls, fences or benches, but such objects alone shall not qualify as landscaping. The selected combination of objects for landscaping purposes shall be arranged in a harmonious manner as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
“Large-scale development” means a development that contains two or more main buildings on a zoning lot and which development is planned and developed as a single entity.
“Livestock corral” means a place or pen where livestock are kept on a seasonal basis as a part of an agricultural enterprise or operation as distinguished from a livestock feed yard.
“Living open space” is that portion of the yards on a zoning lot which is not used by automotive vehicles but reserved for outdoor living space, recreational space and landscaping.
“Lodging” means any short-term temporary living or sleeping place in which someone lives or stays for a period of time not to exceed thirty consecutive days. This includes hotels, motels, bed and breakfasts, townhomes, condominiums, and campgrounds located in an appropriate zone that allows short-term lodging.
Lodging House. See “boarding house.”
“Lot” means a single parcel or tract of land.
    1. “Lot, corner” means a lot situated at a junction of two public streets or situated on a curved street or way, the radius of which is thirty-five feet or less and where the angle formed by the intersection of the tangent is one hundred five degrees or less.
    2. “Lot, interior” means a lot other than a corner lot.
    3. “Lot of record” means a lot designated on a subdivision plat or deed, duly recorded pursuant to statute in the county recorder’s office. A lot of record may or may not coincide with a zoning lot.
    4. “Lot, zoning” means a parcel of land, composed of one or more recorded lots, occupied or to be occupied by a principal building or buildings or principal use or used along with permitted accessory buildings or uses, meeting all the requirements for area, buildable area, frontage, width, yards, setbacks, and any other requirements set forth in this title.
“Mobile home” means a vehicular or portable structure which is constructed for movement on the public highways; which has been constructed in accordance with the building code for mobile homes as adopted by the City, but which has not been demonstrated to conform to the requirements of the building code for other residences.
“Mobile home park” means an area or tract of land used to accommodate two or more mobile homes.
“Motel-tourist home-motor hotel” means one or more buildings containing individual sleeping rooms or living units designed for use by automobile tourists or transients with garage attached or parking space conveniently located to each unit.
“Motor home” means a self-propelled vehicular unit, primarily designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation use.
“Noncomplying structure” means a building or structure that:
    1. Legally existed before its current land use; or
    2. Because of one or more subsequent land use ordinance changes, does not comply to the setback, height restrictions, or other regulations, excluding those regulations, that govern the use of land.
“Nonconforming building” means a building, structure or portion thereof, which does not conform to the regulations of this title applicable to the zone or district in which such building is situated but which was in existence on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title.
“Nonconforming use” means a use of land that:
    1. Legally existed before its current land use designation;
    2. Has been maintained continuously since the time the land use ordinance governing the land changed; and
    3. Because of one or more subsequent land use ordinance changes, does not conform to the regulations that now govern the use of the land.
“Nursery, day care” means a home or building in which children are tended or kept for compensation; does not include overnight accommodations for such children as does a foster home or an orphanage.
“Other public facilities” means and include, but are not limited to, governmental functions such as libraries, museums, parks, playgrounds, recreational centers, police, fire, or utilities facilities, that are public owned or operated or under public control and jurisdiction, and subject to the provisions of this code.
“Outdoor recreational uses, commercial” Outdoor recreation uses are those activities that:
    1. Are undertaken outside the confines of buildings;
    2. May or may not involve organized competition or formal rules;
    3. Can be undertaken without the existence of any built facility or infrastructure;
    4. May require large areas of land, water and/or air;
    5. May require outdoor areas of predominantly unmodified natural landscape
Facilities, site modification or infrastructure may be provided to manage the impacts generated by the activities. However, outdoor recreation activities can be undertaken without facilities, site modification or infrastructure. Such activities can be active or passive.
Active outdoor recreational activities include but are not limited to the following:
+------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| Ballooning                         | Motor/trail bike riding                           |
+------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| Boating/sailing                    | Mountain bike riding                              |
+------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| Camping: RV’s/tents/rustic lodging | Multi purpose trail use                           |
+------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| Canoeing                           | Nature studies                                    |
+------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| Canyoneering                       | Orienteering                                      |
+------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| Caving                             | Outdoor festivals                                 |
+------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| Climbing                           | Parachuting                                       |
+------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| Collecting                         | Photography                                       |
+------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| Conservation activities            | Picnicking                                        |
+------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| Cycling: Paved or off-road         | Rafting                                           |
+------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| Dog Park                           | Ropes courses                                     |
+------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| Fishing                            | Sailboarding                                      |
+------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| Four-wheel-driving                 | Scuba diving                                      |
+------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| Golfing                            | Skate parks: Skateboarding/rollerblading/mountain |
|                                    | boarding                                          |
+------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| Hang-gliding/para-gliding          | Snorkeling                                        |
+------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| Hiking                             | Touring                                           |
+------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| Horse riding                       | Trail Running on an unpaved trail                 |
|                                    | Day hiking on an unpaved trail                    |
|                                    | Backpacking                                       |
|                                    | Rock climbing (rock or ice)                       |
+------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| Informal concerts                  | Walking                                           |
+------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| Jet skiing                         | Water parks/pools with play features              |
+------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| Kayaking                           | Wildlife Viewing/Bird and wildlife                |
+------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| Kite flying                        | Waterskiing                                       |
+------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
A passive activity area is an area within an outdoor recreation site which provides an opportunity for such less athletic recreational pursuits as pleasure walking, rest and relaxation, and informal picnicking. Such areas are generally maintained in a natural state, except for minimal clearing for paths, trails, sitting areas, walkways or auxiliary structures. However, landscaped areas with maintained lawns, shade trees, and benches may also be used. Passive recreation generally encompasses the less intensive range of outdoor activities compatible with preserving natural resource functions such as wildlife habitat and floodplain protection. Conservation areas and their associated trail systems provide excellent opportunities for low impact activities like hiking, bird watching, and picnicking on a carry-in, carry-out basis.
+---------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
| Baseball and softball fields          | Playground areas                      |
+---------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
| Boating access                        | Racquetball courts                    |
+---------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
| Basketball courts                     | Restrooms                             |
+---------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
| Beach/pond/lake swimming              | Scenic overlooks                      |
+---------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
| Camping                               | Shelters/gazebos/pavilions            |
+---------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
| Football/soccer fields                | Swimming pools                        |
+---------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
| Fishing access                        | Tennis courts                         |
+---------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
| Gardens                               | Trails                                |
+---------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
| Golf Courses/driving ranges/practice  | Volleyball courts                     |
| and putting greens/tee boxes          |                                       |
+---------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
| Historic or educational sites         | Water parks                           |
+---------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
| Picnic areas                          | Winter sports access                  |
+---------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
| Service areas: Maintenance facilities/storage buildings/dumpsters/loading     |
| areas/accessory uses intended primarily for the servicing of the recreational |
| facility or associated equipment.                                             |
+---------------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
“Park trailer” means a vehicle that:
    1. Is designed as a temporary living quarters for seasonal or a destination residence which may be connected to utilities necessary for operation of installed fixtures and appliances;
    2. Is built on a single chassis and mounted on wheels; and
    3. Has a gross trailer area not exceeding four hundred square feet in the set up mode.
“Parking space” means a space within a building or parking area, exclusive of driveways, ramps, columns, office and working area, for the parking of a motor vehicle, not less than eighteen and one-half feet in length and not less than nine feet in width.
“Pasture” means an enclosure for animals in which no feed is provided, except that which the animals obtain by grazing.
“Places of worship” (house of worship) shall mean a specially designed structure or consecrated space where individuals or a group of people come to perform acts of devotion, veneration, or religious study. Buildings constructed or used for this purpose include temples, churches, synagogues, convents, monasteries and mosques.
“Planned unit development” means a tract of land which is planned and developed as a single entity wherein the requirements applying to all buildings and improvements are modified to conform to the approved plan.
“Planting plan” means a plan showing the location and dimensions of plants, irrigation equipment, curbs and other protective features around the edge of the planting beds and the location and species of plants to be planted.
“Premises” means a zoning lot together with buildings and structures located thereon.
“Premises agricultural occupation” means a business selling seed, feed, fertilizer, and other items and equipment used in agriculture.
“Premises occupation” means an occupation conducted on the premises outside of a dwelling, by persons residing on the premises.
“Professional offices” means an office for a professional person that includes but is not limited to architects, engineers, surveyors, doctors of medicine, osteopaths, dentists, optometrists, lawyers, accountants, chiropractors, chiropodists, naturopaths, and consultants who engage in a vocation that requires graduation from an accredited school of higher learning.
“Professional person” means an architect, landscape architect, engineer, surveyor, doctor of medicine, osteopath, dentist, optometrist, lawyer, accountant, chiropractor, chiropodist, naturopath, and consultants who engage in a vocation that requires graduation from an accredited school of higher learning.
“Public facility” means a publicly owned structure, building or place open to the public that provides a particular service or is used for a particular activity of leisure and may include entertainment, sports and social activities available for all ages.
“Public parks and playgrounds” means a tract of land which is owned by the public and which has been partially or totally developed or designated for recreational purposes.
“Recreational vehicle,” “camper,” “travel trailer,” “motor home,” and “vacation vehicle” means a vehicular unit, other than a mobile home, primarily designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation use, which is either self-propelled or is mounted on or pulled by another vehicle; including but not limited to: a travel trailer, a camping trailer, a motor home, a fifth wheel trailer and a van.
“Recreational vehicle court; vacation vehicle court” means an area or tract of land used to accommodate two or more recreational vehicles.
“Rest home; nursing home; convalescent home” means a building for the care and keeping of elderly or infirm people afflicted with infirmities or chronic illness.
“Retail establishment” means a business that sells new goods and merchandise from a single point of purchase directly to customers who intend to use that product and serves the everyday needs of the community in which it is located. The use does not include lodging, service or dining uses. Such an establishment sells food, drink, clothing, jewelry, furniture, stone and monuments, automobiles, radios, refrigerators, coal, lumber, and other goods, hardware, and may perform incidental services on such goods when necessary.
“Revetment” means a wall or facing of stone, concrete, masonry, wood or other stabilizing material placed on the banks of rivers, streams or levees to protect them from erosion.
Salvage Yard. See “junkyard.”
“Service establishment” means a business that sells services to the general public that fulfill the everyday needs of the community in which it is located. Such an establishment provides repair and other services for the comfort and convenience of the public in the course of daily living and includes, but is not limited to, hardware stores, tailors, seamstresses, watch repair, home cleaning, investment banking, gas stations, branch offices for insurance companies, repair shops, shoe shops, hair salons, barbers, medical clinics, delivery and mail businesses, car repair, travel agencies, tutoring services, and similar activities.
“Setback” means the shortest distance between the property line and the foundation, wall, or main frame of the building.
“Sign” means any device for visual communication that is used for the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of the public, but not including a flag pole.
    1. “Sign, accessory” means a sign which directs attention to a business or profession conducted on the premises.
    2. Sign, Area Of. The area of a sign shall be considered to include all the lettering, working and accompanying design or symbols together with any background material whether painted or applied. Where a sign consists of individual letters attached to or painted on a building or wall or window, the area of the sign shall be considered to be that of the smallest rectangle which encompasses all the letters or symbols.
    3. “Sign, nonaccessory; billboard” means a sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered elsewhere than on the premises, and only incidentally on the premises, if at all.
“Small neighborhood retail” means a privately owned, small volume business that does not exceed one thousand five hundred square feet in size and sells a variety of a small number of goods and merchandise that appeal to local residents living in the area near the shop.
“Special exception” means a use which is not listed as a permitted use in a zone, but which is permitted as a special exception when such use is specifically mentioned in this title as being a special exception. Also, a use which is permitted in a zone, but which is subject to compliance with conditions prescribed by the terms of this title and by the appeal authority.
“Street, major” means one of the principal thoroughfares, as shown or designated on the major street plan.
“Street, minor,” means any dedicated street serving as the principal means of access to property, which street is not shown on the major street plan, as a principal thoroughfare.
Subdivision. The term “subdivision” means the division of a tract or lot or parcel of land into three or more lots, plots, sites, or other division of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or of building development.
“Travel trailer” means a vehicular, portable unit, mounted on wheels, not requiring special highway permits when drawn by a motorized vehicle:
    1. Designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational, and vacation use; and
    2. When factory-equipped for the road, having a body width of not more than eight feet or a body length of not more than forty feet.
“Twin home” means a two-household dwelling with two individual owners who have rights and responsibilities for their own side and for their own lot. Twin homes have a shared common wall with a lot line landing between the two homes and with their own respective lot.
“Two-household dwelling” means a structure under single ownership and containing two residential dwelling units, other than manufactured homes, within a single building and under a single roof each of which is designed for or occupied by one household.
“Usable floor area” means the net floor area of a building where persons may move about and carry on the usual tasks for working and living but does not include: restrooms and lounges, stairwells, elevators and escalator shafts, building equipment and service areas, entrance and elevator lobbies, stacks and shafts, freezer and cooler areas, storage and stock rooms, and other building elements where patrons would not normally be allowed.
“Variance” means a waiver of specific regulations of this title granted by the appeal authority in accordance with the provisions set forth in this title for the purposes of assuring that no property, because of special circumstances applicable to it, shall be deprived of privileges commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same zone.
“Warehouse” means a large building, or part of one, where raw materials or manufactured goods may be stored before their export or distribution for sale.
“Yard” means an open space on the same lot with a building unoccupied or unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided in this title.
    1. “Yard, front” means the minimum horizontal distance between the street line and the front line of the building or any projection thereof, excluding nonenclosed steps. On a corner lot the front yard may be applied to either street.
    2. “Yard, rear” means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot as a building, measured from the rear line of the building (exclusive of steps) and the rear lot line, and extending for the entire width of the lot. In case of a corner lot where the building facade faces on the side street, the rear yard may be established from the side of the house to the side property line.
    3. “Yard, required” means the open space around buildings which is required by the terms of this title.
    4. “Yard, side” means a yard between the building and the side line of the lot and extending from the front yard to the rear yard. (Ord. 19-13 §§ 1--3, 21 (part), 2019; Ord. 18-01 (part), 2018; Ord. 18-06 (part), 2018; Ord. 17-32 (part), 2017; Ord. 17-22, 2017; Ord. 11-07, 2011; Ord. 11-01, 2011; Ord. 10-15, 2010; Ord. 10-06, 2010; Ord. 09-08, 2009; Ord. 08-25, 2008; Ord. 08-15 (part), 2008: Ord. 01-11 (part), 2001; Ord. 98-11, 1998; Ord. 98-10, 1998; Ord. 96-09, 1996; Ord. 95-13, 1995; Ord. 94-27, 1994; Ord. 94-24 (part), 1994; Ord. 14-81 (part), 1981; Ord. 10-79 (part), 1979; prior code § 27-2-2)

Chapter 17.09 SUPPLEMENTARY REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES APPLICABLE WITHIN ZONES

Sections:
17.09.010    Intent.
17.09.020    Yard space for one building only.
17.09.030    Every dwelling to be on a zoning lot.
17.09.035    Dwelling unit to front on public street.
17.09.040    Sale or lease of required space prohibited.
17.09.050    Yards to be unobstructed--Exceptions.
17.09.060    Reserved.
17.09.070    Accessory building--Prohibited as living quarters.
17.09.080    Kitchen units in motels and hotels.
17.09.090    Storage of large vehicles prohibited.
17.09.100    Residential zone--Storage of junk and debris prohibited.
17.09.110    Additional height allowed for public buildings.
17.09.120    Minimum height of dwellings and fences.
17.09.130    Location of barns.
17.09.140    Drainage.
17.09.150    Clear view of intersecting streets.
17.09.160    Effect of street plan.
17.09.170    Exception to front and side setback requirements.
17.09.180    Concessions in public parks and playgrounds.
17.09.190    Sewage disposal.
17.09.200    Location of gasoline pumps.
17.09.210    Off-street parking and loading-Generally.
17.09.220    Off-street parking and loading-Number of spaces.
17.09.230    Off-street parking and loading--Location and control of facilities.
17.09.240    Off-street parking and loading-Computation of required spaces.
17.09.250    Off-street parking and loading-Combined areas.
17.09.260    Off-street parking and loading-Mixed uses.
17.09.270    Off-street parking and loading-Access to facilities.
17.09.280    Off-street parking and loading-Circulation within a parking area.
17.09.290    Off-street parking and loading-Location of facilities restricted.
17.09.300    Off-street parking and loading-Lighting.
17.09.310    Off-street parking and loading-Continuing obligation.
17.09.320    Off-street parking and loading-Plot plan approval required.
17.09.330    Off-street parking and loading-Landscaping.
17.09.340    Off-street parking and loading--Loading space required.
17.09.350    Reserved.
17.09.360    Landscaping--Required.
17.09.370    Landscaping--Specifications generally.
17.09.380    Landscaping--Scope of requirements.
17.09.390    Landscaping--Maintenance.
17.09.400    Landscaping--Screening requirements (shrubs).
17.09.410    Landscaping--Plot plan required.
17.09.420    Landscaping--Nonconforming status.
17.09.430    Signs--Generally.
17.09.440    Signs--Residential zones.
17.09.450    Signs--Setback.
17.09.460    Signs--Information permitted.
17.09.470    Signs--Permits required.
17.09.480    Pollution prevention.
17.09.490    Manufactured home--Generally.
17.09.500    Manufactured home--Code compliance.
17.09.510    Manufactured home--Development standard.
17.09.520    Manufactured home--Procedure.
17.09.530    Reserved.
17.09.531    Reserved.
17.09.540    Reserved.
17.09.560    Accessory use or structure.
17.09.570    Reserved.
17.09.620    Reserved.
17.09.630    Reserved.
17.09.650    Reserved.
17.09.660    Reserved.
17.09.665    Reserved.
17.09.670    Designated recreation areas for apartments.
17.09.680    Reserved.
17.09.690    Development design standards for all primary residential dwellings.
17.09.700    Residential short-term rentals prohibited.

17.09.010 Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to accumulate under one heading, regulations which apply to two or more zones, rather than to repeat them several times. (Prior code § 27-3-1)

17.09.020 Yard space for one building only.
No required yard or other open space around an existing building, or which is hereafter provided around any buildings, which is needed to comply with the provisions of this title shall be considered as providing a yard of open space for any other building; nor shall any yard or other required open space on an adjoining lot whereon a building is to be erected or established. (Prior code § 27-3-2)

17.09.030 Every dwelling to be on a zoning lot.
Only one building which contains a dwelling shall be located and maintained on a zoning lot as defined in this title, except for dwellings within a townhome development, court apartment, a planned unit development, mobile home park and other large-scale development. (Ord. 11-16, 2011: prior code § 27-3-3)

17.09.035 Dwelling unit to front on public street.
Except as otherwise provided for in this title, at least one side of each lot used as a dwelling site shall abut upon a street which has been designated or dedicated to the public for street purposes and the length of such abutting side measured at the setback line shall be at least as great as the width required for dwelling sites in the zone in which such building site is located. (Ord. 06-01 (part), 2006: prior code § 27-3-28(E). Formerly 17.09.580)

17.09.040 Sale or lease of required space prohibited.
No space needed to meet the width, yard, area, coverage, parking or other requirements of this title for a lot or building may be sold or leased apart from such lot or building unless other space so complying is provided. (Prior code § 27-3-4)

17.09.050 Yards to be unobstructed--Exceptions.
Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky and unobstructed except for permitted accessory buildings and except for ordinary and customary projection of sills, belt courses, cornices, and other ornamental features and unenclosed steps and unwalled stoops, porches, and carports, which may project up to three feet into a required yard. No projection into a required court which is provided in connection with a court apartment shall be constructed except for customary sills, belt courses, and cornices which may extend into the court not more than sixteen inches. (Prior code § 27-3-5)

17.09.060 Reserved.
Editor’s note: Ord. No. 17-19, adopted June 13, 2017, repealed § 17.09.060, which pertained to accessory building area and derived from prior code § 27-3-6.

17.09.070 Accessory building--Prohibited as living quarters.
Living and sleeping quarters in any building other than the main residential building, or an accessory dwelling unit, is prohibited. (Ord. 18-01 (part), 2018; Ord. 17-19 (part), 2017: prior code § 27-3-7)

17.09.080 Kitchen units in motels and hotels.
Lot area per dwelling unit shall apply to motels and hotels for those units that include kitchen facilities. (Prior code § 27-3-8)

17.09.090 Storage of large vehicles prohibited.
It is unlawful to park any vehicle that exceeds twenty-five feet in length or has a rated capacity of two tons or more for a period of over two hours on any public street or private property zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, RA-1, O-1, C-1 or C-5.
A. Commercial or construction vehicles otherwise subject to this section shall be exempt when stored or parked incident to construction activity taking place on the property, provided such vehicles shall not be stored on any site for a period exceeding one year.
B. Agricultural or farm machinery otherwise subject to this section shall be exempt when stored or parked incident to farming operations on property located within any zone permitting agricultural uses.
C. Recreation vehicles or campers otherwise subject to this section shall be exempt when stored or parked on the private property of the vehicle owner.
D. Vehicles used for the specific purpose of moving households from one location to another that would be subject to this section are exempt, provided such vehicles shall not be parked for a period not to exceed forty-eight hours.
E. Vehicles used for the express propose of delivery are also exempt for a period not to exceed one hour while deliveries are being made.
F. Vehicles in for repair at an auto repair shop within a C-5 zone shall be exempt.
G. Violations of this section shall be punishable, at the option of the City, either as an infraction, or by appropriate civil action to enjoin or abate the violation. In any such civil action the violator shall be liable for fines not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars per violation, together with court costs and reasonable attorney fees. (Ord. 00-07, 2000: Ord. 98-03, 1998: Ord. 92-16, 1992: prior code § 27-3-9)

17.09.100 Residential zone--Storage of junk and debris prohibited.
No yard or other open space surrounding an existing building in any residential zone, or which is hereafter provided around any building in any residential zone, shall be used for the storage of junk, debris, or inoperable vehicles; and no land shall be used for such purposes, except as specifically permitted herein. (Prior code § 27-3-10)

17.09.110 Additional height allowed for public buildings.
Public buildings and churches may be erected to a maximum height of forty feet as defined in Section 17.06.020, Definitions. (Ord. 17-13, 2017: prior code § 27-3-11)

17.09.120 Minimum height of dwellings and fences.
A. No dwelling shall be erected which has a ceiling height of less than seven feet six inches or one story above grade, whichever is greater.
B. No fence or wall shall be constructed higher than four feet above the ground in any required front or side yard that fronts on a street, except that in agricultural zones such fences may be constructed to a height of six feet. (Prior code § 27-3-12)

17.09.130 Location of barns.
No barn, corral, or coop (for the housing of animals, birds, or fowl) shall be constructed closer than one hundred feet from any existing dwelling or public street, nor shall any corral, barn, pen, or coop be constructed or maintained closer than twenty feet to any open waterway that drains into a natural stream. Surface drainage from corrals or barns or coops shall not be permitted to drain into a waterway that drains into a natural stream. (Prior code § 27-3-13)

17.09.140 Drainage.
Surface water from roof tops, lots or irrigation ditches shall not be allowed to drain onto adjacent lots or streets, except after written agreement between the parties involved. (Prior code § 27-3-14)

17.09.150 Clear view of intersecting streets.
In all zones which require a front yard, no obstruction which will obscure the view of automobile drivers shall be placed on any corner lot within a triangular area formed by the street property lines and a line connecting them at points forty-five feet from the intersection of the street lines. (Prior code § 27-3-15)

17.09.160 Effect of street plan.
Wherever a front or side yard is required for a building which building abuts on a proposed street which has not been constructed but which has been designated by the Planning Commission as a future street, the depth of such front or side yard shall be measured from the planned street lines. (Prior code § 27-3-16)

17.09.170 Exception to front and side setback requirements.
The setback from the street for any dwelling located between two existing dwellings in any residential zone may be the same as the average for said two existing dwellings, provided the existing dwellings are on the same side of the street and are located within one hundred fifty feet of each other. (Prior code § 27-3-17)

17.09.180 Concessions in public parks and playgrounds.
Concessions, including but not limited to amusement devices, recreational buildings, and refreshment stands, shall be approved by the City Council. (Prior code § 27-3-18)

17.09.190 Sewage disposal.
Where domestic sewage disposal facilities are used in connection with the construction of buildings which buildings are not connected to a public sewer, approval of such facilities shall be obtained from the health department before a building permit shall be issued therefor. (Prior code § 27-3-19)

17.09.200 Location of gasoline pumps.
Gasoline pump islands shall be set back not less than fifteen feet from any street line to which the pump island is vertical and twelve feet from any street line to which the pump island is parallel and not less than twelve feet from any residential zone boundary line. If the pump island is set in an angle on the property, it shall be so located that automobiles stopped for service will not extend over the property line. In no case shall pumps be set closer than twelve feet from any street line, nor closer than ten feet from any side or rear property line. Lots from which gasoline is dispensed to customers at retail shall be not less than seventy-five by one hundred feet in size. Canopies over pump islands may extend to within five feet to the property lines. (Prior code § 27-3-20)

17.09.210 Off-street parking and loading-Generally.
The regulations set out in Sections 17.09.220 through 17.09.230 are established to increase safety and lessen congestion in the public streets, to provide adequately for parking needs associated with the development of land and increased automobile usage, to set standards for off-street parking according to the amount of traffic generated by each use, and to reduce the on-street storage of vehicles. There shall be provided minimum off-street parking spaces with adequate provisions for ingress and egress by standard sized vehicles in accordance with the requirements of this code at the time of erection of any main building or at the time such buildings are structurally enlarged or converted to increase the use or capacity of the buildings. Parking arrangements must be approved by the Zoning Administrator; four inches of gravel may be allowed for parking lots less than seven spaces if the spaces are delineated and are maintained weed-free. (Ord. 95-14, 1995: Ord. 93-24 (part), 1993: Ord. 93-04 (part), 1993: prior code § 27-3-21 (part))

17.09.220 Off-street parking and loading-Number of spaces.
The following required off-street parking spaces for the particular use are minimum requirements:
A. Residential structures, not including boardinghouses and roominghouses and bachelor dwellings, shall have parking spaces per dwelling unit as follows:
    1. One-household dwellings and mobile homes, two spaces;
    2. Two-household dwellings, four spaces;
    3. Multiple-household dwellings, one and one-half spaces per dwelling unit.
B. Reserved.
C. Hospitals shall have one visitor parking space per two patient beds; plus one parking space for each employee at work in the hospital during daylight hours.
D. Convalescent, nursing and other such institutions shall have one visitor parking space per three patient beds, plus one parking space for each employee at work in the home during daylight hours.
E. Hotels and motels shall have one parking space per room or suite.
F. Private clubs and lodge halls shall have one parking space per two hundred square feet of floor area.
G. Commercial recreation uses shall have one parking space per two hundred square feet of floor area; outdoor commercial recreation uses shall have one parking space per three patrons based on the design capacity of the facility.
H. Churches shall have one parking space per four seating spaces in the main assembly room.
I. Theaters, auditoriums, sports arenas and places of assembly shall have one parking space per four seating spaces.
J. Mortuaries or funeral parlors shall have one parking space per four seating spaces in the main assembly room.
K. Medical clinics shall have one parking space per two hundred square feet of floor area.
L. Restaurants, taverns and lounges shall have one parking space per two hundred square feet of floor area.
M. Banks shall have one parking space per two hundred square feet of floor area in the building.
N. Retail stores, professional offices, personal service shops and other business buildings not specifically mentioned elsewhere in this section shall have one parking space per three hundred square feet of floor area, except that in any zone designated as central commercial zone, parking space may be reduced to three spaces per one thousand square feet of floor area. Retail and wholesale stores that exceed ten thousand square feet of floor area require one parking space per one hundred square feet of floor area for the amount of floor area that exceeds ten thousand square feet.
O. Industrial, manufacturing and wholesale establishments shall have one parking space per two employees based on the largest shift.
P. Uses Not Mentioned. The required off-street parking for any building, structure or use of land of a type which is not listed in this section shall be determined by the appeal authority. The appeal authority shall be guided by comparison with the requirements for similar uses which are listed.
Q. Special Exceptions to the Parking Requirements. Exceptions to the above listed minimum parking requirements require Planning Commission approval. The applicant requesting an exception to the minimum requirements shall conduct studies, prepare a report and prove to the Planning Commission that a lower than minimum requirement is adequate for the off-street parking needs of a development. The report shall include, but not be limited to:
    1. National parking standards such as Institute of Transportation Engineers or Urban Land Institute studies supporting fewer spaces;
    2. Local studies of businesses comparable by size and type demonstrating significant parking availability with the current standard; and
    3. Present business potential related to number of employees, number of customers, and turnover of customers that may support fewer parking spaces.
    4. For businesses located on Main Street in the C-3 zone the applicant shall demonstrate that on-street parking is reasonably available for short-term parking. The Public Works Director and Zoning Administrator shall address visibility and safety concerns.
The Planning Commission shall consider how future use changes may affect the future parking needs of the development.
R. Reserved.
S. Replacement of Existing Buildings. In the C-3 central commercial zone, additional parking is not required when existing buildings are replaced with new buildings that are the same size or smaller than the existing buildings, provided that the proposed use does not change from the historic use of the building. When existing buildings are replaced with larger buildings of the same use, additional parking is required for the additional size of the buildings. (Ord. 19-13 §§ 4, 21 (part), 2019; Ord. 12-06, 2012; Ord. 10-06 (part), 2010; Ord. 98-01, 1998; Ord. 93-24 (part), 1993: Ord. 93-04 (part), 1993: prior code § 27-3-21(A))

17.09.230 Off-street parking and loading--Location and control of facilities.
The off-street parking facilities required by this title shall be located on the same lot or parcel of land as the use they are intended to serve except for approved shared parking, payment-in-lieu of parking or off-site parking.
A. Shared parking facilities may be used jointly with parking facilities for other uses when operations are not normally conducted during the same hours, when peak uses or seasonal uses vary, and that shared parking lots be located within three hundred feet of all businesses being served by such lots. Requests for shared parking or off-site parking are subject to conditional use approval of the Moab Planning Commission. The minimum conditions and submittals for shared parking and off-site parking requests shall include the following:
    1. Proposal must show sufficient evidence that there will be no substantial conflict in the periods of peak demand of uses for which shared-parking is proposed;
    2. A site plan showing the number and location of proposed parking spaces, location and size of buildings, parcel boundaries, streets, sidewalks, driveways and curb cuts must be submitted;
    3. Off-site parking may be used only for hotels and motels that provide valet service. Proof of valet service must be submitted;
    4. A written agreement executed by all parties concerned shall be filed with the Moab City Recorder.
B. In the event that the Zoning Administrator determines that off-street parking cannot be reasonably provided in accordance with the provisions of this title, a commercial property owner, in the C-3 zone and designated portion of the C-4 zone, may be allowed to make a payment-in-lieu of providing parking spaces, according to the following conditions:
    1. A commercial property owner must fill out a payment-in-lieu of parking application and pay a review fee as established by resolution.
    2. The City Planning Commission must review any payment-in-lieu of parking requests and after holding a public hearing, may approve or disapprove such requests.
    3. The established payment-in-lieu rate shall be established by resolution. Such fees shall be deposited into a parking facilities development fund and all expenditures from this fund shall be directly spent or encumbered only for the propose of operation, maintenance and administration of parking or transit facilities. The fee shall be paid to the City of Moab according to the following schedule: fifty percent of the fee shall be paid prior to an issuance of a building permit and the remaining fifty percent shall be paid prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy permit.
    4. To encourage higher building density in the downtown businesses district, owners of land or businesses in the C-3 central commercial zone have the option to use payment-in-lieu of parking rather than to reasonably provide parking spaces at the time of erection of any main building or at the time such buildings are structurally enlarged or converted to increase the use or capacity of the buildings.
    5. To encourage more harmonious development patterns in the general commercial district, owners of existing businesses in the C-4 general commercial zone located between Mill Creek and Pack Creek as designated on the official Moab City zoning map, have the option to use payment-in-lieu of parking rather than to provide additional on-site parking spaces at the time buildings on the parcel are structurally enlarged or converted to increase the use or capacity of the buildings.
    6. Payment-in-lieu of parking shall be permitted to provide no more than thirty percent of the parking spaces required by this chapter of any particular use or development. (Ord. 98-02, 1998; Ord. 97-06, 1997; Ord. 96-07, 1996; Ord. 93-24 (part), 1993: Ord. 93-04 (part), 1993: prior code § 27-3-21(B))

17.09.240 Off-street parking and loading-Computation of required spaces.
For the purpose of computing off-street parking spaces which are required by this title, the following rules shall apply:
A. “Floor area” means gross floor area, unless otherwise specified for a particular use.
B. In stadiums, sports arenas, churches, and other places of assembly in which benches or pews are used in place of seats, each eighteen inches of length of such benches or pews shall be counted as one seat. (Prior code § 27-3-21(C))

17.09.250 Off-street parking and loading-Combined areas.
The required off-street parking and loading facilities may be provided collectively for two or more buildings or uses, provided that the total number of parking spaces shall be not less than the sum of the requirements for each of the individual uses. (Prior code § 27-3-21(D))

17.09.260 Off-street parking and loading-Mixed uses.
In the event that two or more uses occupy the same zoning lot, or parcel of land, the total requirements for off-street parking and off-street loading space shall be the sum of the requirements of the various uses computed separately. (Prior code § 27-3-21(E))

17.09.270 Off-street parking and loading-Access to facilities.
A. Access driveways shall be provided for ingress to and egress from all parking and loading facilities. Each parking and loading space shall be easily accessible to the intended user.
B. Forward travel to and from parking facilities from a dedicated street or alley shall be required for all uses, except for parking which has been provided in connection with one-household and two-household dwellings. The parking area shall be adequate to facilitate the turning of vehicles to permit forward travel upon entering a street.
C. Access to all off-street parking facilities shall be designed in a manner which will not interfere with the movements of vehicular and pedestrian traffic. (Ord. 19-13 § 21 (part), 2019; prior code § 27-3-21(F))

17.09.280 Off-street parking and loading-Circulation within a parking area.
Circulation within a parking area shall comply with the following requirements:
A. Parking area with more than one aisle must be so arranged that a car need not enter the street to reach another aisle within the same parking area.
B. Directional signs shall be required to differentiate between entrance and exit access points to the street. (Prior code § 27-3-21(G))

17.09.290 Off-street parking and loading-Location of facilities restricted.
Parking and loading facilities may be located any place on the premises except for areas that are required to be landscaped. Off-street parking space which is required in connection with a use shall be construed to be part of that use and shall not be located within a zone unless expressly therein. (Parking must be listed in the zone; if it is not listed, it is not permitted.) (Prior code § 27-3-21(H))

17.09.300 Off-street parking and loading-Lighting.
Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking facilities or vehicle sales areas shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from the adjoining premises in any residential zone. (Prior code § 27-3-21(I))

17.09.310 Off-street parking and loading-Continuing obligation.
The required off-street parking and loading facilities shall be a continuing obligation of the property owner so long as the use requiring vehicle parking or vehicle loading facilities continues. It is unlawful for an owner of any building or use to discontinue or dispense with the required vehicle parking or loading facilities without providing other vehicle parking or loading area which meets the requirements of this title. (Prior code § 27-3-21(J))

17.09.320 Off-street parking and loading-Plot plan approval required.
At the time a building permit is requested for any building or structure, or at the time the use of land is changed which requires additional off-street parking space, a plot plan shall be submitted showing the location and layout of such required space along with access aisles, roadways, curbs and curb cuts. The Zoning Administrator shall disapprove such plans if he finds that the required spaces are not usable for standard-sized automobiles or do not comply with the requirements for offstreet parking as set forth in this title. (Prior code § 27-3-21(K))

17.09.330 Off-street parking and loading-Landscaping.
A. All off-street parking lots shall be bordered by a curb. Landscaped areas shall be provided for parking lots so as to provide visual and climatic relief from broad expanses of pavement and to channelize and define logical areas for pedestrian and vehicular circulation. Landscaped areas shall include trees to maximize the amount of shade on the parking lot at noon during summer months.
B. For parking lots designed for over five vehicle spaces, shade trees shall be appropriately spaced around the perimeter of parking lots to provide a solid canopy of shade when the trees mature. Irrigation systems shall be installed for landscapes areas.
C. For parking lots over four thousand square feet, at least five percent of the interior of the lot shall be landscaped so as to define aisles and limit unbroken rows of parking. End of aisles and corner areas shall be curbed and landscaped. Unbroken parking rows in interior parking lots shall not exceed one hundred fifty feet except when such landscaped areas seriously limit functions of the building site.
D. To provide for a pleasant, pedestrian environment in the central commercial district, a landscaped strip at least ten feet in width shall be provided along the edge of any parking lot adjacent to a public street right-of-way. This landscaped strip shall not be required if the building is located at the front of the property line abutting a right-of-way and parking is located entirely in the interior of the block.
E. If the specific application of the interior landscape requirements will seriously limit functions of the building site, the Zoning Administrator may permit consolidation and relocation of these landscaped areas on the building site.
F. During the winter and summer months a bond may be collected by the City for new developments where landscaping is required. The type, amount, and forfeiture of the bond shall be determined by the City administrator or manager. The bond is collected when a building permit is issued. (Ord. 94-01 (part), 1994: prior code § 27-3-21(L))

17.09.340 Off-street parking and loading--Loading space required.
For every building having a gross floor area of five thousand square feet or more to which goods, material, merchandise or supplies are received or distributed by vehicle, there shall be provided at least one off-street loading space. One additional loading space shall also be provided for each additional twenty thousand square feet of gross floor area of such building or for each vehicle which must be loaded or unloaded at the same time, whichever requirement is greater. Each required off-street loading space shall be not less than ten feet in width, twenty-five feet in length, and fourteen feet in height. (Prior code § 27-3-21(M))

17.09.350 Reserved.
Editor’s note: Ord. No. 17-37, adopted November 14, 2017, repealed § 17.09.350, which pertained to motor vehicle access and derived from prior code § 27-3-22 and Ord. No. 10-06, 2010.

17.09.360 Landscaping--Required.
At least seventy percent of the area contained within a required front or side yard adjacent to a street in any residential or residential-agricultural zone shall be landscaped. Also, other landscaping shall be required in other zones as specified. (Prior code § 27-3-23)

17.09.370 Landscaping--Specifications generally.
The purpose of the landscaping requirements in this title shall be to enhance, conserve and stabilize property values by encouraging pleasant and attractive surroundings and thus create the necessary atmosphere for the orderly development of a pleasant community. Landscaping also contributes to the relief of heat, noise and glare through the proper placement of green plants and trees, and other commonly accepted forms of landscaping. (Prior code § 27-3-24 (part))

17.09.380 Landscaping--Scope of requirements.
Where landscaping is required, such landscaping shall comply with the requirements set forth in this title for the specific use and location. (Prior code § 27-3-24(A))

17.09.390 Landscaping--Maintenance.
Required landscaped areas shall be maintained in a neat, clean, orderly and healthful condition. This is meant to include proper pruning, mowing lawns, weeding, removal of litter, fertilizing, replacement of dead plants and the regular watering of all plantings. (Prior code § 27-3-24(B))

17.09.400 Landscaping--Screening requirements (shrubs).
Where landscaped screening is required, said screening shall consist of evergreen shrubs, walls, berms, opaque fences, or other densely planted shrubs or vegetation, closely spaced and maintained at substantially the specified height of said required screening. When not otherwise specified, natural screening shall be maintained at a height of from four feet to six feet.
A buffer of ten feet of landscaping and an opaque screen or fence shall be installed and maintained along commercial zoning boundaries (other than streets) that abut residential zones. The opaque screen or fence shall have a total height of six feet. Where there is a difference in elevation on the opposite sides of the screen, the height shall be measured from the highest elevation. Under special conditions where it has been determined that the development may create unique impacts on an adjoining residential zone, such as in the case of parking lots, extended business hours, or hillside developments, the Zoning Administrator may review and approve other methods of screening such as bermed landscaping, screen height, placement of screening, or other types of screening.
Screening of mechanical equipment, loading areas, dumpsters or structures built to accommodate the storage of trash and garbage shall be required. (Ord. 94-01 (part), 1994: prior code § 27-3-24(C))

17.09.410 Landscaping--Plot plan required.
Where landscaping is required in this title, a plot plan showing the proposed landscape development, watering system and use of the property shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator. The same plot plan used to show parking layout or other requirements for the issuance of a building permit may be used to show landscaping, providing all proposed landscaping is detailed adequately on said plot plan. The Zoning Administrator may disapprove such plans if he determines that they are not consistent with the requirements and purposes of this title. (Prior code § 27-3-24(D))

17.09.420 Landscaping--Nonconforming status.
Any use of property which, on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, is nonconforming only as to the regulations relating to landscaping may be continued in the same manner as if the landscaping were conforming. (Prior code § 27-3-24(E))

17.09.430 Signs--Generally.
(As a reference use the Uniform Building Sign Code, Utah State Department of Transportation.) Advertising signs shall be regulated as set out in Sections 17.09.440 through 17.09.470. (Prior code § 27-3-25 (part))

17.09.440 Signs--Residential zones.
No advertising signs of any kind shall be allowed in any residential zone, except signs pertaining to the sale or lease of residential property, and except for nameplate or signs indicating the existence of an office of a professional person and a home occupation. (Prior code § 27-3-25(A))

17.09.450 Signs--Setback.
All advertising signs shall be set back from public streets a distance at least equal to the distance that buildings are required to be set back within the zone in which the signs are located. (Prior code § 27-3-25(B))

17.09.460 Signs--Information permitted.
Except in those zones where nonaccessory signs are permitted, all signs shall display thereon only information pertaining to products or services sold on the premises. (Prior code § 27-3-25(C))

17.09.470 Signs--Permits required.
Regardless of cost, no sign shall be erected or placed within the City without first making application for and obtaining building permit therefor, except temporary window and political posters, temporary signs pertaining to the sale of adjacent property, and nameplates for identification signs indicating the existence of an approved home occupation or professional office. In addition to the requirements of this title, all signs located within six hundred sixty feet of the right-of-way line of a federally designated highway shall conform to the standards and regulations for such signs established by the state. Any approval or permits hereinabove required and construction or placement of a sign shall not be commenced until all approvals and permits have been obtained. (Prior code § 27-3-25(D))

17.09.480 Pollution prevention.
Any use which emits or discharges gases, fumes, dust, glare, noise or other pollutants into the atmosphere in amounts which exceed the standards as prescribed by the Utah State Air Conservation Board or the Board of health and any use which emits or discharges liquids or solid material onto the soil or water in amounts which result in pollutants entering groundwater in amounts exceeding the standards prescribed by the Utah State Water Pollution Control Board or the Board of health shall be prohibited. (Prior code § 27-3-26)

17.09.490 Manufactured home--Generally.
Manufactured homes shall be allowed in all zones allowing residential development provided the unit was manufactured after June 16, 1976, and is appropriately stamped and complies with the provisions set out in Sections 17.09.500 through 17.09.520. (Ord. 14-81 (part), 1981: prior code § 27-3-27 (part))

17.09.500 Manufactured home--Code compliance.
A. All manufactured houses shall possess necessary building permits as required by the City building, plumbing, electrical and mechanical codes and this title including those required for site preparation, provision of utilities and the construction of accessory structures.
B. Foundations. All manufactured houses to be developed on city lots shall be placed on permanent firm foundations, footings and proper blocking support as approved by the City.
C. Roof Load. This requirement for manufactured homes is thirty psf roof load; wind load is fifteen psf.
D. Site preparation. Properly graded and sloped compacted to ninety percent maximum relative density.
E. Firm foundation. May be set on concrete pier and footing, or other method approved by the City. (Ord. 14-81 (part), 1981: prior code § 27-3-27(A))

17.09.510 Manufactured home--Development standard.
Prior to the issuance of a building permit for placement of a manufactured house on a permanent foundation, all such houses must meet the following development standards:
A. Have exterior siding extending to within six inches of dirt or two inches of concrete and consisting of a conventional dwelling type exterior material, finished before occupancy;
B. Have a shingled, pitched roof with eaves;
C. Meet all setback and area requirements of this title;
D. Improved permanent access entrance or exits must be installed according to city standard, (steps, porch and deck, patios, etc.);
E. They do not violate deed restrictions in the area where the unit is to be located. (Ord. 14-81 (part), 1981: prior code § 27-3-27(B))

17.09.520 Manufactured home--Procedure.
Any person desiring to place a manufactured house on a permanent foundation within city limits shall make application for a building permit for that purpose with the City building inspector and then shall deliver to the building inspector an affidavit to have the manufactured house appurtenance to the real property. Upon completion of the installation of the manufactured house on a permanent foundation, the building inspector shall cause the affidavit to be filed with the county assessor. (Ord. 14-81 (part), 1981: prior code § 273-27(C))

17.09.530 Reserved.
(Ord. 16-02 (part), 2016; Ord. 12-09 (part), 2012; Ord. 12-05 (part), 2012; Ord. 11-09 (part), 2011; Ord. 11-01 (part), 2011; Ord. 10-13 (part), 2010; Ord. 10-06 (part), 2010; Ord. 08-05 (part), 2008)

17.09.531 Reserved.
(Ord. 17-21 (part), 2017; Ord. 16-02 (part), 2016; Ord. 12-05 (part), 2012; Ord. 11-09 (part), 2011; Ord. 11-01 (part), 2011; Ord. 10-13 (part), 2010; Ord. 08-05 (part), 2008)

17.09.540 Reserved.
(Ord. 16-05 (part), 2016; Ord. 14-02 § 2, 2014)

17.09.560 Accessory use or structure.
A. Accessory uses or structures as defined in Section 17.06.020 may be permitted subject to the following conditions:
    1. Such accessory uses shall be limited to those customarily associated with and appropriate, incidental and subordinate to the principal use.
    2. Such accessory uses shall be located on the same lot or tract as the associated principal use.
    3. Detached garages and attached carports located in the front yard setback shall be controlled in the same manner as the associated principal use, except as otherwise expressly provided in this code. Carports located in the rear one-half of the building lot and all nongarage accessory structures shall be required to have a minimum 2:12 roof pitch.
    4. Such accessory uses shall not be located on the lot so that storm water drainage is allowed to drain directly onto neighboring private property or public property including easements, alleys, and rights-of-way.
    5. In no event shall an accessory use be construed to authorize a use not otherwise permitted in the zone district in which the principal use is located, and in no event shall an accessory use or structure be constructed or established prior to the principal use or structure to which it is accessory.
    6. Dimensional requirements for accessory structures in the RA-1, A-2, C-1, C-2, C-4, C-5, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, and MH/RV-1 zone districts:
        a. The combined total area of all primary, secondary, and accessory buildings on a lot may cover not more than seventy-five percent of the lot area.
        b. The maximum height of accessory structures shall not exceed twenty feet or the height of the principal structure, whichever is less; provided, however, that carports may not exceed a height of sixteen feet, and must be less than or equal to the height of a single-story principal structure if located in the front yard and attached to the principal residential structure.
    7. Individuals who desire to construct accessory buildings and carports are required to obtain a building permit and to submit site plans that accurately describe the dimensions of the proposed structure and the required setbacks.
    8. Carports with three sides open may be constructed in conjunction with an allowed residential structure to within ten feet of the front property line. However, no carport shall be constructed to encroach over any recorded easement, public right-of-way or other private property. If a property owner desires to construct a carport closer than ten feet to the front property line a variance is required from the appeals authority as per Chapter 17.72 of this code.
    9. An accessory carport that is attached to the principal structure may be allowed to extend into the front yard setback when all of the following standards can be met:
        a. The carport roof must be constructed in such a manner to appear as a part of the original construction of the principal structure.
        b. The materials used in construction of the accessory use are compatible with the materials used in the principal use.
        c. The carport meets side yard setback standards for the underlying zone.
        d. The carport does not extend into or over any easement or any city right-of-way.
        e. The carport roof slope shall comply with the requirements of garages in subsection (c) above, and have no less than a 4:12 pitch or match the roof pitch of the existing principal structure. A carport in conjunction with a southwestern style house shall have no less than a 2:12 roof pitch.
        f. Staff is authorized to review the proposal for compliance with the above standards and approve the building materials for the project.
        g. All attached carports shall meet the requirements of the adopted building codes of the City.
    10. Residential front porches attached to the principal use and having three sides open may be constructed in conjunction with an allowed residential structure to extend a distance of ten feet into the front yard setback. However, in no case shall a residential porch extend to less than five feet from a street right-of-way or be constructed on or encroach over any recorded easement, public right-of-way or other private property. Such porches shall not be converted to living space or be enclosed with solid walls.
B. Setbacks. Detached accessory buildings shall be constructed to the established setbacks as illustrated in the following table:
+--------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------------+
|                          | Detached accessory structures | Detached accessory structures   |
|                          | less than 10 feet in          | more than 10 feet in height     |
|                          | height                        |                                 |
+--------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Side yard                | 3 feet for structures         | 5 feet for structures exceeding |
|                          | up to 10 feet                 | 10 feet                         |
+--------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Rear yard                | 3 feet for structures         | 5 feet for structures exceeding |
|                          | up to 10 feet                 | 10 feet                         |
+--------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| From other accessory     | 3 feet for structures         | 5 feet for structures exceeding |
| structures on the same   | up to 10 feet                 | 10 feet                         |
| property                 |                               |                                 |
+--------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Corner lot (side street) | 3 feet for structures         | 5 feet for structures exceeding |
|                          | up to 10 feet                 | 10 feet                         |
+--------------------------+-------------------------------+---------------------------------+
*As measured from any side lot line, alley right-of-way or easement line.
(Ord. 17-29, 2017; Ord. 17-28, 2017; Ord. 10-14, 2010)
Editor’s note: Ord. No. 10-14, adopted November 9, 2010, in effect repealed the former § 17.09.560, and enacted a new § 17.09.560 as set out herein. The former § 17.09.560 pertained to conditional use; small lots and derived from prior code § 27-3-28(C) and Ord. No. 06-01, 2006.

17.09.570 Reserved.
Editor’s note: Ord. No. 10-13, adopted September 14, 2010, repealed § 17.09.570, which pertained to conditional use; utility buildings and structures permitted and derived from prior code § 27-3-28(D) and Ord. No. 06-01, 2006.

17.09.620 Reserved.
Editor’s note: Ord. No. 10-13, adopted September 14, 2010, repealed § 17.09.620, which pertained to conditional use; flood protection and derived from prior code § 27-3-28(I) and Ord. No. 09-12, 1992.

17.09.630 Reserved.
Editor’s note: Ord. No. 10-13, adopted September 14, 2010, repealed § 17.09.630, which pertained to conditional use; twin homes and derived from prior code § 27-3-28(J) and Ord. No. 06-01, 2006.

17.09.650 Reserved.
Editor’s note: Ord. No. 10-13, adopted September 14, 2010, repealed § 17.09.650, which pertained to street lighting and derived from prior code § 27-3-29.

17.09.660 Reserved.
Editor’s note: Ord. No. 17-18, adopted July 11, 2017, repealed § 17.09.660, which pertained to site plan, required, and derived from Ord. No. 92-19, 1992; Ord. No. 95-15, 1995; Ord. No. 06-01, 2006; Ord. No. 10-05, 2010; Ord. No. 10-06, 2010; Ord. No. 13-03, 2013; Ord. No. 13-04, 2013; and Ord. No. 13-09, 2013.

17.09.665 Reserved.
Editor’s note: Ord. No. 17-18, adopted July 11, 2017, repealed § 17.09.665, which pertained to site plan review, approval, and derived from Ord. No. 10-05, 2010.

17.09.670 Designated recreation areas for apartments.
Apartments and court apartments that have nine or more dwelling units shall designate twenty-five percent of the lot to be developed into recreation, play or landscaped areas. The designated twenty-five percent shall exclude parking, driveways, dwellings and required setbacks. Apartments and court apartments that have eight or less dwelling units shall designate fifteen percent of the lot to be developed into recreation, play or landscaped areas. The designated fifteen percent shall exclude parking, driveways, dwellings and required setbacks. (Ord. 93-14, 1993)

17.09.680 Reserved.
Editor’s note: Ord. No. 17-20, adopted June 13, 2017, repealed § 17.09.680, which pertained to carports located within the side setback area of primary dwellings as a conditional use, and derived from Ord. No. 01-11, 2001.

17.09.690 Development design standards for all primary residential dwellings.
All residential single-household dwelling units in all zones where residential dwelling units are allowed shall have at a minimum a twenty-four-foot horizontal wall and a fourteen-foot horizontal wall bisected by an angle on at least two non-opposite sides; i.e., other than directly opposite sides of the structure. (Ord. 19-13 §§ 5, 21 (part), 2019; Ord. 06-01 (part), 2006)

17.09.700 Residential short-term rentals prohibited.
Except for bed and breakfast facilities and guest apartments that comply with Chapters 17.70 and 17.71 of the Moab Municipal Code, the short-term rental of dwellings is prohibited in the following zones: A-2, C-1, C-5, FW, I-1, O-1, R&D-1, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, RA-1, and all other zones where short-term rentals are not listed as a permitted use.
A. For the purposes of this section, “short-term rental” shall be defined as:
    1. The use, occupancy, rent or lease, for direct or indirect remuneration, of a structure or any portion thereof constructed for single-household or multihousehold occupancy or of any other residential property for an effective term of thirty consecutive calendar days or less;
    2. The commercial use, by any person, of residential property for hostel, hotel, inn, lodging, motel, resort or other transient lodging uses where the term of occupancy, possession or tenancy of the property by the person entitled to such occupancy, possession or tenancy for a term of thirty consecutive days or less.
B. For the purposes of this section, “remuneration” means compensation, money, rent, or other bargained for consideration given in return for occupancy, possession or use of real property. (Ord. 19-13 § 21 (part), 2019; Ord. 07-09, 2007)

Chapter 17.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS1

Sections:
17.12.010    Intent.
17.12.020    Special exceptions--Generally.
17.12.030    Nonconforming uses and non-complying buildings.
17.12.040    Continuation and expansion.
17.12.050    Damaged building restoration.
17.12.060    Discontinuance or abandonment.
17.12.070    Change to another nonconforming use prohibited.
17.12.080    Nonconforming lots.
17.12.090    Establishment, abandonment and miscellaneous requirements.
17.12.100    Owner-occupied mobile home.
17.12.110    Prohibition of reconstruction or restoration of a non-complying structure.
17.12.120    Annexations.
17.12.170    Policy pertaining to flag-shaped or panhandle lots.
17.12.180    Height restrictions of buildings.

17.12.010 Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to accumulate provisions applying to all land and building within the incorporated area of the City into one chapter rather than to repeat them several times. (Ord. 10-15, 2010)

17.12.020 Special exceptions--Generally.
Sections 17.12.030 through 17.12.100 are to be decided by the Zoning Administrator with appeal to the hearing officer. (Ord. 10-15, 2010)

17.12.030 Nonconforming uses and non-complying buildings.
A. Applicability. These provisions apply only to legal, nonconforming uses and non-complying structures, and do not apply to illegally established nonconforming uses and non-complying structures. No use may be considered a legally existing nonconforming use under the provisions of this chapter if the use was never lawfully established.
B. Nonconforming Status. The use of land, use of a structure, or a structure itself shall be deemed to have nonconforming status when all of the following conditions are satisfied:
    1. The use or structure does not conform to the regulations prescribed in the district in which such use or structure is located and was in existence and lawfully constructed, located and operating prior to, and at the time of, the event that made such use or structure nonconforming.
    2. The event that made such use or structure nonconforming was one of the following: annexation into the City; adoption of this code or a previous zoning ordinance, or, amendment of this code or a previous zoning ordinance.
    3. The nonconforming use or the use occupying the non-complying structure has been operating since the time that the use or structure first became non-complying without abandonment, as abandonment is defined in Section 17.12.060. (Ord. 10-15, 2010)

17.12.040 Continuation and expansion.
Except as provided in this section, a nonconforming use or non-complying structure may be continued by the present or a future property owner.
A. A nonconforming use may be extended through the same building, provided no structural alteration of the building is proposed or made for the purpose of the extension. Installation of solar energy devices to a building is not a structural alteration.
B. A non-complying building or structure or nonconforming use of land may be continued to the same extent and character as that which legally existed on the effective day of the applicable regulations.
C. A nonconforming structure may not expand. A nonconforming structure may be allowed to reconstruct a portion of the building subject to the conditions established in Section 17.12.040 of this code.
D. Allowed dwellings that are nonconforming as to the required minimum building square footage at the time of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, shall be allowed to construct additions, expansions, and remodels without having to come into full compliance with the minimum square footage requirement. In any case, such addition, expansion or remodel shall in all other ways fully comply with the requirements of the zoning district. (Ord. 10-15, 2010)

17.12.050 Damaged building restoration.
A. The following changes or alterations may be made to a nonconforming building provided that such changes or alterations do not exceed fifty percent of its assessed valuation, excluding the value of the land, for tax purposes at such date unless such building or structure is changed to a conforming use.
    1. Repairs may be made to a non-complying building or to a building housing a nonconforming use that has been officially declared unsafe to restore it to a safe condition. All structural alterations shall be made as required by law or as established by a health or safety official. No further expansion or change in use can be undertaken contrary to the provisions of this title unless a health or safety official, acting in his official capacity, requires such increase or expansion. Such expansions shall be limited to that which is required to comply with the minimum requirements.
    2. Maintenance repairs may be made to a non-complying building to maintain an acceptable condition of a building.
    3. Any structural alterations that would not increase the degree of nonconformance or which would change the use to a conforming use.
B. If a nonconforming structure or a structure occupied by a nonconforming use is destroyed by fire, the elements or other cause, it may be rebuilt to conform to the provisions of this code except as follows:
    1. In the case of partial destruction of a structure occupied by a nonconforming use not exceeding fifty percent of its replacement value, reconstruction may be permitted subject to the following standards:
        a. The size and function of the nonconforming use shall not be expanded; and
        b. Work on the restoration of the use must begin within twelve months of the time of the calamity.
    2. A residential structure that is destroyed fifty percent or more of its replacement value and is nonconforming only because it does not meet the minimum required dwelling unit floor area, may be reconstructed subject to the following standards:
        a. The replacement residential structure may be the same size or it may be larger than the destroyed structure provided that the new structure conforms with all other requirements of the zone district; and
        b. The replacement residential structure conforms to all adopted building codes, including but not limited to: currently adopted city construction codes;
        c. All manufactured housing must comply with the requirements of this code. (Ord. 10-15, 2010)

17.12.060 Discontinuance or abandonment.
A. Any nonconforming use that is discontinued for, or non-complying structure that remains vacant for a period of one year, shall be considered to have been abandoned. Any nonconforming use that is moved from the premises shall be considered to have been abandoned.
    1. Whenever a nonconforming use or a conforming use in a nonconforming structure is abandoned, all nonconforming rights shall immediately cease and the use of the premises shall henceforth conform to this code. Abandonment shall involve the actual act of discontinuance, regardless of the intent of the user or owner to discontinue a nonconforming operation.
    2. A nonconforming use shall not be transferred or moved from another location unless the use will be in conformance with the zoning regulations of the zone into which it is moved.
    3. No accessory use to a primary nonconforming use may continue after the primary nonconforming use has been abandoned. (Ord. 10-15, 2010)

17.12.070 Change to another nonconforming use prohibited.
A nonconforming use shall not be changed to another nonconforming use. (Ord. 10-15, 2010)

17.12.080 Nonconforming lots.
A. General. A single-household dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be developed on a lot that fails to meet the minimum area and width dimensions for one-household dwellings as required by the underlying zone district and was an official “lot of record” prior to January 1, 1975, if:
    1. The “lot of record” is in separate ownership or contiguous to lots in the same ownership; and
    2. The proposed single-household dwelling can be located on the lot so that the yard, height, and other dimensional requirements of the underlying zone district can be met, or a variance is obtained from said dimensional requirements pursuant to Chapter 17.72 of this code.
Dwellings are permitted in the zone.
B. Undivided Lot. If two or more lots or combinations of contiguous lots in a single ownership (including husband and wife as, in all cases, a single owner) are of record since January 1, 1975, regardless of time of acquisition, on all or parts of the lots which do not meet the requirements established for lot width and area, the lots shall be considered an undivided parcel, and no portion shall be used or occupied which does not meet the width and area requirements of this code. Yard dimensions and other requirements not involving area or width shall conform to the regulations of the zone in which the lot is located, except when granted a variance by the hearing officer.
C. Lot Reduction. 
    1. No lot or interest therein shall be transferred, conveyed, sold or subdivided so as to create a new nonconforming lot, to avoid, circumvent or subvert any provision of this code, or to leave remaining any lot in violation of the dimensional requirements of this code.
    2. No lot or portion of a lot required as a building site under this code shall be used as a portion of a lot required as a site for another structure.
    3. No building permit shall be issued for any lot or parcel of land which has been conveyed, sold, or subdivided in violation of this subsection. Any transferee who acquires a lot in violation of this subsection without knowledge of such violation, and any subsequent transferee, shall have the right pursuant to Utah law to rescind and/or receive damages from any transferor who violates the provisions of this paragraph. (Ord. 19-13 §§ 6, 7, 21 (part), 2019; Ord. 10-15, 2010)

17.12.090 Establishment, abandonment and miscellaneous requirements.
A. A property owner shall have the burden of establishing the legal existence of a non-complying structure or a nonconforming use.
B. The City or any party claiming a nonconforming use has been abandoned shall have the burden of establishing the abandonment. Abandonment shall be presumed to have occurred if:
    1. A majority of the primary structure associated with the nonconforming use has been voluntarily demolished without prior written agreement with the City regarding an extension of the nonconforming use;
    2. The nonconforming use has been discontinued for a minimum of one year;
    3. The non-complying primary structure associated with the nonconforming use remains vacant for a period of one year; or
    4. The nonconforming use has been replaced by a conforming use.
C. The property owner may rebut the presumption of abandonment under subsection B of this section and shall have the burden of establishing that any claimed abandonment under subsection B of this section has not in fact occurred. (Ord. 10-15, 2010)

17.12.100 Owner-occupied mobile home.
A. An owner-occupied mobile home constituting a non-complying building in its present location may be removed by the owner and replaced by a manufactured home within ninety days and so continue as a non-complying building, providing the manufactured home replacing the one formerly removed be located within the minimum setbacks as required by the zoning district for residential use in that zoning district, and providing it is a newer model and an improvement and manufactured after June 16, 1976, in accordance with the standards adopted pursuant to the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 and stamped approved by HUD (S 54026) and contains the State Insignia of Approval. Mobile homes that have existed in the City prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this section may be moved to another mobile home park or subdivision within the City as long as minimum safety standards and applicable laws are met and approved by the City building official. (Ord. 10-15, 2010)

17.12.110 Prohibition of reconstruction or restoration of a non-complying structure.
A. In accordance with UCA 10-9a-511(3), the City may, at its discretion, prohibit the reconstruction or restoration of a non-complying structure or termination of the nonconforming use of a structure if:
    1. The structure is allowed to deteriorate to a condition that the structure is rendered uninhabitable and is not repaired or restored within six months after written notice to the property owner that the structure is uninhabitable and that the non-complying structure or nonconforming use will be lost if the structure is not repaired or restored within six months; or
    2. The property owner has voluntarily demolished a majority of the non-complying structure or the building that houses the nonconforming use. (Ord. 10-15, 2010)

17.12.120 Annexations.
All land hereafter annexed to the City shall conform to the Utah State Local Boundary Commissions Act of 1979. (Prior code § 27-4-4)

17.12.170 Policy pertaining to flag-shaped or panhandle lots.
Flag-shaped or panhandle lots shall be permitted in any subdivision where required by the configuration of land boundaries or terrain dictates such lot shape, but under no circumstances shall such lot shape be utilized as a standard or repetitious pattern in a subdivision.
Flag-shaped or panhandle-shaped lots may be created in any residential zone if all of the following requirements are met:
A. The lot has at least twenty feet of frontage on a dedicated public street, which frontage serves as access only to the subject lot or parcel;
B. The handle portion of the lot is at least twenty feet in width, and not more than one hundred fifty feet in length;
C. The lot meets the lot area and lot width requirements of the applicable zone.
D. Setbacks for structures on a flag lot shall be those as applied to any other standard lot in the underlying zone.
    1. Setback exception: Single-story dwellings constructed on flag lots may be constructed to within five feet of the side lot line adjacent to the pole side of the lot. (Ord. 18-06 (part), 2018: Ord. 10-79 (part), 1979: prior code § 27-4-7)

17.12.180 Height restrictions of buildings.
A. No lot or parcel shall have a building or structure which exceeds a height of three stories and is to be no more than forty feet, measured as defined in Chapter 17.06.
B. Antennas, chimneys, flues, vents, or similar structures may extend up to ten feet above the forty-foot height limit, except as may be specifically authorized by the building codes and building inspector for safety requirements and special conditions. In no case shall the parapet wall of a flat roof extend more than two feet above the maximum height limitation.
C. Church spires, bell towers, and like architectural features may extend over the specified maximum height limit by up to fifty percent of the height limit, but shall not contain any habitable spaces above the forty-foot maximum height limit. (Ord. 19-13 § 8, 2019; Ord. 91-13, 1991)
1 Editor’s note: Ord. 10-15, adopted September 14, 2010, amended §§ 17.12.010--17.12.110 in their entirety to read as herein set out. Former §§ 17.12.010--17.12.110 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from prior codes §§ 27-4-1--27-4-3; Ord. 06-01, 2006 and Ord. 10-06, adopted November 9, 2010. Sections 17.12.120, 17.12.170 and 17.12.180, were not amended by Ord. 10-15.

Chapter 17.15 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES

Sections:
17.15.010    Scope and applicability.
17.15.020    Districts established.
17.15.030    Official zoning map.
17.15.040    Zone boundaries.
17.15.050    Residential area regulations summary.

17.15.010 Scope and applicability.
The regulations of this chapter shall apply to all lands located within the corporate limits of the City. All lands, buildings, structures or appurtenances thereon located within the City that are hereafter occupied, used, erected, altered, removed, placed, demolished or converted shall be occupied, used, erected, altered, removed, placed, demolished or converted in conformance with the zoning regulations prescribed for the zoning district in which such land or building is located as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 13-01 (part), 2013)

17.15.020 Districts established.
In order to implement the General Plan and the other purposes and provisions of this title, the City is divided into residential, commercial, agricultural, industrial, and flood hazard zoning districts. The regulations as set out herein are uniform throughout each district.
A. Purpose for Zone Districts. 
    1. Residential Districts. In order to secure for the persons who reside there a comfortable, healthy, safe, and pleasant environment in which to live, sheltered from incompatible and disruptive activities and to encourage a diversity of housing options, the following residential districts are established:
    +-------------------------+------------------------------------+--------------+
    | Residential Zones                                                           |
    +-------------------------+------------------------------------+--------------+
    | Abbreviated Designation | Zoning District                    | Code Chapter |
    +-------------------------+------------------------------------+--------------+
    | R-1                     | Single-Household Residential       | 17.42        |
    |                         | Zone                               |              |
    +-------------------------+------------------------------------+--------------+
    | R-2                     | Single-Household and Two-Household | 17.45        |
    |                         | Residential Zone                   |              |
    +-------------------------+------------------------------------+--------------+
    | R-3                     | Multi-Household Residential        | 17.48        |
    |                         | Zone                               |              |
    +-------------------------+------------------------------------+--------------+
    | R-4                     | Manufactured Housing Residential   | 17.51        |
    |                         | Zone                               |              |
    +-------------------------+------------------------------------+--------------+
    | RA-1                    | Residential-Agricultural           | 17.54        |
    |                         | Zone                               |              |
    +-------------------------+------------------------------------+--------------+
    | MH/RV-1                 | Mobile Home/Recreational           | 17.35        |
    |                         | Vehicle Parks Zone                 |              |
    +-------------------------+------------------------------------+--------------+
    | Commercial Zones                                                            |
    +-------------------------+------------------------------------+--------------+
    | C-1                     | Commercial-Residential             | 17.20        |
    |                         | Zone                               |              |
    +-------------------------+------------------------------------+--------------+
    | C-2                     | Commercial-Residential             | 17.21        |
    |                         | Zone                               |              |
    +-------------------------+------------------------------------+--------------+
    | C-3                     | Central Commercial Zone            | 17.24        |
    +-------------------------+------------------------------------+--------------+
    | C-4                     | General Commercial Zone            | 17.27        |
    +-------------------------+------------------------------------+--------------+
    | C-5                     | Neighborhood Commercial            | 17.30        |
    |                         | Zone                               |              |
    +-------------------------+------------------------------------+--------------+
    | RC                      | Resort Commercial Zone             | 17.31        |
    +-------------------------+------------------------------------+--------------+
    | SAR                     | Sensitive Area Resort Zone         | 17.32        |
    +-------------------------+------------------------------------+--------------+
    | Agricultural Zones                                                          |
    +-------------------------+------------------------------------+--------------+
    | A-2                     | Agricultural Zone                  | 17.18        |
    +-------------------------+------------------------------------+--------------+
    | Industrial                                                                  |
    +-------------------------+------------------------------------+--------------+
    | I-1                     | Industrial Zone                    | 17.36        |
    +-------------------------+------------------------------------+--------------+
    | Flood Hazard                                                                |
    +-------------------------+------------------------------------+--------------+
    | FW                      | Flood Channel Zone                 | 17.33        |
    +-------------------------+------------------------------------+--------------+
(Ord. 19-13 § 21 (part), 2019; Ord. 13-01 (part), 2013: prior code § 27-5-1. Formerly 17.15.010)

17.15.030 Official zoning map.
A. The location and boundaries of each of the zones are shown on the official zone map of the City, and said map is declared to be an official record and a part of this title.
B. Whenever amendments or changes are made in zone boundaries, such amendments or changes shall be promptly made on the official zone map subsequent to approval by City Council. No amendment or change shall become effective until after it has been properly posted and attested to on the official zone map.
C. No changes of any nature shall be made in the official zone map, except in conformity with the procedure set forth in this title. Any unauthorized changes of whatever kind by any person or persons shall be considered a violation of this title and punishable as provided in this title.
D. Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the official zone map which may from time to time be made or published, the official zone map, which shall be located in the office of the City Recorder, shall be the final authority in determining current zoning status. (Ord. 13-01 (part), 2013: prior code § 27-5-2. Formerly 17.15.020)

17.15.040 Zone boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of various zones, the following rules shall apply:
A. Where the intended boundaries on the zone map are approximately street or alley lines, said streets or alleys shall be construed to be the zone boundaries.
B. Where the indicated boundaries are approximately lot lines, said lot lines shall be construed to be the zone boundaries, unless otherwise indicated.
C. Where land has not been subdivided into lots, the zone boundary shall be determined by the use of the scale of measurement shown on the map.
D. Where other uncertainty exists, the appeal authority shall interpret the map. (Ord. 13-01 (part), 2013: Ord. 10-06 (part), 2010; prior code § 27-5-3. Formerly 17.15.030)

17.15.050 Residential area regulations summary.
A. Schedule of Residential Area Regulations. The following residential area regulations schedule summarizes the regulations of this code with regard to minimum lot size, minimum yard setbacks, maximum lot coverage, minimum floor area per dwelling unit, and maximum building height of residential uses in the various zoning districts. The standards shown in the following schedule may be modified by additional provisions contained in this section or in the individual district regulations.
In the event of any conflict between the text of the individual zoning district chapters and the schedule of residential area regulations below, the text of the individual zoning district chapter shall control.
+-------------------------------------+--------+-------------+-------------+-------------+--------+
|        Development Standard         |  R-1   |     R-2     |     R-3     |     R-4     |  RA-1  |
+-------------------------------------+--------+-------------+-------------+-------------+--------+
| Single-Household Dwelling                                                                       |
+-------------------------------------+--------+-------------+-------------+-------------+--------+
| Minimum Lot Area/Unit (sq           | 10,000 | 5,000       | 5,000       | 5,000       | 43,560 |
| ft)                                 |        |             |             |             |        |
+-------------------------------------+--------+-------------+-------------+-------------+--------+
| Minimum Front Yard Setback          | 25     | 15          | 15          | 15          | 25     |
| (ft)                                |        |             |             |             |        |
+-------------------------------------+--------+-------------+-------------+-------------+--------+
| Minimum Side Yard Setback           | 10     | 7           | 7           | 7           | 10     |
| for Dwelling (ft)                   |        |             |             |             |        |
+-------------------------------------+--------+-------------+-------------+-------------+--------+
| Minimum Side Yard Setback           | 20     | 15          | 15          | 15          | 25     |
| for Dwelling, Corner (ft)           |        |             |             |             |        |
+-------------------------------------+--------+-------------+-------------+-------------+--------+
| Minimum Rear Yard Setback           | 15     | 12          | 10          | 10          | 25     |
| for Dwelling, Interior (ft)         |        |             |             |             |        |
+-------------------------------------+--------+-------------+-------------+-------------+--------+
| Minimum Rear Yard Setback           | 20     | 15          | 15          | 15          | 20     |
| for Dwelling, Corner (ft)           |        |             |             |             |        |
+-------------------------------------+--------+-------------+-------------+-------------+--------+
| Accessory Structures <10            | 3      | 3           | 3           | 3           | 3      |
| ft. hgt. Rear/Side Setbacks         |        |             |             |             |        |
| (ft)                                |        |             |             |             |        |
+-------------------------------------+--------+-------------+-------------+-------------+--------+
| Accessory Structures >10            | 5      | 5           | 5           | 5           | 5      |
| ft. hgt. Rear/Side Setbacks         |        |             |             |             |        |
| (ft)                                |        |             |             |             |        |
+-------------------------------------+--------+-------------+-------------+-------------+--------+
| Max. Lot Coverage                   | -      | 75%         | 75%         | 75%         | -      |
+-------------------------------------+--------+-------------+-------------+-------------+--------+
| Max. Building Height (ft)           | 30     | 30          | 30          | 30          | 30     |
+-------------------------------------+--------+-------------+-------------+-------------+--------+
| Min. Lot Width (ft)                 | 90     | 50          | 50          | 50          | 125    |
+-------------------------------------+--------+-------------+-------------+-------------+--------+
| Minimum Ground Floor Area/Structure | 1,200  | 500         | 500         | 500         | 1,000  |
| (sq ft)                             |        |             |             |             |        |
+-------------------------------------+--------+-------------+-------------+-------------+--------+
| Two-Household Dwelling                                                                          |
+-------------------------------------+--------+-------------+-------------+-------------+--------+
| Minimum Lot Area/Unit (sq           | -      | 3,000 sq    | 2,500 sq    | 2,500 sq    | -      |
| ft)                                 |        | ft/dwelling | ft/dwelling | ft/dwelling |        |
+-------------------------------------+--------+-------------+-------------+-------------+--------+
| Minimum Front Yard Setback          | -      | 20          | 15          | 15          | -      |
| (ft)                                |        |             |             |             |        |
+-------------------------------------+--------+-------------+-------------+-------------+--------+
| Minimum Side Yard Setback           | -      | 7           | 7           | 7           | -      |
| for Dwelling (ft)                   |        |             |             |             |        |
+-------------------------------------+--------+-------------+-------------+-------------+--------+
| Minimum Side Yard Setback           | -      | 15          | 12          | 12          | -      |
| for Dwelling, Corner (ft)           |        |             |             |             |        |
+-------------------------------------+--------+-------------+-------------+-------------+--------+
| Minimum Rear Yard Setback           | -      | 12          | 10          | 10          | -      |
| for Dwelling, Interior (ft)         |        |             |             |             |        |
+-------------------------------------+--------+-------------+-------------+-------------+--------+
| Minimum Rear Yard Setback           | -      | 15          | 15          | 12          | -      |
| for Dwelling, Corner (ft)           |        |             |             |             |        |
+-------------------------------------+--------+-------------+-------------+-------------+--------+
| Accessory Structures <10            | 3      | 3           | 3           | 3           | 3      |
| ft. hgt. Rear/Side Setbacks         |        |             |             |             |        |
| (ft)                                |        |             |             |             |        |
+-------------------------------------+--------+-------------+-------------+-------------+--------+
| Accessory Structures >10            | 5      | 5           | 5           | 5           | 5      |
| ft. hgt. Rear/Side Setbacks         |        |             |             |             |        |
| (ft)                                |        |             |             |             |        |
+-------------------------------------+--------+-------------+-------------+-------------+--------+
| Max. Lot Coverage                   | -      | 75%         | 75%         | 75%         | -      |
+-------------------------------------+--------+-------------+-------------+-------------+--------+
| Max. Building Height (ft)           | -      | 30          | 30          | 30          | -      |
+-------------------------------------+--------+-------------+-------------+-------------+--------+
| Min. Lot Width (ft)                 | -      | 50          | 50          | 50          | -      |
+-------------------------------------+--------+-------------+-------------+-------------+--------+
| Minimum Ground Floor Area/Unit      | -      | 500         | 500         | 500         | -      |
| (sq ft)                             |        |             |             |             |        |
+-------------------------------------+--------+-------------+-------------+-------------+--------+
| Three-, Four-, Five- or Six-Household Dwelling                                                  |
+-------------------------------------+--------+-------------+-------------+-------------+--------+
| Minimum Lot Area/Unit (sq           | -      |             | 2,000 sq    | 1,800 sq    | -      |
| ft)                                 |        |             | ft/dwelling | ft/dwelling |        |
+-------------------------------------+--------+-------------+-------------+-------------+--------+
| Minimum Front Yard Setback          | -      |             | 15          | 15          | -      |
| (ft)                                |        |             |             |             |        |
+-------------------------------------+--------+-------------+-------------+-------------+--------+
| Minimum Side Yard Setback           | -      |             | 7           | 8           | -      |
| for Dwelling (ft)                   |        |             |             |             |        |
+-------------------------------------+--------+-------------+-------------+-------------+--------+
| Minimum Side Yard Setback           |        |             | 12          | 12          | -      |
| for Dwelling, Corner (ft)           |        |             |             |             |        |
+-------------------------------------+--------+-------------+-------------+-------------+--------+
| Minimum Rear Yard Setback           |        |             | 10          | 10          | -      |
| for Dwelling, Interior (ft)         |        |             |             |             |        |
+-------------------------------------+--------+-------------+-------------+-------------+--------+
| Minimum Rear Yard Setback           |        |             | 15          | 12          | -      |
| for Dwelling, Corner (ft)           |        |             |             |             |        |
+-------------------------------------+--------+-------------+-------------+-------------+--------+
| Accessory Structures <10            | 3      | 3           | 3           | 3           | 3      |
| ft. hgt. Rear/Side Setbacks         |        |             |             |             |        |
| (ft)                                |        |             |             |             |        |
+-------------------------------------+--------+-------------+-------------+-------------+--------+
| Accessory Structures >10            | 5      | 5           | 5           | 5           | 5      |
| ft. hgt. Rear/Side Setbacks         |        |             |             |             |        |
| (ft)                                |        |             |             |             |        |
+-------------------------------------+--------+-------------+-------------+-------------+--------+
| Max. Lot Coverage                   |        |             | 75%         | 75%         | -      |
+-------------------------------------+--------+-------------+-------------+-------------+--------+
| Max. Building Height (ft)           |        |             | 30          | 30          | -      |
+-------------------------------------+--------+-------------+-------------+-------------+--------+
| Min. Lot Width (ft)                 |        |             | 50          | 50          | -      |
+-------------------------------------+--------+-------------+-------------+-------------+--------+
(Ord. 19-13 § 21 (part), 2019; Ord. 17-27, 2017: Ord. 13-01 (part), 2013: prior code § 27-6-1. Formerly 17.15.040)

Chapter 17.18 A-2 AGRICULTURAL ZONE

Sections:
17.18.010    Objectives and characteristics.
17.18.020    Permitted uses and regulations.
17.18.030    Area requirements.
17.18.040    Width requirements.
17.18.050    Location requirements.
17.18.060    Special provisions.
17.18.070    Supplementary regulations.

17.18.010 Objectives and characteristics.
A. The A-2 agricultural zone has been established for the primary purpose of providing a location where the cultivation of crops and the raising and keeping of livestock and related uses can be carried on and where such uses can be protected and encouraged. While dwellings and certain other uses not related to agriculture are permitted, such development is not encouraged in the A-2 agricultural zone because of the conflict which occurs between farm and nonfarm uses. For this reason, owners or developers of land should bear in mind that primacy is given in this zone to agriculture and livestock raising and any development would fall under conditional use.
B. The A-2 agricultural zone is characterized by dwellings situated on large lots and tracts of land which are devoted to the growing of crops and the pasturing and care and keeping of animals and fowl. Caretaker or owner occupied dwellings situated on the large lots and tracts of land are also characteristic of this zone. In order to accomplish the objectives and purposes of this title and to stabilize and protect the essential characteristics of the zone, the following regulations shall apply in the A-2 agricultural zone. (Prior code § 27-7-1)

17.18.020 Permitted uses and regulations.
A. Permitted Uses. The following uses shall be permitted-by-right. If a use is not listed it is prohibited.
    1. Agriculture.
    2. Agriculture buildings.
    3. Cemeteries, public and private. No cemetery, or any extension of an already existing cemetery, shall hereafter be established in the City without a site plan permit process, as outlined in Chapter 17.67.
        a. Application Required. Application for the establishment of a cemetery or for the extension to an existing cemetery shall be made on forms provided by the Zoning Administrator. The application shall include:
            i. The name(s) and address(es) of the owner(s) of the land;
            ii. The area(s) of the property that will be used for burial purposes;
            iii. The area(s) of the property that will be used for screening purposes;
            iv. An appropriate fee as adopted by resolution of the City Council;
            v. Detailed site plans drawn to scale by a licensed professional Utah registered land surveyor or professional engineer as per Chapter 17.67;
            vi. A written legal description of the cemetery;
            vii. A narrative describing the:
                (A) Age and condition,
                (B) Historical significance if applicable,
                (C) Whether the cemetery is religious, family, organizational, or publicly owned,
                (D) Any prehistoric or historic archaeological discoveries on the property, and
                (E) A written description of names and vital dates of those interred.
        b. Expansion/Disruption. If the expansion requires a disruption of existing burial sites, the applicant shall provide a detailed site alteration plan indicating the extent of disruption of the cemetery, methods of construction or removal of human remains, and reburial plan. Such plan shall include a written description and visual drawing of the plan showing the relocation of graves.
        c. Standards of Approval to Be Specified. A resolution shall be prepared establishing specific standards of compliance to create/extend a cemetery. These shall be based on:
            i. The need for the proposed cemetery or extension;
            ii. The desirability of the location;
            iii. Specific areas to be used for burial purposes and screening;
            iv. Type and extent of landscaping;
            v. Amount of guarantee bond for improvements;
            vi. Light, glare, dust, noise;
            vii. Traffic impacts; and
            viii. Parking.
    4. Day care. Day care shall be permitted to operate subject to the following standards:
        a. City of Moab business license is required.
        b. A valid day care license or certificate as issued by the State of Utah is required.
        c. Applicants for a City business license shall submit a conceptual site plan that indicates:
            i. Ingress and egress to the property;
            ii. Drop off/pick up areas;
            iii. Traffic circulation;
            iv. Off-street parking (single-household residence plus space for each FTE staff member);
            v. Landscaping;
            vi. Buffering or separation from dissimilar uses;
            vii. Open space for older kids.
        d. Compliance with all applicable City regulations regarding noise, odor and glare.
    5. Golf courses. Golf courses must contain a minimum of ten acres. Applications for golf courses must follow the site plan requirements of Chapter 17.67 and must address the following standards:
        a. Golf course designs shall implement nonpoint source pollution best management practices (BMPs).
        b. Course designs and best management plans shall be submitted to the Moab City Planning Department for review.
        c. Course designs must show that there are no encroachments into areas restricted from development and to minimize the impact of the overall site development on natural resources of the area. The design must meet the requirements of Chapter 17.67, Site Plan Review, and contain the following supplemental information:
            i. Address stream, wetland, and habitat protection;
            ii. Contain an environmental constraints analysis that includes the existing environmental conditions on the site and a report with plans that provide:
                (A) Field located streams, ponds or other water bodies, name of watershed and sub-watershed and stream use class designation,
                (B) Field located wetlands including documentation of vegetation, soils, and hydrology,
                (C) Wetlands classifications (Cowardin; National Vegetation Classification Standard for wetlands),
                (D) Calculated one-hundred-year floodplain,
                (E) Topography with slopes differentiated as one to twenty-five percent, twenty-six to thirty-nine percent, forty to forty-five percent, and forty-six or more percent,
                (F) Existing land cover (e.g., forest, meadow, old field, etc.),
                (G) Location of significant plant and/or animal habitat including: documentation of species, date of last known sighting, status, and source of documentation.
        d. Application of Regulations and Policies. After verification of the existing environmental conditions by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or other Federal agency, the applicant will identify on the plan those areas of the site that would be restricted from development by: (i) denoting buffer boundaries, (ii) denoting those areas of significant habitat determined to exist on site that will be preserved, and (iii) denoting those existing areas that will be preserved.
        e. Design Standards for Preliminary Plan. After the applicant has determined the areas restricted from development, a plan should be prepared for submission to the Planning Department that shows the proposed layout of the golf course. The plan shall include the following:
            i. Tees, greens, fairways, and practice range;
            ii. Buildings (e.g., clubhouse, maintenance facilities, etc.);
            iii. Roads, cart paths, and parking lots;
            iv. Conceptual design for the management of storm water runoff and water quality including locations and methods and documentation that these locations and methods are practical; and
            v. Location of irrigation wells and/or ponds.
        f. Approval of Encroachments. If any of the above facilities would require encroachment on buffers, streams, wetlands or floodplains, approval must be granted by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or other Federal agency.
    6. Group homes.
        a. Such homes must be licensed by the State of Utah.
        b. All exterior aspects of a group home, including its scale and off-street parking configuration, shall conform with the requirements of the A-2 zone.
        c. Such homes shall provide off-street parking pursuant to Sections 17.09.210 through 17.09.340.
        d. Such homes may provide living arrangements for not more than eight residents per home (excluding supervisory personnel).
    7. Home occupations subject to the requirements set forth in Section 5.80.050.
    8. One-household dwellings and accessory uses.
    9. Places of worship. All places of worship shall be subject to the regulations established by Utah State Code Annotated (“UCA”). The Planning Department, in accordance with Chapter 17.67, shall receive a complete site plan which demonstrates that:
        a. Traffic impacts are minimized so that on-street vehicle flows will not be impeded.
        b. Noise, odor, and glare is contained on the property.
        c. Landscaping shall be completed in accordance with the provisions located in Sections 17.09.360 (Landscaping – Required) and 17.09.370 (Landscaping – Specifications generally). A minimum of fifteen percent of the interior of the parking areas must be landscaped. Trees shall be utilized to provide shade for vehicles and must be of a sufficient size and placement to provide shade to forty percent of the parking area within three years.
        d. Possible impacts on adjacent streets, sidewalks, and bike/pedestrian routes have been identified and reduced to minimum levels.
        e. Adequate parking for the intended use is provided.
    10. Planned unit developments which are connected to a public sewer, subject to the requirements set forth in Chapter 17.66.
    11. Premises agricultural occupations. This type of occupation specifically concerns the retail sale of feed, seed, fertilizer, equipment and similar items used in agriculture. The following standards shall be met for this type of business:
        a. Parking areas shall be an all-weather surface such as concrete, asphalt or sealed gravel that will not generate dust or deposit gravel on paved roadways.
        b. Hours of operation shall be confined to seven a.m. to seven p.m.
        c. Dust, glare, odor, and noise shall be confined within the boundaries of the property.
        d. All signs shall comply with the sign regulations of Chapter 15.44 and shall not exceed fifteen square feet.
        e. Outside storage of products for sale is limited to hours of operation.
    12. Public facilities. This type of use shall be allowed in compliance with the following standards:
        a. The proposed use shall be situated on a tract of land sufficient in size to provide for the activities of the use as well as required landscaping, off-street parking, and trails;
        b. Landscaping, screening, and fencing shall be installed and maintained to mitigate impacts on surrounding residential uses;
        c. Parking areas shall be an all-weather surface such as concrete, asphalt or sealed gravel that will not generate dust or deposit gravel on paved roadways;
        d. Compliance with all applicable City regulations regarding noise, odor and glare;
        e. Outside storage of equipment, materials, and supplies shall be contained and located within a building or a sight obscuring fence;
        f. The use shall demonstrate that there is a benefit to the neighborhood or community;
        g. The proposed use shall not generate traffic in excess of the level of traffic associated with the number of residential dwellings that could be permitted on the parcel.
    13. Public parks.
    14. Raising, care and keeping of animals and fowl for household use and consumption.
    15. Schools. All schools shall be subject to the regulations established by Utah State Code Annotated. The City, in accordance with Chapter 17.67, shall receive a complete site plan showing that:
        a. Traffic impacts are minimized so that on-street vehicle flows will not be impeded; and
        b. Possible impacts to adjacent streets, sidewalks, and bike/pedestrian routes have been identified and reduced to minimum levels.
    16. Utility provider structures. New construction of water lines, sewer lines and electric substations and structures may be constructed subject to the approval of the Planning Commission and Council with a review of a subdivision plat. Such construction is not required to apply for a separate permit but must satisfy the requirements below. Expansions of existing facilities are also subject to the approval of the Planning Commission and Council, and subject to the standards below. The Planning Commission may require standards in accordance with the following language that are reasonably necessary to protect surrounding property values and residential amenities:
        a. These types of facilities include but are not limited to:
            i. Electrical utility facility, provided transmission lines are excluded from the requirements of this section if visibility is essential to safety, security, or maintenance access;
            ii. Solid waste disposal facility;
            iii. Water pumping plants and pipelines;
            iv. Public utility buildings and structures (except power plants);
            v. Flood control structures;
            vi. Substations;
            vii. Sewage treatment plants subject to review and approval of the State Department of Health.
        b. Site Standards. 
            i. Architectural Form and Character. A building housing all or a majority of a utility facility must be compatible with the architectural form of surrounding buildings. This requirement is not applicable to a utility facility where significant elements of the facility are not housed inside of a building or to isolated minor elements such as pad mounted transformers, telephone pedestals and metering stations.
            ii. Screening and Fence Requirements. A utility facility must be site screened with landscaping and/or fencing. Landscape development shall include retention of significant trees, as necessary to maintain and protect property values, to enhance the visual appearance of the City, to preserve the natural character of the area, to promote utilization of natural systems, to reduce the impacts of development on the storm drainage system and water resources, and to provide a better transition between the various land uses permitted in the City.
                (A) The Planning Department and Community Development Director shall review the proposed landscape plan with each application and make a recommendation to the Planning Commission.
                (B) The applicant shall provide site perimeter landscaping that consists of a minimum width of ten feet and includes:
                    (1) Evergreen and deciduous trees, with no more than fifty percent being deciduous, a minimum of six feet in height, and planted at intervals no greater than thirty feet on center;
                    (2) A minimum of three and one-half feet in height, and living ground cover planted so that the ground will be covered within three years.
            iii. If planted to buffer a parking area, access, or site development other than a building, any of the following alternatives may be used unless otherwise noted:
                (A) Shrubs, a minimum of three and one-half feet in height, and living ground cover must be planted so that the ground will be covered within three years.
                (B) Earth-mounding, an average of three and one-half feet in height, planted with shrubs or living ground cover so that the ground will be covered within three years. This alternative may not be used in a downtown land use district.
                (C) A combination of earth-mounding and shrubs to produce a visual barrier at least three and one-half feet in height.
            iv. Equipment and vehicle storage yards require fifteen feet of landscaping on all sides if visible from a public right-of-way.
            v. Parking Area Landscaping. Parking areas require landscaping as follows in addition to any site perimeter landscaping as required.
            vi. Alternative landscaping may be approved by the Planning Commission if the landscaping will provide the desired screening as noted below:
                (A) The proposed landscaping represents an equal or better result than that which could be achieved by strictly following the requirements of this section; and
                (B) The proposed landscaping either:
                    (1) Incorporates the increased retention of significant trees and naturally occurring undergrowth;
                    (2) Better accommodates or improves the existing physical conditions of the subject property;
                    (3) Incorporates elements to provide for wind protection or to maintain solar access;
                    (4) Incorporates elements to protect or improve water quality; or
                    (5) Incorporates native species in a design that buffers a critical area from uses on the site, including parking.
    17. Veterinary clinic with kennel.
        a. Noise, odor and glare shall be contained on the property.
        b. Fencing, landscaping, the design of parking areas, and downward directed and full cut-off light fixtures shall be used to reduce impacts on adjacent properties.
        c. Parking shall be provided at a rate of one space per one thousand square feet and one space per each employee. ADA handicapped accessible spaces shall be provided as required.
        d. A buffer area of twenty-five feet shall be used to provide a separation from other uses and adjacent properties. Buffering shall include the elements of subsection (A)(17)(b) of this section.
        e. Vehicular ingress and egress traffic patterns shall be designed to not impede existing traffic flows and provide adequate interior circulation.
        f. Hours of operation for public access shall be from seven a.m. to seven p.m.
        g. Landscaping shall consist of berms, solid wooden privacy fence, decorative block wall or combination thereof and be in accordance with the requirements of Sections 17.09.360 (Landscaping – Required) and 17.09.370 (Landscaping – Specifications generally). A minimum of fifteen percent of the interior of the parking areas must be landscaped. Trees shall be utilized to provide shade for vehicles and must be of a sufficient size and placement to provide shade to forty percent of the parking area within three years. (Ord. 19-13 § 21 (part), 2019; Ord. 18-01 (part), 2018: Ord. 10-06, 2010; Ord. 08-03 (part), 2008; Ord. 94-12 (part), 1994; Ord. 85-01 § 1, 1985; prior code § 27-7-2)

17.18.030 Area requirements.
Each dwelling, day care nursery, rest home or boys ranch shall be located on a lot containing at least five acres of land. For other uses, there shall be no area requirements. (Prior code § 27-7-3)

17.18.040 Width requirements.
The minimum width of any building site for a dwelling shall be three hundred thirty feet. For uses other than dwellings, there shall be no width requirements. (Prior code § 27-7-4)

17.18.050 Location requirements.
A. Front Setback. All buildings and structures shall be set back at least twenty-five feet from the front lot line or fifty-five feet from the centerline of any public street, whichever is greater.
B. Side Setback. All dwellings shall be set back from the side property line a distance of at least ten feet and the total distance of the two side setbacks shall be at least twenty-four feet. On corner lots, the side setback from any street shall not be less than twenty-five feet for main buildings.
C. Rear Setback. For interior lots, all dwellings and other main buildings shall be set back from the rear property line a distance of at least twenty-five feet. For corner lots, all dwellings and other main buildings shall be set back from the rear property line a distance of at least twenty feet.
D. The minimum side setback for accessory buildings on interior and corner lots is listed in Section 17.09.560, Accessory use or structure.
E. Livestock and Fowl Setback. Uses for the care and keeping of livestock and fowl shall be located at least one hundred feet distance from any existing dwelling and one hundred feet from the front property lines. (Ord. 18-01 (part), 2018: Ord. 10-14, 2010; prior code § 27-7-5)

17.18.060 Special provisions.
The maximum density in a planned unit development shall not exceed one dwelling unit per five acres of land contained in the development. (Ord. 18-01 (part), 2018: prior code § 27-7-6)

17.18.070 Supplementary regulations.
See also Supplementary Requirements and Procedures Applicable Within Zones (Chapter 17.09 of this title). (Prior code § 27-7-7)

Chapter 17.20 C-1 COMMERCIAL--RESIDENTIAL ZONE

Sections:
17.20.010    Objectives and characteristics.
17.20.020    Permitted uses and regulations.
17.20.030    Area, width and location requirements.
17.20.040    Special provisions.
17.20.050    Supplementary regulations.

17.20.010 Objectives and characteristics.
A. The objectives in establishing the C-1 commercial-residential zone are to facilitate the development of attractive areas within the City that allow the mixing of compatible commercial and residential uses; to provide a buffer zone between residential and more intensive commercial uses; and to facilitate the orderly expansion of commercial uses on lots that lie adjacent to commercial zones.
B. The C-1 commercial-residential zone is characterized by attractive and well-maintained commercial and residential buildings set back from public streets and surrounded by landscaped yards. In order to accomplish the objectives and purposes of this title and to stabilize and protect the essential characteristics of the zone, the regulations set out in this chapter shall apply in the C-1 commercial-residential zone. (Ord. 94-21 (part), 1994)

17.20.020 Permitted uses and regulations.
A. Permitted Uses. The following uses shall be permitted-by-right. If a use is not listed it is prohibited.
    1. Arts and crafts shop less than three thousand square feet.
    2. Bed and breakfast facilities. All bed and breakfast facilities shall comply with the following standards:
        a. Bed and breakfast facilities may be allowed where the proprietor can show evidence of compliance with the standards and procedures outlined below and where there is minimal impact on adjacent residential properties and neighborhoods. An inspection by the Building Inspector, Fire Chief and Health Department shall be required prior to issuance of a business license, and as often as necessary for enforcement of this chapter. No person shall operate a bed and breakfast unless the person holds a valid business license.
        b. A written letter sworn before a notary public shall be provided by the owner(s) stating that such owner or a manager will occupy the facility, as provided for herein. The letter shall be recorded by the City Recorder.
        c. The bed and breakfast shall conform to the requirements for landscaping found in Sections 17.09.360 through 17.09.420.
        d. The bed and breakfast facility shall not unduly increase local traffic in the immediate neighborhood. A bed and breakfast shall not be located on a cul-de-sac, dead-end street, or a zoning lot with a street frontage of less than fifty feet.
        e. There shall be a minimum perimeter separation of three hundred feet between property lines of bed and breakfasts.
        f. Construction and alterations of bed and breakfast facilities shall not alter the residential appearance of the dwelling. A new structure shall not be constructed solely for the use of a bed and breakfast. A property owner may not operate a bed and breakfast for a period of five years after the date a certificate of occupancy is issued. Bed and breakfast facilities shall be located in an existing structure that is a minimum of two thousand square feet in size. Additions to an existing structure for a bed and breakfast use shall not exceed twenty percent of the total area of the existing structure.
        g. The parcel shall also be of sufficient size to be in scale with the number of people using the facility. All bed and breakfast rentals must provide adequate parking (required one off-street parking space per rental bedroom) in addition to needed parking for owners of the facility. A maximum stay shall not exceed thirty days, and meals shall be served only to guests. One off-street parking space for trailers must be provided per every two off-street parking spaces for vehicles.
        h. No bed and breakfast facility shall rent for compensation more than five rooms. Suites that do not use a public corridor or passageway between suite bedroom areas shall be counted as one room.
        i. No bed and breakfast facility shall allow more than two adults in any rental room unless the bedroom square footage is larger than three hundred square feet and does not use a public corridor or passageway between suite bedroom areas.
        j. Signs are limited to one nonflashing sign not larger in area than four square feet. If lighted, the light shall be diffused or shielded and downward directed.
        k. All bed and breakfast facilities shall pay water and sewer rates according to the rates established by the City Council.
        l. All bed and breakfasts must collect and pay an applicable transient room tax, sales tax, and pay a City gross business license fee.
        m. The bed and breakfast facility shall conform to fire, building and health codes and be licensed in conformance with all City ordinances.
    3. Day care. Day care shall be permitted to operate subject to the following standards:
        a. City of Moab business license is required.
        b. A valid day care license or certificate as issued by the State of Utah is required.
        c. Applicants for a City business license shall submit a conceptual site plan that indicates:
            i. Ingress and egress to the property;
            ii. Drop off/pick up areas;
            iii. Traffic circulation;
            iv. Off-street parking (single-household residence plus space for each FTE staff member);
            v. Landscaping;
            vi. Buffering or separation from dissimilar uses;
            vii. Open space for older kids.
        d. Compliance with all applicable City regulations regarding noise, odor and glare.
    4. Eating establishments, excluding drive-in and drive-through services.
    5. Financial institutions. Standards for drive-through windows for financial institutions:
        a. The drive-through use shall not interfere with traffic circulation to and from the building site;
        b. The drive-through use shall not hinder the use of available parking areas or access to parking areas;
        c. The drive-through use shall utilize additional landscaping, berms, and/or fencing as required to serve as a buffer for light and/or noise;
        d. Design features shall be incorporated for the sufficient protection of adjacent uses from adverse impacts including noise, vibration, smoke, fumes, gas, dust, odor, lighting, glare, traffic minimization or circulation, parking issues, or other undesirable or hazardous conditions;
        e. Provisions for proper maintenance of the drive areas, lighting, signage, landscaping, etc., shall be provided;
        f. The drive-through window shall be operated only during normal business hours;
        g. The developer or proprietor must demonstrate that site impacts within the property as well as adjoining properties have been fully mitigated appropriate to the topography of the site. The review of impacts includes, at a minimum, slope retention, flood potential, and possible damage to riparian or hillside areas.
    6. Funeral establishments.
    7. Greenhouses and nurseries.
    8. Group homes.
        a. Such homes must be licensed by the State of Utah.
        b. All exterior aspects of a group home, including its scale and off-street parking configuration, shall conform with the requirements of the C-1 zone.
        c. Such homes shall provide off-street parking pursuant to Sections 17.09.210 through 17.09.340.
    9. Gymnasiums.
    10. Home occupations subject to the requirements set forth in Section 5.80.050.
    11. Hospitals.
    12. Multi-household dwellings. Developments consisting of seven or more multi-household units shall be subject to the following additional requirements:
        a. Access. Vehicular access shall be provided to the property in such a way that it does not impede traffic patterns on adjacent streets.
        b. Parking. Off-street parking shall be designed in such a way as to allow vehicles to pull forward into the on-street traffic flow.
        c. Garages or Carports. If provided, garages and carports shall not be located in the front yard and shall be set back from the front wall of the principal structure at least fifteen feet or be accessed from the rear or side of the property.
        d. Landscaping. All off-street parking shall be landscaped and buffered from adjacent uses. A minimum of fifteen percent of the interior of the parking area shall be landscaped to provide shade and break up the expanse of asphalt.
        e. Buffering. All adjacent uses shall be buffered by a distance of not less than fifteen feet and contain berms, shrubs, and other plantings. Buffering may be combined with screens, fences and hedges.
        f. Apartments and court apartments shall designate an open space/recreation area that is a minimum of two hundred square feet in size to be developed into recreation, play or landscaped areas. The requirement can be met with the construction of a recreation room (“rec room”) or club house of a similarly sized area that can be used for residents and their guests for recreation/social activities and/or relaxation.
    13. One-household dwellings and accessory uses.
    14. Places of worship. All places of worship shall be subject to the regulations established by Utah State Code Annotated (“UCA”). The Planning Department, in accordance with Chapter 17.67, shall receive a complete site plan which demonstrates that:
        a. Traffic impacts are minimized so that on-street vehicle flows will not be impeded.
        b. Noise, odor, and glare is contained on the property.
        c. Landscaping shall be completed in accordance with the provisions located in Sections 17.09.360 (Landscaping – Required) and 17.09.370 (Landscaping – Specifications generally). A minimum of fifteen percent of the interior of the parking areas must be landscaped. Trees shall be utilized to provide shade for vehicles and must be of a sufficient size and placement to provide shade to forty percent of the parking area within three years.
        d. Possible impacts on adjacent streets, sidewalks, and bike/pedestrian routes have been identified and reduced to minimum levels.
        e. Adequate parking for the intended use is provided.
    15. Planned unit developments subject to the requirements in Chapter 17.66.
    16. Professional offices.
    17. Public buildings. This type of use shall be allowed when in compliance with the following standards:
        a. The proposed use shall be situated on a tract of land sufficient in size to provide for the activities of the use as well as required landscaping, off-street parking, and trails;
        b. Landscaping, screening, and fencing shall be installed and maintained to mitigate impacts on surrounding residential uses;
        c. Parking areas shall be an all-weather surface such as concrete, asphalt or sealed gravel that will not generate dust or deposit gravel on paved roadways;
        d. Dust, glare, odor, and noise shall be confined within the boundaries of the property;
        e. Outside storage of equipment, materials, and supplies shall be contained and located within a building or a sight obscuring fence;
        f. The use shall demonstrate that there is a benefit to the neighborhood or community;
        g. Traffic from the proposed use shall not create a significant negative impact on the neighborhood.
    18. Public parks.
    19. Retail establishments that are less than three thousand square feet.
    20. Schools. All schools shall be subject to the regulations established by Utah State Code Annotated. The City, in accordance with Chapter 17.67, shall receive a complete site plan showing that:
        a. Traffic impacts are minimized so that on-street vehicle flows will not be impeded.
        b. Possible impacts to adjacent streets, sidewalks, and bike/pedestrian routes have been identified and reduced to minimum levels.
    21. Two-household dwellings and accessory uses.
    22. Veterinary clinic with indoor kennel.
        a. Noise, odor and glare shall be contained on the property.
        b. Fencing, landscaping, the design of parking areas, and downward directed and full cut-off light fixtures shall be used to reduce impacts on adjacent properties.
        c. Parking shall be provided at a rate of one space per one thousand square feet and one space per each employee. ADA handicapped accessible spaces shall be provided as required.
        d. A buffer area of twenty-five feet shall be used to provide a separation from other uses and adjacent properties. Buffering shall include the elements of subsection (A)(22)(b) of this section.
        e. Vehicular ingress and egress traffic patterns shall be designed to not impede existing traffic flows and provide adequate interior circulation.
        f. Hours of operation for public access shall be from seven a.m. to seven p.m.
        g. Landscaping shall consist of berms, solid wooden privacy fence, decorative block wall or combination thereof and be in accordance with the requirements of Sections 17.09.360 (Landscaping – Required) and 17.09.370 (Landscaping – Specifications generally). A minimum of fifteen percent of the interior of the parking areas must be landscaped. Trees shall be utilized to provide shade for vehicles and must be of a sufficient size and placement to provide shade to forty percent of the parking area within three years.
    23. Wholesale establishments less than three thousand square feet. (Ord. 19-13 § 21 (part), 2019; Ord. 19-07 (part), 2019; Ord. 18-01 (part), 2018: Ord. 08-14 (part), 2008; Ord. 08-03 (part), 2008; Ord. 04-04, 2004; Ord. 94-21 (part), 1994)

17.20.030 Area, width and location requirements.
Area, width and location requirements in the C-1 commercial-residential zone for all commercial and residential buildings shall be set back from the front property line a distance of at least twenty-five feet. Minimum side yards shall be at least eight feet with a minimum rear yard setback of fifteen feet. Street-side setbacks for corner lots shall be no less than twenty feet in width. Buffers between residential uses on adjacent lots shall be a minimum of fifteen feet and be included in the setbacks listed above and may be in addition to the landscaping requirements. The lot coverage of the principal use shall not exceed fifty percent. (Ord. 19-13 § 9, 2019; Ord. 08-24, 2008: Ord. 94-21 (part), 1994)

17.20.040 Special provisions.
In the C-1 commercial-residential zone:
A. A strip of land at least fifteen feet in width adjacent to all public streets shall be landscaped as set forth in Sections 17.09.360 (Landscaping--Required) and 17.09.370 (Landscaping--Specifications) of this title, except for permitted driveways.
B. No dust, odor, smoke, vibration or intermittent glare or noise shall be emitted which is discernible beyond the premises, except for normal traffic movements.
C. Storage of all merchandise, materials and products shall be carried on within a building or within an area enclosed within a sight obscuring fence or wall, except for vehicles in running order.
D. All off-street parking shall be hard-surfaced.
E. No building or structure shall exceed twenty-four feet in height, except that, in mixed-use developments consisting of both commercial and residential uses, no building or structure shall exceed thirty feet in height. Building height shall be measured as the vertical distance from the average finished grade of the building line to the midpoint of the highest peak of the roof. (Ord. 19-07 (part), 2019; Ord. 97-08, 1997: Ord. 94-21 (part), 1994)

17.20.050 Supplementary regulations.
See also Supplementary Requirements and Procedures Applicable Within Zones (Chapter 17.09 of this title). (Ord. 94-21 (part), 1994)

Chapter 17.21 C-2 COMMERCIAL--RESIDENTIAL ZONE*

Sections:
17.21.010    Objectives and characteristics.
17.21.020    Permitted uses and regulations.
17.21.030    Area, width and location requirements.
17.21.040    Special provisions.
17.21.050    Supplementary regulations.
* Prior history:Prior code Sections 27-8-1 through 27-8-5.

17.21.010 Objectives and characteristics.
A. The objectives in establishing the C-2 commercial-residential zone are:
    1. To facilitate the development of attractive areas within the City that allow the mixing of compatible commercial and residential uses;
    2. To facilitate the orderly expansion of commercial uses out from the central commercial district.
B. The C-2 commercial-residential zone is characterized by attractive and well-maintained commercial and residential buildings set back from public streets and surrounded by landscaped yards. In order to accomplish the objectives and purposes of this title and to stabilize and protect the essential characteristics of the zone, the regulations set out in this chapter shall apply in the C-2 commercial-residential zone. (Ord. 93-16 (part), 1993)

17.21.020 Permitted uses and regulations.
A. Permitted Uses. The following uses shall be permitted-by-right. If a use is not listed it is prohibited.
    1. Arts and crafts shops.
    2. Assembly of appliances from previously prepared parts (contained within a building).
    3. Bed and breakfast facilities. All bed and breakfast facilities shall comply with the following standards:
        a. Bed and breakfast facilities may be allowed where the proprietor can show evidence of compliance with the standards and procedures outlined below and where there is minimal impact on adjacent residential properties and neighborhoods. An inspection by the Building Inspector, Fire Chief and Health Department shall be required prior to issuance of a business license, and as often as necessary for enforcement of this chapter. No person shall operate a bed and breakfast unless the person holds a valid business license.
        b. A written letter sworn before a notary public shall be provided by the owner(s) stating that such owner or a manager will occupy the facility, as provided for herein. The letter shall be recorded by the City Recorder.
        c. The bed and breakfast shall conform to the requirements for landscaping found in Sections 17.09.360 through 17.09.420.
        d. The bed and breakfast facility shall not unduly increase local traffic in the immediate neighborhood. A bed and breakfast shall not be located on a cul-de-sac, dead-end street, or a zoning lot with a street frontage of less than fifty feet.
        e. There shall be a minimum perimeter separation of three hundred feet between property lines of bed and breakfasts.
        f. Construction and alterations of bed and breakfast facilities shall not alter the residential appearance of the dwelling. A new structure shall not be constructed solely for the use of a bed and breakfast. A property owner may not operate a bed and breakfast for a period of five years after the date a certificate of occupancy is issued. Bed and breakfast facilities shall be located in an existing structure that is a minimum of two thousand square feet in size. Additions to an existing structure for a bed and breakfast use shall not exceed twenty percent of the total area of the existing structure.
        g. The parcel shall also be of sufficient size to be in scale with the number of people using the facility. All bed and breakfast rentals must provide adequate parking (required one off-street parking space per rental bedroom) in addition to needed parking for owners of the facility. A maximum stay shall not exceed thirty days, and meals shall be served only to guests. One off-street parking space for trailers must be provided per every two off-street parking spaces for vehicles.
        h. No bed and breakfast facility shall rent for compensation more than five rooms. Suites that do not use a public corridor or passageway between suite bedroom areas shall be counted as one room.
        i. No bed and breakfast facility shall allow more than two adults in any rental room unless the bedroom square footage is larger than three hundred square feet and does not use a public corridor or passageway between suite bedroom areas.
        j. Signs are limited to one nonflashing sign not larger in area than four square feet. If lighted, the light shall be diffused or shielded and downward directed.
        k. All bed and breakfast facilities shall pay water and sewer rates according to the rates established by the City Council.
        l. All bed and breakfasts must collect and pay an applicable transient room tax, sales tax, and pay a City gross business license fee.
        m. The bed and breakfast facility shall conform to fire, building and health codes and be licensed in conformance with all City ordinances.
    4. Carpentry shops.
    5. Convenience establishments that are less than three thousand square feet.
    6. Day care. Day care shall be permitted to operate subject to the following standards:
        a. City of Moab business license is required.
        b. A valid day care license or certificate as issued by the State of Utah is required.
        c. Applicants for a City business license shall submit a conceptual site plan that indicates:
            i. Ingress and egress to the property;
            ii. Drop off/pick up areas;
            iii. Traffic circulation;
            iv. Off-street parking (single-household residence plus space for each FTE staff member);
            v. Landscaping;
            vi. Buffering or separation from dissimilar uses;
            vii. Open space for older kids.
        d. Compliance with all applicable City regulations regarding noise, odor and glare.
    7. Eating establishments less than two thousand square feet excluding drive-ins or drive-through services.
    8. Electrical appliance shops (wholesale).
    9. Engraving and printing establishments.
    10. Funeral establishments.
    11. Greenhouses and nurseries.
    12. Group homes.
        a. Such homes must be licensed by the State of Utah.
        b. All exterior aspects of a group home, including its scale and off-street parking configuration, shall conform with the requirements of the C-2 zone.
        c. Such homes shall provide off-street parking pursuant to Sections 17.09.210 through 17.09.340.
    13. Gymnasiums.
    14. Home occupations subject to the requirements set forth in Section 5.80.050.
    15. Hospitals.
    16. Lodging establishments (under ten units).
    17. Multi-household dwellings. Developments consisting of seven or more multi-household units shall be subject to the following additional requirements:
        a. Access. Vehicular access shall be provided to the property in such a way that it does not impede traffic patterns on adjacent streets.
        b. Parking. Off-street parking shall be designed in such a way as to allow vehicles to pull forward into the on-street traffic flow.
        c. Garages or Carports. If provided, garages and carports shall not be located in the front yard and shall be set back from the front wall of the principal structure at least fifteen feet or be accessed from the rear or side of the property.
        d. Landscaping. All off-street parking shall be landscaped and buffered from adjacent uses. A minimum of fifteen percent of the interior of the parking area shall be landscaped to provide shade and break up the expanse of asphalt.
        e. Buffering. All adjacent uses shall be buffered by a distance of not less than fifteen feet and contain berms, shrubs, and other plantings. Buffering may be combined with screens, fences and hedges.
        f. Apartments and court apartments shall designate an open space/recreation area that is a minimum of two hundred square feet in size to be developed into recreation, play or landscaped areas. The requirement can be met with the construction of a recreation room (“rec room”) or club house of a similarly sized area that can be used for residents and their guests for recreation/social activities and/or relaxation.
    18. One-household dwellings and accessory uses.
    19. Outfitters and guide services and facilities.
    20. Parking lots (commercial).
    21. Places of worship. All places of worship shall be subject to the regulations established by Utah State Code Annotated (“UCA”). The Planning Department, in accordance with Chapter 17.67, shall receive a complete site plan which demonstrates that:
        a. Traffic impacts are minimized so that on-street vehicle flows will not be impeded.
        b. Noise, odor, and glare is contained on the property.
        c. Landscaping shall be completed in accordance with the provisions located in Sections 17.09.360 (Landscaping – Required) and 17.09.370 (Landscaping – Specifications generally). A minimum of fifteen percent of the interior of the parking areas must be landscaped. Trees shall be utilized to provide shade for vehicles and must be of a sufficient size and placement to provide shade to forty percent of the parking area within three years.
        d. Possible impacts on adjacent streets, sidewalks, and bike/pedestrian routes have been identified and reduced to minimum levels.
        e. Adequate parking for the intended use is provided.
    22. Professional offices.
    23. Public buildings. This use shall be allowed when in compliance with the following standards:
        a. The proposed use shall be situated on a tract of land sufficient in size to provide for the activities of the use as well as required landscaping, off-street parking, and trails;
        b. Landscaping, screening, and fencing shall be installed and maintained to mitigate impacts on surrounding residential uses;
        c. Parking areas shall be an all-weather surface such as concrete, asphalt or sealed gravel that will not generate dust or deposit gravel on paved roadways;
        d. Dust, glare, odor, and noise shall be confined within the boundaries of the property;
        e. Outside storage of equipment, materials, and supplies shall be contained and located within a building or a sight obscuring fence;
        f. The use shall demonstrate that there is a benefit to the neighborhood or community;
        g. Traffic from the proposed use shall not create a significant negative impact on the neighborhood.
    24. Public parks.
    25. Retail establishments that are three thousand square feet or less.
    26. Schools. All schools shall be subject to the regulations established by Utah State Code Annotated. The City, in accordance with Chapter 17.67, shall receive a complete site plan showing that:
        a. Traffic impacts are minimized so that on-street vehicle flows will not be impeded.
        b. Possible impacts to adjacent streets, sidewalks, and bike/pedestrian routes have been identified and reduced to minimum levels.
    27. Secondhand stores.
    28. Service establishments.
    29. Two-household dwellings and accessory uses.
    30. Veterinary clinic with indoor kennel.
        a. Noise, odor and glare shall be contained on the property.
        b. Fencing, landscaping, the design of parking areas, and downward directed and full cut-off light fixtures shall be used to reduce impacts on adjacent properties.
        c. Parking shall be provided at a rate of one space per one thousand square feet and one space per each employee. ADA handicapped accessible spaces shall be provided as required.
        d. A buffer area of twenty-five feet shall be used to provide a separation from other uses and adjacent properties. Buffering shall include the elements of subsection (A)(30)(b) of this section.
        e. Vehicular ingress and egress traffic patterns shall be designed to not impede existing traffic flows and provide adequate interior circulation.
        f. Hours of operation for public access shall be from seven a.m. to seven p.m.
    31. Wholesale establishments that are less than three thousand square feet (wholesale establishments with stock on premises but excluding establishments whose principal activity is that of a storage warehouse). (Ord. 19-13 § 21 (part), 2019; Ord. 18-01 (part), 2018: Ord. 08-03 (part), 2008; Ord. 93-16 (part), 1993)

17.21.030 Area, width and location requirements.
All buildings and structures in the C-2, commercial-residential zone, shall be set back at least twenty-five feet from any public street. Area, width and location requirements for buildings arranged, intended or designed primarily for residential use, shall be set back from the front property line a distance of at least twenty-five feet. Minimum side yards shall be at least eight feet or less by conditional use permit, with a minimum rear yard setback of fifteen feet. Street-side setbacks for corner lots shall be no less than twenty feet in width. No area and width requirements shall apply to dwellings located above the ground floor when the ground floor is devoted exclusively to a commercial use permitted in the zone Lot coverage of the principal use shall not exceed fifty percent of the total lot area. (Ord. 08-24 (part), 2008: Ord. 93-16 (part), 1993)

17.21.040 Special provisions.
A. A strip of land at least fifteen feet in width adjacent to all public streets shall be landscaped as set forth in Sections 17.09.360 (Landscaping--Required) and 17.09.370 (Landscaping--Specifications) of this title, except for permitted driveways.
B. No dust, odor, smoke, vibration or intermittent glare or noise shall be emitted which is discernible beyond the premises, except for normal traffic movements.
C. Storage of all merchandise, material and products shall be carried on within a building or within an area enclosed with a sight obscuring fence or wall, except for vehicles in running order.
D. All off-street parking shall be hard-surfaced. (Ord. 93-16 (part), 1993)

17.21.050 Supplementary regulations.
See also Supplementary Requirements and Procedures Applicable Within Zones (Chapter 17.09 of this title). (Ord. 93-16 (part), 1993)

Chapter 17.24 C-3 CENTRAL COMMERCIAL ZONE

Sections:
17.24.010    Objectives and characteristics.
17.24.020    Permitted uses and regulations.
17.24.030    Area, width and location requirements.
17.24.040    Special provisions.
17.24.050    Supplementary regulations.

17.24.010 Objectives and characteristics.
The C-3 central commercial zone has been established as a district in which the primary use of the land is for business purposes. The area covered by this zone is now and it is intended that it shall continue to be the dominant shopping and financial center of the City and surrounding territory. For this reason the zone has been located in the central part of the City where the street pattern makes the business buildings readily accessible to all parts of the City and surrounding region and where business and shopping activities can be carried on with maximum convenience. The C-3 zone is characterized by wide, clean, well-lighted streets, ample pedestrian ways and vehicular parking lots for the convenience and safety of the public. Attractive, inviting and well-maintained shops, stores, offices and other buildings are also characteristic of this zone.
Representative of the uses in this zone are banks, hotels, office buildings, theaters, and a wide variety of retail outlets. In order to accomplish the objectives and purposes of this title and to promote the characteristics of this zone, the regulations set out in this chapter shall apply in the C-3 zone. (Prior code § 27-9-1)

17.24.020 Permitted uses and regulations.
A. Permitted Uses. The following uses shall be permitted-by-right. If a use is not listed it is prohibited.
    1. Assembly of appliances from previously prepared parts.
    2. Auto body and fender shops, auto painting.
    3. Bars.
    4. Day care.
    5. Drive-through windows.
    6. Dwellings above the ground floor of a nonresidential structure.
    7. Eating establishments.
    8. Engraving and printing establishments.
    9. Food truck parks.
    10. Funeral establishments.
    11. Ground floor dwellings for legally constituted housing authorities or legally recognized affordable housing nonprofit or land trust. Ground floor dwellings shall be allowed in the C-3 zone when all of the following exist:
        a. The owner of the property is a legally constituted housing authority as recognized by the State of Utah, Grand County, or the City of Moab, or alternatively, the owner of the property is a legally recognized affordable housing nonprofit or land trust;
        b. The dwellings are limited to affordable housing units, which shall be defined as housing occupied or reserved for occupancy by households with a gross household income equal to or less than eighty percent of the median gross income of Moab City or Grand County for households of the same size; and
        c. No existing commercial or retail activities shall be displaced.
    Ground floor dwellings permitted under the provisions of this chapter shall be exempt from the designated recreation area requirements of Section 17.09.670.
    12. Ground floor employee dwellings. Dwellings and apartment houses are permitted on the ground floor only when constructed in conjunction with a commercial use. Such dwellings and apartment houses on the ground floor must adhere to the following standards:
        a. The housing units shall be for employees of the business that operates the premises on which the employee housing units are built;
        b. The housing units shall be located on the business property or on a directly adjacent property;
        c. Housing shall meet all residential standards of the International Building Code;
        d. The lease term shall be for a period of not less than thirty-one days;
        e. In no case shall employee housing be physically located in the front of a building, and where all ground floor building frontage is used exclusively for business related purposes and not housing ingress/egress;
        f. Employee housing may be allowed at a rate of up to twenty percent of the commercial structure; and
        g. Off-street parking shall be provided at a rate of 0.75 spaces/unit.
            i. An exception to the required employee housing parking spaces may be granted by the Planning Commission if the applicant can show that more than sufficient parking exists for the commercial use.
    13. Gymnasiums.
    14. Historic dwelling. Dwellings that have or may have historical significance may apply for historic designation through the review process contained in Chapter 17.90. The dwelling must satisfy the review criteria and meet the standards included in that chapter.
    15. Hospitals.
    16. Lodging.
    17. Parking lots (commercial).
    18. Professional offices.
    19. Public facilities.
    20. Public parking structures.
    21. Retail establishments.
    22. Schools. All schools shall be subject to the regulations established by Utah State Code Annotated. The City, in accordance with Chapter 17.67, shall receive a complete site plan showing that:
        a. Traffic impacts are minimized so that on-street vehicle flows will not be impeded.
        b. Possible impacts to adjacent streets, sidewalks, and bike/pedestrian routes have been identified and reduced to minimum levels.
    23. Service establishments.
    24. Service stations.
    25. Vehicle sales and rentals.
    26. Vehicle repair.
    27. Veterinary clinic with indoor kennel.
        a. Noise, odor and glare shall be contained on the property.
        b. Fencing, landscaping, the design of parking areas, and downward directed and full cut-off light fixtures shall be used to reduce impacts on adjacent properties.
        c. Parking shall be provided at a rate of one space per one thousand square feet and one space per each employee. ADA handicapped accessible spaces shall be provided as required.
        d. A buffer area of twenty-five feet shall be used to provide a separation from other uses and adjacent properties. Buffering shall include the elements of subsection (A)(27)(b) of this section.
        e. Vehicular ingress and egress traffic patterns shall be designed to not impede existing traffic flows and provide adequate interior circulation.
        f. Hours of operation for public access shall be from seven a.m. to seven p.m.
    28. Wholesale establishments with stock on premises but excluding establishments whose principal activity is that of a storage warehouse. (Ord. 19-13 § 20, 2019; Ord. 18-01 (part), 2018: Ord. 13-15 (part), 2013; Ord. 08-14 (part), 2008; Ord. 07-08, 2007; Ord. 94-12 (part), 1994; prior code § 27-9-2)

17.24.030 Area, width and location requirements.
There shall be no area, width and location requirements for commercial buildings and structures constructed in accordance with the building code, except for gasoline pumps. (Prior code § 27-9-3)

17.24.040 Special provisions.
A. All merchandise, equipment and other materials (except for seasonal items sold on a temporary basis such as nursery stock, Christmas trees and vehicles in running order) shall be stored within an enclosed building or shall be stored within an opaque or sight obscuring fence, wall or landscaping at least six feet in height.
B. No dust, odor, smoke, vibration or intermittent light, glare or noise shall be emitted which is discernible beyond the premises, except for normal traffic movements.
C. All off-street parking shall be hard-surfaced.
D. All buildings located adjacent to major streets shall have at least one entranceway facing onto said street. (Ord. 93-06, 1993; prior code § 27-9-4)

17.24.050 Supplementary regulations.
See also Supplementary Requirements and Procedures Applicable Within Zones (Chapter 17.09 of this title). (Prior code § 27-9-5)

Chapter 17.27 C-4 GENERAL COMMERCIAL ZONE*

Sections:
17.27.010    Objectives and characteristics.
17.27.020    Permitted uses and regulations.
17.27.030    Area, width and location requirements.
17.27.040    Special provisions.
17.27.050    Supplementary regulations.
* Prior history:Prior code Sections 27-10-1 through 27-10-5.

17.27.010 Objectives and characteristics.
The C-4 general commercial zone has been established as a district in which the primary use of the land is for business and light industrial purposes. Another objective of the zone is to facilitate the development of attractive entrances to the City. The C-4 zone is characterized by clean, well lighted and landscaped streets, ample pedestrian ways and vehicular parking lots for the convenience and safety of the public. In order to accomplish the objectives and purposes of this title and to promote the characteristics of this zone, the regulations set out in this chapter shall apply in the C-4 zone. (Ord. 93-17 (part), 1993)

17.27.020 Permitted uses and regulations.
A. Permitted Uses. The following uses shall be permitted-by-right. If a use is not listed it is prohibited.
    1. Asphalt/concrete batching plant, temporary (not to exceed one calendar year). A temporary asphalt or concrete batching plant for producing asphalt or concrete products used in construction activities on the same or nearby sites is permitted subject to the following standards:
        a. The batching plant site shall comply with all applicable provisions of City, State and Federal laws.
        b. The batching plant shall not be located within six hundred feet of a residence.
        c. Hours of operation will be limited to Monday through Friday, seven a.m. to seven p.m.
        d. The batch plant may operate for up to six months, with a single renewal of a six-month time period permitted by the Zoning Administrator.
        e. No portion of the batch plant or its operation shall be located on a public street.
        f. The batch plant shall only furnish concrete, asphalt, or both, to a specific project. The placement of a temporary batching plant for a private project is restricted to the site of the project.
        g. The site must be clear of all equipment, material and debris upon completion.
        h. All public improvements that are damaged during the operation of the temporary batching plant must be repaired or replaced within thirty days of completion of the project.
        i. At termination and/or removal of the plant operation, the operator shall have the person responsible walk the site with the Building Official or his/her designee to verify the site meets City approval.
        j. Compliance with all applicable City regulations regarding noise, dust, odor and glare.
    2. Assembly of appliances from previously prepared parts.
    3. Auction houses.
    4. Auto body and fender shops, auto painting, welding and sheet metal shops.
    5. Bars.
    6. Caretaker dwellings.
    7. Day care.
    8. Dwellings above the ground floor of a nonresidential structure.
    9. Dwellings in the C-4 commercial zone. All dwellings, other than ground floor employee dwellings, on the ground floor shall be subject to the following requirements:
        a. Minimum wall dimensions of the principal structure, excluding garage, shall be twenty-four feet.
        b. All principal residential structures shall:
            i. Be placed on a slab-on-grade or perimeter foundation as approved by the Building Department;
            ii. Have a wood, brick or stucco exterior, or a material that looks similar to wood, brick or stucco;
            iii. Have a minimum four to twelve roof pitch and a one-foot overhang (structures constructed in the traditional southwest Spanish style are exempt from this requirement);
            iv. The combined total area of all primary, secondary, and accessory buildings on a lot may cover not more than seventy-five percent of the lot area;
            v. Buffering is required in accordance with other provisions of this chapter;
            vi. Minimum Setbacks for Residential Structures in the C-4 Zone. 
            +------------+---------+
            | Front yard | 30 feet |
            +------------+---------+
            | Side yard  | 15 feet |
            +------------+---------+
            | Rear yard  | 20 feet |
            +------------+---------+
        c. Multi-household dwellings of seven or more units shall be subject to the following additional requirements:
            i. Access. Vehicular access shall be provided to the property in such a way that it does not impede traffic patterns on adjacent streets.
            ii. Parking. Off-street parking shall be designed in such a way as to allow vehicles to pull forward into the on-street traffic flow.
            iii. Garages or Carports. If provided, garages and carports shall not be located in the front yard and shall be set back from the front wall of the principal structure at least fifteen feet or be accessed from the rear or side of the property.
            iv. Landscaping. All off-street parking shall be landscaped and buffered from adjacent uses. A minimum of fifteen percent of the interior of the parking area shall be landscaped to provide shade and break up the expanse of asphalt.
            v. Buffering. All adjacent uses shall be buffered by a distance of not less than fifteen feet and contain berms, shrubs, and other plantings. Buffering may be combined with screens, fences and hedges.
            vi. Apartments and court apartments shall designate an open space/recreation area that is a minimum of two hundred square feet in size to be developed into recreation, play or landscaped areas. The requirement can be met with the construction of a recreation room (“rec room”) or club house of a similarly sized area that can be used for residents and their guests for recreation/social activities and/or relaxation.
    10. Eating establishments.
    11. Engraving and printing establishments.
    12. Farm equipment sales.
    13. Funeral establishments.
    14. Ground floor employee dwellings. Employee dwellings on the ground floor of a nonresidential use must adhere to the following standards:
        a. The housing units shall be for employees of the business that operates the premises on which the employee housing units are built;
        b. The housing units shall be located on the business property or a directly adjacent property;
        c. Housing shall meet all residential standards of the International Building Code;
        d. Housing shall house employees for a period of not less than thirty-one days;
        e. In no case shall employee housing be located in front of buildings and such units shall be located in the rear portion of commercial business structures;
        f. Employee housing may be allowed at a rate of up to two units per ten thousand square feet of the floor area of the commercial structure and shall not exceed one thousand square feet per unit in size; and
        g. Off-street parking shall be provided at a rate of 0.75 spaces/unit.
            i. An exception to the required employee housing parking spaces may be granted by the Planning Commission if the applicant can show that more than sufficient parking exists for the commercial use.
    15. Gymnasiums.
    16. Hardware stores and lumber yards.
    17. Historic dwelling. Dwellings that have or may have historical significance may apply for historic designation through the review process contained in Chapter 17.90. The dwelling must satisfy the review criteria and meet the standards included in that chapter.
    18. Hospitals.
    19. Laboratories, but not including activities which are hazardous by reason of explosion, fire, chemical, biochemical, or other danger.
    20. Lodging.
    21. Manufactured home sales. The following additional items shall be used during review of applications for this use in an effort to mitigate impacts from the sales of factory built structures: additional landscaping, berms, screening, fencing, increased setbacks, hours of operation, storm water management, compatibility in terms of appearance, architectural scale and features, site design and scope, the control of adverse impacts from noise, vibration, smoke, fumes, gas, dust, odor, lighting, glare, traffic minimization or circulation, parking, or other undesirable or hazardous conditions.
    22. Manufacturing, compounding and processing.
    23. Parking lots (commercial).
    24. Places of worship. All places of worship shall be subject to the regulations established by Utah State Code Annotated (UCA). The Planning Department, in accordance with Chapter 17.67, shall receive a complete site plan which demonstrates that:
        a. Traffic impacts are minimized so that on-street vehicle flows will not be impeded.
        b. Noise, odor, and glare is contained on the property.
        c. Landscaping shall be completed in accordance with the provisions located in Sections 17.09.360 (Landscaping – Required) and 17.09.370 (Landscaping – Specifications generally). A minimum of fifteen percent of the interior of the parking areas must be landscaped. Trees shall be utilized to provide shade for vehicles and must be of a sufficient size and placement to provide shade to forty percent of the parking area within three years.
        d. Possible impacts on adjacent streets, sidewalks, and bike/pedestrian routes have been identified and reduced to minimum levels.
        e. Adequate parking for the intended use is provided.
    25. Professional offices.
    26. Public facilities.
    27. Public and private research establishments.
    28. Recreational vehicle park or campground. The following provisions are intended to manage the development of RV parks while minimizing land use conflicts and environmental degradation:
        a. Trees and other landscaping serving as a buffer to other adjacent uses must surround the area for a minimum distance of fifteen feet. Landscaping shall be in accordance with the requirements of Section 17.09.360.
        b. A solid decorative privacy wall or wooden privacy fence shall be constructed and maintained around the park perimeter.
        c. A minimum separation of twenty feet shall be maintained between each RV unit.
        d. Adequate sanitation facilities and ADA facilities shall be provided and maintained for the maximum number of units as per the International Building Code Appendices.
        e. A minimum area of ten percent or two hundred square feet, whichever is greater, must be provided as open space for a playground and/or picnic area.
        f. Traffic patterns within the park and ingress and egress from adjacent streets shall be designed to minimize congestion at all intersections.
        g. Hours of operation shall be limited to six a.m. to ten p.m. for the office and other park facilities.
    29. Retail establishments.
    30. Schools. All schools shall be subject to the regulations established by Utah State Code Annotated (UCA). The Planning Department, in accordance with Chapter 17.67, shall receive a complete site plan which demonstrates that:
        a. Traffic impacts are minimized so that on-street vehicle flows will not be impeded.
        b. Noise, odor, and glare is contained on the property.
        c. Possible impacts on adjacent streets, sidewalks, and bike/pedestrian routes have been identified and reduced to minimum levels.
        d. Adequate parking for the intended use is provided.
    31. Second hand stores.
    32. Self-storage warehouses.
        a. All new self-storage warehouse facilities or expansions are subject to approval of a site plan as described in Chapter 17.67, Site Plan Review.
        b. All drives and parking area surfaces shall consist of a maintained all-weather dust free surface such as asphalt, concrete, bricks, pavers, cobblestones or some other porous surface, but gravel is not allowed.
        c. Drive lanes must be of a sufficient width to allow vehicles to pass when another is loading or unloading by a unit.
        d. Traffic impacts shall be evaluated and mitigated in accordance with Sections 17.67.040(M) and (N).
        e. Self-storage warehouses shall be screened/buffered from adjacent properties by the use of decorative/solid wooden privacy fencing or decorative block walls. Fences/walls shall be constructed to a minimum of six feet in height when adjacent to other commercial zones and no less than eight feet when adjacent to residential zones. Landscaping shall also be incorporated into the screening effort at the following rate:
            i. Landscape designs shall be in harmony with the environmental context of the development site. Preservation of native, on-site vegetation shall be a primary objective of site planning for development. Specimen plants shall be given particular consideration for retention on site.
            ii. Wherever the undisturbed natural desert landscape cannot be preserved, landscape design and construction shall promote the use of transplanted, on-site desert plants, container plants, seeded desert plants and inorganic ground covers. This standard shall be particularly emphasized on all landscaped areas abutting public rights-of-way.
            iii. Trees shall be a minimum of fifteen gallons in size, or of comparable height if bare-rooted, at planting time. If twenty-four-inch box trees or transplanted trees of two-inch caliper or larger are planted for all of the required trees, a reduction of one required tree per one hundred linear feet will be allowed.
                (A) Trees shall be planted at appropriate intervals so that a continuous perimeter canopy will be provided at maturity and not be at a rate of less than four canopy trees and six understory trees per one hundred feet of buffer length;
                (B) Trees and shrubs shall be planted so that at maturity they do not interfere with service lines, traffic sight lines and the property rights of adjacent property owners;
                (C) Any tree placed in the sight visibility triangle must be of a box size large enough to be immediately pruned up to a seventy-two-inch height for clear sight visibility. All other trees shall be placed so that severe pruning is not required to keep the sight visibility triangle clear.
            iv. Trees located within sight visibility triangles shall not exceed one foot in their greatest cross-sectional dimension at maturity and shall not be planted in a line that could result in a solid wall effect when viewed at an angle; and
                (A) Trees planted within ten feet of public sidewalks or curbs shall be provided with suitable root diverters to minimize heaving of those improvements.
            v. Ground Covers. 
                (A) When inorganic ground covers are used they shall be in combination with live plants and not exceed two-thirds of the total area of applied ground covers.
                (B) Turf use is prohibited.
                (C) Unpaved areas in any plant bed, median or tree understory within a planter shall be planted with shrubs, accents or vines, or covered with appropriate organic and inorganic ground covers.
                (D) All areas not required for buildings, access drives, parking spaces, trails, and accessory uses shall be landscaped.
            vi. Shrubs. 
                (A) Shrubs shall be either deciduous species planted at two and one-half feet in height with a mature height of at least six feet or a coniferous species planted at two and one-half feet in spread. Shrubs shall be at least five gallons in size or at least thirty-inch-tall pots at planting time;
                (B) Shrubs shall be planted at a rate of twenty-four shrubs for each one hundred feet of buffer length, or a portion thereof.
        f. Maintenance and replacement of all vegetation is the responsibility of the owner(s) of the property.
        g. Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the requirements above. Landscaped screening shall be provided and maintained along the perimeter of the property and consist of ten feet in depth.
        h. All structures shall be maintained in accordance with the adopted version of the International Property Maintenance Code.
        i. The lot size shall be between a minimum of two acres and a maximum of five acres.
        j. The total area covered by buildings shall not exceed fifty percent of the site.
        k. The maximum height of the enclosed building or buildings permitted shall not exceed twenty feet.
        l. No outside storage is permitted except for large vehicles and boats that are under a permanent cover. The permanent cover shall not exceed twenty-four feet in height.
        m. The storage of hazardous, toxic, or explosive substances, including, but not limited to, hazardous waste, industrial solid waste, medical waste, municipal solid waste, septage, or used oil, is prohibited.
        n. No business activity other than the rental of storage units shall be conducted on the premises.
        o. One dwelling unit is permitted on the same lot for use as a caretaker dwelling.
    33. Service establishments.
    34. Service stations.
    35. Trucking companies.
        a. Parking areas shall be paved with an all-weather hard surface such as concrete or asphalt that will not generate dust or gravel deposits on paved roadways.
        b. A minimum of fifteen percent of the parking area shall be landscaped with:
            i. Shrubs, a minimum of three and one-half feet in height, and living ground cover must be planted so that the ground will be covered within three years.
            ii. Earth-mounding, an average of three and one-half feet in height, planted with trees, shrubs or living ground cover so that the ground will be covered within three years. A combination of earth-mounding and shrubs to produce a visual barrier at least three and one-half feet in height.
            iii. Evergreen and deciduous trees, with no more than fifty percent being deciduous, a minimum of six feet in height, and planted at intervals no greater than thirty feet on center.
        c. Odor, glare, and noise shall be confined to the property.
        d. Adjacent properties shall be buffered by perimeter landscaping a minimum of fifteen feet in width.
        e. Parking areas shall be illuminated by pole lighting only that shall be downward directed with full cut-off fixtures dispersed throughout the parking area and shall provide a minimum of 0.5 candle power and not more than 1.0 candle power of illumination. No light shall be placed on the eave or side of buildings and be directed outward toward the perimeter of the property.
        f. Adequate access/ingress shall be provided so as not to impact traffic patterns in the area.
        g. Refrigerator units shall not be allowed to run from the hours of ten p.m. to seven a.m.
    36. Utility provider structures and buildings. New construction of water lines, sewer lines and electric substations and structures may be constructed subject to the approval of the Planning Commission and Council with a review of a subdivision plat. Such construction is not required to apply for a separate permit but must satisfy the requirements below. Expansions of existing facilities are also subject to the approval of the Planning Commission and Council, and subject to the standards below. The Planning Commission may require standards in accordance with the following language that are reasonably necessary to protect surrounding property values and residential amenities:
        a. These types of facilities include but are not limited to:
            i. Electrical utility facility, provided transmission lines are excluded from the requirements of this section if visibility is essential to safety, security, or maintenance access;
            ii. Solid waste disposal facility;
            iii. Water pumping plants and pipelines;
            iv. Public utility buildings and structures (except power plants);
            v. Flood control structures;
            vi. Substations;
            vii. Sewage treatment plants subject to review and approval of the State Department of Health.
        b. Site Standards. 
            i. Architectural Form and Character. A building housing all or a majority of a utility facility must be compatible with the architectural form of surrounding buildings. This requirement is not applicable to a utility facility where significant elements of the facility are not housed inside of a building or to isolated minor elements such as pad mounted transformers, telephone pedestals and metering stations.
            ii. Screening and Fence Requirements. A utility facility must be site screened with landscaping and/or fencing. Landscape development shall include retention of significant trees, as necessary to maintain and protect property values, to enhance the visual appearance of the City, to preserve the natural character of the area, to promote utilization of natural systems, to reduce the impacts of development on the storm drainage system and water resources, and to provide a better transition between the various land uses permitted in the City.
                (A) The Planning Department and Community Development Director shall review the proposed landscape plan with each application and make a recommendation to the Planning Commission.
                (B) The applicant shall provide site perimeter landscaping that consists of a minimum width of ten feet and includes:
                    (1) Evergreen and deciduous trees, with no more than fifty percent being deciduous, a minimum of six feet in height, and planted at intervals no greater than thirty feet on center;
                    (2) A minimum of three and one-half feet in height, and living ground cover planted so that the ground will be covered within three years.
            iii. If planted to buffer a parking area, access, or site development other than a building, any of the following alternatives may be used unless otherwise noted:
                (A) Shrubs, a minimum of three and one-half feet in height, and living ground cover must be planted so that the ground will be covered within three years.
                (B) Earth-mounding, an average of three and one-half feet in height, planted with shrubs or living ground cover so that the ground will be covered within three years. This alternative may not be used in a downtown land use district.
                (C) A combination of earth-mounding and shrubs to produce a visual barrier at least three and one-half feet in height.
            iv. Equipment and vehicle storage yards require fifteen feet of landscaping on all sides if visible from a public right-of-way.
            v. Parking Area Landscaping. Parking areas require landscaping as follows in addition to any site perimeter landscaping as required.
            vi. Alternative landscaping may be approved by the Planning Commission if the landscaping will provide the desired screening as noted below:
                (A) The proposed landscaping represents an equal or better result than that which could be achieved by strictly following the requirements of this section; and
                (B) The proposed landscaping either:
                    (1) Incorporates the increased retention of significant trees and naturally occurring undergrowth;
                    (2) Better accommodates or improves the existing physical conditions of the subject property;
                    (3) Incorporates elements to provide for wind protection or to maintain solar access;
                    (4) Incorporates elements to protect or improve water quality; or
                    (5) Incorporates native species in a design that buffers a critical area from uses on the site, including parking.
    37. Vehicle repair.
    38. Vehicle sales.
    39. Warehouses.
    40. Wholesale establishments with stock on premises.
    41. Wireless telecommunication towers subject to the regulations set forth in Chapter 17.76. (Ord. 18-01 (part), 2018: Ord. 17-21 (part), 2017; Ord. 13-15 (part), 2013; Ord. 08-32 (part), 2008; Ord. 08-24 (part), 2008; Ord. 08-15 (part), 2008; Ord. 08-03 (part), 2008; Ord. 94-22 (part), 1994; Ord. 93-17 (part), 1993)

17.27.030 Area, width and location requirements.
All buildings shall have a minimum front yard setback of twenty-five feet and may be constructed to a zero side and rear lot line setback in accordance with the adopted building code. Convenience stores with gasoline pumps shall be set back at least twenty-five feet from any public street or side or rear lot line. No area and width requirements shall apply to residential uses located above the ground floor when said ground floor is devoted exclusively to a commercial use permitted in this zone. Lot coverage of the principal use shall not exceed fifty percent of the total lot area. (Ord. 08-24 (part), 2008: Ord. 93-17 (part), 1993)

17.27.040 Special provisions.
A. A strip of land at least fifteen feet in width adjacent to all public streets shall be landscaped as set forth in Sections 17.09.360 through 17.09.420 of this title, except for permitted driveways.
B. No dust, odor, smoke, vibration or intermittent light, glare or noise shall be emitted which is discernible beyond the premises, except for normal traffic movements.
C. Storage of all merchandise, material and products shall be carried on within a building or within an area enclosed with a sight obscuring fence or wall, except for vehicles in running order.
D. All off-street parking shall be hard-surfaced. (Ord. 93-17 (part), 1993)

17.27.050 Supplementary regulations.
See also Supplementary Requirements and Procedures Applicable Within Zones (Chapter 17.09 of this title). (Ord. 93-17 (part), 1993)

Chapter 17.30 C-5 NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL ZONE

Sections:
17.30.010    Objectives and characteristics.
17.30.020    Permitted uses and regulations.
17.30.030    Area, width and location requirements.
17.30.040    Special provisions.
17.30.050    Supplementary regulations.

17.30.010 Objectives and characteristics.
The C-5 neighborhood commercial zone has been established for the primary purpose of providing a location where commercial establishments can be located where people who live in the surrounding neighborhood can obtain daily household goods and services conveniently. This zone is characterized by stores, shops and establishments situated in landscaped surroundings that are maintained in harmony with amenities of adjacent residential development.
In order to accomplish the objectives and purposes of this title and to promote the characteristics of this zone, the following regulations shall apply in the C-5 neighborhood commercial zone. (Ord. 92-15 (part), 1992: Ord. 88-05 (part), 1988; prior code § 27-11-1)

17.30.020 Permitted uses and regulations.
A. Permitted Uses. The following uses shall be permitted-by-right. If a use is not listed it is prohibited.
    1. Arts and crafts shops.
    2. Convenience enterprises that are less than three thousand square feet.
    3. Day care. Day care shall be permitted to operate subject to the following standards:
        a. City of Moab business license is required.
        b. A valid day care license or certificate as issued by the State of Utah is required.
        c. Applicants for a City business license shall submit a conceptual site plan that indicates:
            i. Ingress and egress to the property;
            ii. Drop off/pick up areas;
            iii. Traffic circulation;
            iv. Off-street parking (single-household residence plus space for each FTE staff member);
            v. Landscaping;
            vi. Buffering or separation from dissimilar uses;
            vii. Open space for older kids.
        d. Compliance with all applicable City regulations regarding noise, odor and glare.
    4. Eating establishments.
    5. Fraternal lodges.
    6. Group homes.
        a. Such homes must be licensed by the State of Utah.
        b. All exterior aspects of a group home, including its scale and off-street parking configuration, shall conform with the requirements of the C-5 zone.
        c. Such homes shall provide off-street parking pursuant to Sections 17.09.210 through 17.09.340.
    7. Gymnasiums.
    8. Home occupations subject to the requirements set forth in Section 5.80.050.
    9. Multi-household dwellings of seven or more units. Developments consisting of seven or more multi-household units shall be subject to the following additional requirements:
        a. Access. Vehicular access shall be provided to the property in such a way that it does not impede traffic patterns on adjacent streets.
        b. Parking. Off-street parking shall be designed in such a way as to allow vehicles to pull forward into the on-street traffic flow.
        c. Garages or Carports. If provided, garages and carports shall not be located in the front yard and shall be set back from the front wall of the principal structure at least fifteen feet or be accessed from the rear or side of the property.
        d. Landscaping. All off-street parking shall be landscaped and buffered from adjacent uses. A minimum of fifteen percent of the interior of the parking area shall be landscaped to provide shade and break up the expanse of asphalt.
        e. Buffering. All adjacent uses shall be buffered by a distance of not less than fifteen feet and contain berms, shrubs, and other plantings. Buffering may be combined with screens, fences and hedges.
        f. Apartments and court apartments shall designate an open space/recreation area that is a minimum of two hundred square feet in size to be developed into recreation, play or landscaped areas. The requirement can be met with the construction of a recreation room (“rec room”) or club house of a similarly sized area that can be used for residents and their guests for recreation/social activities and/or relaxation.
    10. One-household dwellings and accessory uses.
    11. Planned unit developments subject to the requirements set forth in Chapter 17.66, relating to large-scale developments.
    12. Professional offices.
    13. Public buildings. This use shall be allowed when in compliance with the following standards:
        a. The proposed use shall be situated on a tract of land sufficient in size to provide for the activities of the use as well as required landscaping, off-street parking, and trails;
        b. Landscaping, screening, and fencing shall be installed and maintained to mitigate impacts on surrounding residential uses;
        c. Parking areas shall be an all-weather surface such as concrete, asphalt or sealed gravel that will not generate dust or deposit gravel on paved roadways;
        d. Dust, glare, odor, and noise shall be confined within the boundaries of the property;
        e. Outside storage of equipment, materials, and supplies shall be contained and located within a building or a sight obscuring fence;
        f. The use shall demonstrate that there is a benefit to the neighborhood or community;
        g. Traffic from the proposed use shall not create a significant negative impact on the neighborhood.
    14. Schools. All schools shall be subject to the regulations established by Utah State Code Annotated. The City, in accordance with Chapter 17.67, shall receive a complete site plan showing that:
        a. Traffic impacts are minimized so that on-street vehicle flows will not be impeded.
        b. Possible impacts to adjacent streets, sidewalks, and bike/pedestrian routes have been identified and reduced to minimum levels.
    15. Small neighborhood retail uses less than one thousand five hundred square feet.
    16. Two-household dwellings and accessory uses.
    17. Veterinary clinic with indoor kennel.
        a. Noise, odor and glare shall be contained on the property.
        b. Fencing, landscaping, the design of parking areas, and downward directed and full cut-off light fixtures shall be used to reduce impacts on adjacent properties.
        c. Parking shall be provided at a rate of one space per one thousand square feet and one space per each employee. ADA handicapped accessible spaces shall be provided as required.
        d. A buffer area of twenty-five feet shall be used to provide a separation from other uses and adjacent properties. Buffering shall include the elements of subsection (A)(17)(b) of this section.
        e. Vehicular ingress and egress traffic patterns shall be designed to not impede existing traffic flows and provide adequate interior circulation.
        f. Hours of operation for public access shall be from seven a.m. to seven p.m. (Ord. 19-13 § 21 (part), 2019; Ord. 18-01 (part), 2018: Ord. 17-32 (part), 2017; Ord. 12-09 (part), 2012; Ord. 08-03 (part), 2008; Ord. 92-15 (part), 1992: Ord. 88-05 (part), 1988; prior code § 27-11-2)

17.30.030 Area, width and location requirements.
There shall be no area, width or location requirements, except for land that is necessary to provide for required landscaping and off-street parking and, except that all buildings shall be set back at least fifteen feet from the boundaries of the C-5 zone. (Prior code § 27-11-3)

17.30.040 Special provisions.
A. A landscaped strip of at least fifteen feet in width shall be installed along the border of any public street in compliance with Sections 17.12.360--17.12.420 of this title.
B. All off-street parking space shall be hard-surfaced.
C. All areas not covered by buildings, off-street parking space or walks and drives shall be landscaped. All merchandise, equipment and other materials (except for seasonal items sold on a temporary basis such as nursery stock, Christmas trees and vehicles in running order) shall be stored within an enclosed building or shall be stored within an opaque or sight obscuring fence, wall or landscaping at least six feet in height. (Ord. 93-07 Section 1, 1993; Ord. 92-15 (part), 1992: Ord. 88-05 (part), 1988; prior code § 27-11-4)

17.30.050 Supplementary regulations.
See also Supplementary Requirements and Procedures Applicable Within Zones (Chapter 17.09 of this title). (Ord. 92-15 (part), 1992: Ord. 88-05 (part), 1988: prior code § 27-11-5)

Chapter 17.31 RC RESORT COMMERCIAL ZONE

Sections:
17.31.010    Objectives and characteristics.
17.31.020    Permitted uses and regulations.
17.31.030    Area, width, and location requirements.
17.31.040    Special provisions.
17.31.050    Supplementary regulations.

17.31.010 Objectives and characteristics.
The RC, Resort Commercial District is intended site design concepts that implement the Moab/Grand County North Gateway Plan (“Gateway Plan”), an amendment to the City of Moab General Plan. The district is designed to create a positive first impression of the City of Moab and Grand County and to encourage mixed residential and commercial development, including resort guest-oriented and local-oriented commercial uses in an urban setting. In addition to the use and area regulations of this section, development in the RC, Resort Commercial Zone shall be in compliance with all other applicable provisions of this code. If conflict arises between this chapter and other parts of the City code, the more restrictive shall apply. (Ord. 02-04 (part), 2002)

17.31.020 Permitted uses and regulations.
A. Permitted Uses. The following uses shall be permitted-by-right. If a use is not listed it is prohibited.
    1. Accessory buildings and uses;
    2. Bars;
    3. Caretaker or guard residence, accessory;
    4. Custom personal services;
    5. Eating establishments;
    6. Gasoline service station, subject to the supplementary regulations of Section 17.31.050(B);
    7. General retail (indoors);
    8. Lodging;
    9. Multi-household dwellings;
    10. Municipal facilities and services;
    11. Office, business or professional;
    12. One-household dwelling and accessory uses;
    13. Outdoor recreational uses, commercial;
    14. Outfitters and guide services and facilities;
    15. Recreational vehicle/travel trailer park, subject to the supplementary regulations of Section 17.31.050(C);
    16. Single-household dwelling.
    17. Two-household dwelling and accessory units.
B. Large-Scale Retail Prohibited – Large-Scale Commercial Uses Allowed. As defined in Chapter 17.80, large-scale retail development comprising a retail use in a single building in excess of thirty thousand square feet is not permitted in the resort commercial (RC) zoning district. Other uses permitted in this chapter which would constitute large-scale commercial development, e.g., lodging related uses in excess of thirty thousand square feet, are permitted in the RC zoning district, subject to the criteria in Chapter 17.80. All other uses permitted in the RC district shall be subject to the remaining criteria of this chapter. (Ord. 19-13 § 19, 2019; Ord. 18-01 (part), 2018: Ord. 17-18 (part), 2017; Ord. 09-08, 2009)
Editor’s note: Ord. No. 09-08, adopted June 9, 2009, repealed the former § 17.31.020, and enacted a new § 17.31.020 as set out herein. The former § 17.31.020 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 02-04, 2002.

17.31.030 Area, width, and location requirements.
A. Non-residential development in the RC, Resort Commercial Zone shall be subject to the following standards:
    1. Minimum lot area: ten thousand eight hundred ninety square feet (one-quarter acre);
    2. Minimum front and street side setbacks:
        a. Highway 191 right-of-way: zero feet, except for single and two household dwellings which shall be twenty-five feet;
        b. All others: twenty-five feet.
    3. Minimum interior side setback: ten feet;
    4. Minimum rear setbacks: ten feet;
    5. Minimum lot width: None;
    6. Maximum height shall be forty feet for principal structures and sixteen feet for accessory structures.
B. Residential Area and Bulk Standards. Residential development in the RC, Resort Commercial Zone shall be subject to the following standards:
    1. Minimum lot area:
        a. Dwelling, single-household: nine thousand square feet;
        b. Dwelling, two-household: nine thousand square feet;
        c. Dwelling, multi-household: two thousand five hundred square feet
    2. Minimum front and street side setbacks: zero feet, except for single and two household dwellings which shall be twenty-five feet;
    3. Minimum rear and interior side setbacks: ten feet;
    4. Minimum lot width:
        a. Single-household and two-household dwellings: eighty feet;
    5. Maximum height:
        a. Principal uses: twenty-four feet;
        b. Accessory uses: sixteen feet. (Ord. 19-13 § 21 (part), 2019; Ord. 17-18 (part), 2017; Ord. 02-04 (part), 2002)

17.31.040 Special provisions.
Where the standards of this section are in conflict with other requirements of this Land Use code, the more restrictive shall apply.
A. Building Design. All land uses and structures shall:
    1. Be placed on a slab-on-grade or perimeter foundation;
    2. Have a minimum twenty-four foot horizontal wall dimension on at least two non-opposite sides; i.e., other than directly opposite sides of the structure;
    3. Utilize indigenous, regional architectural styles and materials for all structures - use of standard corporate image architecture is prohibited. The architectural style of all structures shall be complementary to that of other structures in the area or vicinity;
    4. Exhibit a unity of design for buildings within multi-building complexes through the use of similar elements such as rooflines, materials, window arrangement, sign location, and details;
    5. Incorporate, within all walls over one hundred feet in length, at least four recesses, off-sets, balconies, angular forms and other features within each one hundred foot length to provide a visually interesting shape;
    6. Utilize medium to darker earth tones and non-reflective materials on all structures, including roofs, to minimize contrast and blend with the surrounding natural landscape without calling undue attention to the development.
B. Outdoor Lighting. All new development shall be required to shield the lamp (bulb) from view off site in accordance with Supplementary Regulations of Section 17.31.050.
C. Site Design. 
    1. Locate some or all of the structures on each lot directly adjacent to the front, Highway 191 (east side) or to the “build to” line (west side) as established by the Grand County North Corridor “Build To” Line Location Map unless it can be shown to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission that building to the front lot line or to the “build to” line is impractical because of topography. Parks and plazas can cover up to twenty percent of the frontage.
    2. Locate most, at least eighty percent, of required parking on the side or in the rear of each land use or structure;
    3. Provide public trails and/or sidewalks along all street frontages and as necessary to implement the trails plan illustrated on the Gateway Plan’s Future Land Use Plan. Trails and sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of city standards;
[See Gateway Plan for more illustrations.]
[IMAGE: <17.31.040.jpg>]
    4. Each lot shall include meaningful open space intended for use by all occupants of a development. This space may include recreation-oriented areas. In no case shall open space be less than twenty-five percent of the total lot area;
    5. Minimize new highway access points in accordance with the requirements of a site specific UDOT permit to be obtained for each new use or change in use;
        a. Provide cross or through-access connections to adjacent areas, where possible;
D. Parking Lots. Design parking areas so as to provide reasonable connectivity between adjacent parking areas on other sites without encouraging through traffic.
E. Landscaping. In addition to the supplementary regulations of Section 17.31.050(D), the following standards shall apply:
    1. Landscape Parking Lot Buffer. Maintain a minimum thirty-five foot depth landscape setting where parking occurs between a building and Highway 191 or its frontage roads. (Note: Parking behind buildings is preferred. Buildings may be built with zero front setbacks.)
    2. Break-up Large Parking Areas. Break-up large parking areas into smaller areas with intermittent landscaping and/or buildings. For parking lots over four thousand square feet, at least five percent of the interior of the lot shall be landscaped so as to define aisles and limit unbroken rows of parking. End of aisles and corner areas shall be curbed and landscaped. Unbroken parking rows shall not exceed one hundred fifty feet.
    3. Right-of-Way Landscaping. Landscaping of all street and highway rights-of-way contiguous to the proposed development site not used for street pavements, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, or driveways shall be required. Within private property, street trees shall be provided as required by Section 17.31.050(D). Any landscape areas in the public right-of-way shall comply with the criteria of the Utah Department of Transportation.
F. Signage. All signs shall comply with the requirements this Title provided, however, that notwithstanding provisions to the contrary:
    1. Illumination. Freestanding signs and wall signs may be illuminated indirectly or internally. Directional signs shall not be illuminated. Where internal illumination is employed, only the face area of the letters or logos may be illuminated and at least fifty percent of the sign face shall have an opaque background.
    2. Window signs. 
        a. Window signs may be internally illuminated with the use of exposed neon lighting; provided, however, that there shall be a maximum of one window sign per use.
        b. Such sign shall be limited to nine square feet per window panel.
        c. Sign copy shall be limited to business identification, “open” or “closed”, and a graphic symbol, or any combination thereof. In no case shall product signs be allowed.
        d. Freestanding Signs. All free-standing signs shall:
            i. Be monument-style; i.e., mounted on a base (above grade) of wood, brick or stone, which is detached from any building, and built with continuous background surface from the ground up;
            ii. Be limited to a maximum height of eight feet, a maximum width of ten feet, and a maximum square footage of twenty-four square feet; provided, however, where such a sign is not internally illuminated the maximum square footage shall be forty square feet;
            iii. Be placed within a landscaped setting containing not less than one hundred twenty square feet;
            iv. Be architecturally integrated with the building by including materials, shapes and/or colors utilized in the building design; and
            v. Identify the principal land use on site with one such sign per street frontage;
        e. Wall Signs. No part of a wall sign shall extend above a roof line, and all wall signs shall:
            i. Be architecturally integrated with the building by including materials, shapes and/or colors utilized in the building design;
            ii. Identify the principal land use on site with one such sign per street frontage;
            iii. Be limited to twenty-four square feet; provided, however, where such a sign is not internally illuminated the maximum square footage shall be forty square feet;
            iv. Be limited to a maximum height of five feet; and
            v. Such signs shall have a maximum width of ten feet;
        f. Directional Signs. Direction signs shall be allowable off-site to provide directions to businesses located within one thousand feet, provided:
            i. The maximum number for each driveway or street shall be one sign;
            ii. The maximum height shall be three feet;
            iii. The maximum area shall be four square feet;
            iv. The maximum area of a business name or logo shall be one square foot;
            v. Where a driveway is shared the maximum area of such sign shall be eight square feet;
            vi. Where a driveway is shared the maximum area of a business name or logo shall be two square feet. (Ord. 02-04 (part), 2002)

17.31.050 Supplementary regulations.
Notwithstanding other provisions of this title to the contrary, the following supplementary regulations shall apply to all development in the RC, Resort Commercial District:
A. Outdoor Lighting. An outdoor lighting plan shall be submitted with the site/development plan.
    1. All outdoor lighting shall be directed down or toward a surface.
    2. The light source or bulb for all outdoor lighting shall be shielded from view off-site.
    3. No outdoor lighting shall be directed towards any adjacent residential use or public street.
B. Gasoline Service Stations. All gasoline service station pumps shall be set back at least twenty feet from all property lines.
C. Recreational Vehicle/Travel Trailer Parks. A recreational vehicle/travel trailer park and incidental facilities shall comply with the standards in this section:
    1. RV/travel trailer parks shall be occupied only by persons using travel trailers, truck campers, small cabins without plumbing (traditional KOA-style), and tents for overnight, short duration, or seasonal camping;
    2. Each space RV/travel trailer space shall be at least one thousand two hundred square feet in area;
    3. Each cabin or tent space shall be at least eight hundred square feet in area;
    4. Each space shall be at least thirty feet in width;
    5. Each park shall be served by central water and sewer facilities;
    6. No space shall be located more than two hundred feet from a water and sewage service building;
    7. The City may require landscaping and screening pursuant to the provisions of the City code; and
    8. One tree of a species suitable for the area shall be provided for each two spaces, and shall be located in close proximity to those spaces. (Existing trees on the site may be used to satisfy this requirement.)
D. Landscaping and Screening. 
    1. Purpose. This section is designed to provide standards for the installation and maintenance of landscaping, walls and screening devices so as to promote the general welfare of the community. This is accomplished by encouraging the creation of an attractive appearance along streets and highways and by screening from view those uses that may be unattractive to the public eye. Landscaping materials, including ground covers, shrubs, and trees further facilitate the control of erosion and the reduction of glare and dust, as well as the visual softening of building masses. Low water use plant materials are preferred, but not required, for required landscaping. Walls and screening devices allow for the separation of incongruous uses and for the buffering of road noise and intensive activities. Landscaping, walls and screening devices together, help to effectuate privacy, logical development, and enhancement of property values.
    2. Applicability. This section shall apply to all multi-household and non-residential development, provided that a onetime expansion of the floor area of buildings on a lot or building tract not exceeding twenty-five percent of the existing floor area shall not be subject to the requirements of this article.
    3. General Requirements. 
        a. Landscape and Site Plan. Any proposed building or use shall be shown on a landscape and site plan indicating:
            i. The location of existing and proposed buildings, parking areas, street improvements;
            ii. Locations and general types of landscaped treatment areas i.e., lawn areas, low-water use areas, and inorganic areas;
            iii. Proposed plant or inorganic materials to be used in each treatment area;
            iv. The underground irrigation system to be used in each planted area; and
            v. Walls and screening devices.
        b. Location of Utilities. Proposed utilities shall be located, when possible, so that their installation will not adversely affect vegetation to be retained on a site.
        c. Installation. Landscaping, underground irrigation systems, walls and screening structures shall be installed in accordance with the approved landscape or screening plan prior to issuance of a final Certificate of Occupancy for the building or use. The building official may grant a temporary Certificate of Occupancy during the winter months when installation is impracticable or not feasible.
        d. Maintenance Requirements. 
            i. Landscaped areas shall be reasonably maintained by the owner or the lessee of the property, including pruning, trimming, watering, and other requirements necessary to create an attractive appearance for the development. Lack of maintenance of required landscaping material shall constitute a violation of this code.
            ii. Any plant materials not surviving shall be replaced within thirty days of its demise or in the next appropriate season.
        e. Landscaping Standards. All undeveloped areas of the street yard of each lot or tract and the adjacent right-of-way shall be landscaped with trees, shrubs, grasses, ground cover or other organic and inorganic materials that create an attractive appearance in accordance with the requirements of this section. Smooth concrete or asphalt surfaces are not considered landscaping.
            i. Shrubs, Trees and Grasses. Use of locally appropriate shrubs, trees and grasses or plants with low-water demand characteristics is encouraged, but not required, in all cases in order to minimize the consumption of water.
            ii. Trees. One tree shall be utilized per one thousand square feet or fraction thereof (in no case closer than thirty-five feet apart) of required landscaped area, provided, however, the Planning Commission may waive this requirement where it finds that trees are either impractical due to water supply problems or inappropriate to the natural setting; and,
            iii. Shrubs, Grasses, Ground Covers, and Inorganic Materials. Any combination of shrubs, grasses, ground covers, and inorganic materials may be used for the balance of the required landscaping at the developer’s discretion.
            iv. Existing Landscaping. To the extent practical, existing significant landscape features shall be preserved and incorporated into the final landscape and site plans. Existing landscaping may be used to meet the requirements of this Land Use Code if it meets the purpose and intent of this article and is included on the approved landscape plan. Such landscaping shall be protected during all phases of site development.
            v. Minimum Plant Sizes. The following minimum plant size requirements shall apply in all cases:
            +-----------------+--------------------------------------+
            |   Plant Type    |             Minimum Size             |
            +-----------------+--------------------------------------+
            | Deciduous Trees | 1-2 inch caliper (measured 1 foot    |
            |                 | above ground)                        |
            +-----------------+--------------------------------------+
            | Evergreen Trees | 6 feet tall                          |
            +-----------------+--------------------------------------+
            | Shrubs          | 5-gallon container size + 24 inches  |
            |                 | tall                                 |
            +-----------------+--------------------------------------+
            | Ground Cover    | 1-gallon container size with 12 inch |
            |                 | spread                               |
            +-----------------+--------------------------------------+
            vi. Irrigation. All required landscaped areas shall include a permanent, underground irrigation system as defined herein to insure the long-term health and growth of the landscape. Where possible, irrigation systems shall utilize untreated, irrigation water instead of treated water. Irrigation system design shall take into consideration the xeriscape characteristics of plant materials used.
            vii. Screening Standards. Where screening standards are required by this code, the following screening standards shall apply:
            viii. Screening Materials. Screening may be accomplished by the use of plants, earth berms, walls or fences, or trees and shrubs in combination as necessary to produce an effective screening from view off-site of the use or facility requiring screening within a reasonable time period.
            ix. Height of Screening Devices. The height of screening devices shall be measured from the highest finished adjacent grade of the element to be screened.
            x. Screening Plant List. Plants used to satisfy any required screening standards shall be limited plants with a mature height of between six and fifteen feet and foliage. For reference to appropriate plants and trees see the publication Urban & Community Forest: A Guide for interior Western United States, Department of Agriculture, 1990.
            xi. Parking Areas. The perimeter of all parking areas shall be screened to a minimum height of three feet above the highest finished grade of the parking area. The minimum width of the landscaped street buffer from the street line to the parking area shall be fifteen feet.
            xii. Outdoor Storage Areas. All outdoor storage areas for materials, trash, mechanical equipment, vehicles, or other similar items shall be screened from street view by a minimum six-foot high screening device. Such screening device shall consist either of plant material or a wall constructed of or finished with materials to match the main building of the site. (Ord. 19-13 § 21 (part), 2019; Ord. 02-04 (part), 2002)

Chapter 17.32 SAR, SENSITIVE AREA RESORT ZONE

Sections:
17.32.010    Objectives and characteristics.
17.32.020    Use regulations.
17.32.030    Area, width and location requirements.
17.32.040    Special provisions.
17.32.050    Supplementary regulations.

17.32.010 Objectives and characteristics.
A. The sensitive area resort zone [SAR Zone] has been established as a zone in which large-scale master planned resort communities can be established in a more creative fashion than is possible under conventional zoning. At the same time, the SAR zone preserves the spectacular beauty and natural character of the surrounding landscapes.
B. The SAR zone is designed to facilitate development in harmony with the surrounding landscape, natural formations, and vegetation. The SAR zone allows developers to create resort communities, intermixing private residences, overnight accommodations, and commercial activities in accord with resort operations and activities. A major aspect of the SAR zone is preservation of the natural feel and look of the landscape, preservation of internal and external view sheds, and emphasis on pedestrian and nonmotorized transportation within the developments themselves.
C. Characteristics of the SAR zone include:
    1. Promotion of large-scale master planned resort communities;
    2. A mix of housing types including overnight accommodations, monthly rentals, employee/workforce housing, and private homes in a variety of dwelling types, including one-household dwellings, multihousehold dwellings, lodges and hotels;
    3. Promotion of design concepts that minimize the disruption of ecological processes, thereby preserving the recreational and aesthetic character of the area;
    4. Building form, massing, and coloring that complements, rather than contrasts with, the surrounding landscapes;
    5. Building designs that present an appealing visual appearance;
    6. A de-emphasis on automobile travel within the development;
    7. Streets, parking areas and other automobile infrastructure that, to the extent practicable, are visually minimized;
    8. Buildings clustered together and an abundance of pedestrian and nonmotorized trails;
    9. Trail access from developments to nearby scenic and recreational areas;
    10. Significant preservation of open space;
    11. Preservation of existing topography by encouraging minimal excavation and site grading;
    12. Retail businesses primarily providing goods and services to overnight guests and to development residents;
    13. Special attention to limiting the effect of night lighting on surrounding areas and on the night sky. (Ord. 19-13 § 21 (part), 2019; Ord. 06-16 (part), 2006)

17.32.020 Use regulations.
A. Permitted Uses. Permitted uses include:
    1. Residential:
        Single-household dwellings;
        Multihousehold dwellings;
        Condominiums;
        Live/work units;
        Caretaker or guard residences;
        Employee/workforce housing.
    2. Overnight Accommodations:
        Hotels;
        Condominiums/town homes;
        Bed and breakfast.
    3. Retail and Commercial:
        Spas/personal care services;
        Restaurants (indoor and outdoor seating);
        Private clubs/taverns;
        Conference facilities;
        Recreational facilities (tennis courts, golf courses, stables, etc.);
        Theaters (indoor);
        Theaters (outdoor);
        Recreational tour companies, outfitters and guide services;
        Vehicle rental businesses (under five thousand square feet total floor space including outdoor storage);
        Individual retail units (under five thousand square feet total floor space);
        Grocery and convenience stores (under five thousand square feet total floor space);
        Art/photo galleries;
        Artisan/hand manufacturing;
        Professional offices;
        Home occupations;
        Parking lots associated with permitted uses.
    4. Public or Civic:
        Municipal facilities and services;
        Schools;
        Public buildings and public parks.
    5. Accessory:
        Accessory buildings and uses.
B. Prohibited Commercial Uses. Commercial uses shall be prohibited if the uses:
    1. Detract from the ambiance and character of a resort area;
    2. Create impediments to the enjoyment of the surrounding natural environment;
    3. Visually detract from the surrounding landscape; or
    4. Pose an environmental threat to wildlife, water resources, or other natural resources and attributes of the area.
Examples of prohibited uses include but are not limited to: industrial, manufacturing and warehousing businesses, automotive service facilities, retail outlets five thousand square feet or larger, gasoline and fuel stations, and freight transportation services. (Ord. 19-13 § 21 (part), 2019; Ord. 08-03 (part), 2008; Ord. 06-16 (part), 2006)

17.32.030 Area, width and location requirements.
A. Minimum Development Area. All development projects in the SAR zone must have a minimum of forty acres.
B. Area, Width, Location and Density. There shall be no area, width and location requirements within the SAR zone, with the exception that there shall be a maximum density of two dwelling units per acre. For the purposes of determining the maximum density of a development, total acreage of the development, including open space, shall be used.
C. Height Limits. Building and structure height limits shall be as follows:
    1. The maximum allowable height for residential and commercial buildings and structures shall be thirty feet.
    2. The maximum allowable height for accessory buildings shall be sixteen feet.
    3. Wireless telecommunications towers shall be permitted provided the conditions as set forth in Moab City Code Chapter 17.76 are met and that the towers’ design meets the intent of the SAR zone. (Ord. 06-16 (part), 2006)

17.32.040 Special provisions.
A. Master Planned Development Required. All development projects in the SAR zone shall be defined as master planned developments and shall follow the provisions of the master plan development ordinance.
B. Open Space. 
    1. A primary aim of the SAR zone is the preservation of the wide open character of Moab’s enveloping desert and canyon landscape. To maintain this character, clustering of buildings and structures shall be encouraged.
    2. All developments in the SAR zone shall reserve a minimum of seventy percent of the land as open space.
C. Landscaping. 
    1. Landscaping of open space shall be consistent with the natural vegetation and topography of the area with the exception of introduced shade trees.
D. View Shed Protection. 
    1. Significant natural features within the development parcel shall be preserved according to the requirements of the master planned developments ordinance.
    2. All development within the SAR zone shall be developed to minimize the visual contrast of colors and materials against the surrounding natural landscape.
    3. All buildings and structures within the SAR zone shall not break the horizon of nearby significant ridgelines when viewed from key observation points, as determined by the Planning Commission during the initial concept plan approval.
E. Streets and Streetscapes. 
    1. Public streets shall be designed and constructed in accordance with City of Moab Public Improvements Standards. Private streets within the SAR zone are allowed subject to the review and approval of the City Engineer.
    2. Streetscapes shall include narrow roads, low speed limits and other traffic calming measures where practicable.
    3. Streetscapes shall be designed to minimize the visual impact of automobiles and automobile infrastructure, such as driveways, garages, and parking lots.
    4. Utilizing technological advances in permeable paving within the SAR zone shall be encouraged.
F. Trails. 
    1. Developments within the SAR zone shall be pedestrian-friendly. Pedestrian and bicycle trails shall be extensive and shall provide a primary method of transportation within and between nodes of activity within SAR zone developments.
    2. Trails shall follow the natural topography wherever practicable.
    3. Pedestrian and bicycle trail systems shall provide access to trails leading to nearby recreational and scenic areas.
    4. Development within the SAR zone shall provide for permanent public access to surrounding public lands and nearby recreational and scenic areas.
    5. In lieu of sidewalks, developments may substitute an acceptable comprehensive nonmotorized trail system.
G. Parking. 
    1. Developments in the SAR zone shall be governed by the provisions of the Moab parking requirements in Supplementary Requirements and Procedures Applicable within Zones (Chapter 17.09 of this title) with the exception of the following:
        a. Curbing requirements in Section 17.09.330(A) and (C) may be waived provided that the applicant demonstrate acceptable alternative methods of controlling and limiting pavement deterioration, controlling erosion of nearby soils, and adequate control and channeling of stormwater.
    2. Parking areas shall be obscured from view as practicable. Parking areas that are colored to match and blend in with the surrounding landscape are encouraged and shall require less obscuration.
    3. Parking areas shall be located on the sides or behind structures wherever practicable.
    4. Accessory vehicles not stored in garages or in driveways shall be parked or stored in separate common parking areas obscured wherever practicable from vision from public roads by vegetation and landscape formations. Examples of accessory vehicles include but are not limited to trailers and vehicles towed by trailer or loaded on a truck bed.
    5. Accessory vehicle parking areas shall be situated and designed to minimize visible automobile infrastructure.
    6. Utilizing permeable surfaces for parking areas within the SAR zone shall be encouraged.
H. Outdoor Signs. Signage within the SAR zone shall be governed by the Moab Sign Code (Chapter 15.44 of the Moab City Code) with the exception of the following:
    1. One development entry sign shall be permitted at each entrance to the development.
    2. Development entry signs shall be monument or landscape wall signs no higher than eight feet above grade and limited to a maximum of twenty-four square feet (in the case of landscape wall signs, the letters, characters and logos shall be all contained within a twenty-four square foot section of the wall).
    3. One development complex sign identifying the businesses shall be permitted at each entrance to the development.
    4. Development complex signs shall be monument or landscape wall signs no higher than six feet above grade and limited to a maximum of eighteen square feet.
    5. Outdoor commercial signs within a development shall be limited to a maximum of eighteen square feet.
    6. Commercial signs shall be attached to buildings and shall be architecturally integrated into the design of the building.
    7. Commercial signs shall not exceed the height of the building rooflines.
    8. One outdoor commercial sign shall be allowed per business.
    9. Outdoor informational signs shall be limited to a maximum of twelve square feet and shall contain no commercial messages.
    10. Directional and way finding signs shall have a maximum height of six feet above grade and shall have a maximum size of four square feet. The company/business name and/or logo shall occupy no more than one square foot of the sign.
    11. Outdoor commercial freestanding signs shall be prohibited within the SAR zone.
    12. Internally illuminated outdoor signs shall be prohibited within the SAR zone.
    13. All signs must be nonflashing and stationary. Lighted signs shall be limited to full-cutoff fixtures.
I. Lighting. 
    1. All outdoor lighting shall be shielded from view off-site and shall be designed to reduce nighttime glare and impact on the night sky. All outdoor lighting shall have full-cutoff fixtures.
    2. All indoor lighting visible from outside shall be shielded or muted to reduce nighttime glare and impact on the night sky. All indoor lighting shall be designed to limit the emission of indoor light to the outdoors and off-site.
J. Building and Structure Design. 
    1. Buildings shall incorporate, within all walls over one hundred feet in length, at least four recesses, off-sets, balconies, angular forms and other features within each one hundred foot length to provide visually interesting shape.
    2. Buildings and structures, including roofs, shall be complementary with the color and of the surrounding landscape and shall not visually exhibit a high degree of contrast.
    3. Building and structures shall exhibit a unity of design within the development through the use of similar architectural styling elements such as rooflines, materials, window arrangement, sign location and details.
    4. Buildings and structures shall utilize nonreflective materials to minimize contrast and to blend with the surrounding natural landscape.
    5. Building design shall de-emphasize the garage as a principal feature of residential structures.
    6. Accessory buildings shall be of the same architecture and color as the associated main buildings.
    7. Outdoor storage areas for materials, trash, mechanical equipment, vehicles or other similar items shall be screened from public view by screening devices consisting of either plant material or a wall constructed of or finished with materials to match the main building of the site.
    8. All developments in the SAR zone shall submit illustrative drawings and architectural drawings indicating building and structure design, color and materials as part of the master planned development approval process. (Ord. 06-16 (part), 2006)

17.32.050 Supplementary regulations.
A. All development projects in the SAR zone must comply with the provisions of the Master Planned Development Ordinance (Chapter 17.65 of this title.)
B. See also Supplementary Requirements and Procedures Applicable Within Zones (Chapter 17.09 of this title).
C. See also Moab Sign Code (Chapter 15.44 of Moab City Code). (Ord. 06-16 (part), 2006)

Chapter 17.33 FW FLOODWAY ZONE

Sections:
17.33.010    Objectives and characteristics.
17.33.020    Definitions.
17.33.030    Use requirements.
17.33.040    Area, width and location requirements.
17.33.050    Specific regulations.
17.33.060    Enforcement and penalties.

17.33.010 Objectives and characteristics.
The primary purpose of the FW floodway zone is to facilitate the protection of life and property from damage due to flood events by ensuring that the creek channel and adjacent overbank areas necessary to convey flood flows will be permanently kept free of encroachments. Lands within this zone are characterized by the primary creek channel and adjacent riparian fringes, which are free of buildings, fences, and fill embankments that are likely to be damaged or which will likely cause a restriction to the free flow of floodwaters during recurring floods. (Ord. 15-05 (part), 2015: Ord. 09-06 (part), 2009; prior code § 27-12-1)

17.33.020 Definitions.
The following terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings set forth in this section.
“Flood hazard areas” identified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map are identified as a Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHA). SFHA are defined as the area that will be inundated by the flood event having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. The one percent annual chance flood is also referred to as the base flood or one-hundred-year flood.
“Floodplain” means an area of nearly flat low-lying ground along the course of a stream, river, or coast that is naturally subject to flooding.
“Floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.
[IMAGE: <17.33.020.jpg>]
“Flood zones” are geographic areas that FEMA has defined according to varying levels of flood risk. These zones are depicted on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or Flood Hazard Boundary Map and each zone reflects the severity or type of flooding in the specific area. (Ord. 15-05 (part), 2015)

17.33.030 Use requirements.
Only the following uses shall be permitted in the FW floodway zone:
A. Agricultural uses such as farming, truck gardening and the growing of nursery stock;
B. Pasturing of animals;
C. Revetments and other flood protection structures;
D. Public parks, trails, and open space;
E. Public transportation structures if “no rise” can be shown;
F. Fences as per requirements in Section 17.33.050; and
G. Maintenance of vegetation with a permit. (Ord. 15-05 (part), 2015: Ord. 09-06 (part), 2009; Ord. 08-03 (part), 2008; Ord. 94-12 (part), 1994; prior code § 27-12-2. Formerly 17.33.020)

17.33.040 Area, width and location requirements.
There shall be no regulations pertaining to area, width or location of building requirements in the FW floodway zone. (Ord. 15-05 (part), 2015: Ord. 09-06 (part), 2009; prior code § 27-12-3. Formerly 17.33.030)

17.33.050 Specific regulations.
The following use regulations shall apply:
A. Fences. Fences will be allowed only if it can be determined through an engineering study that they can satisfy a no-rise (less than or equal to zero feet) in the FEMA and community BFE.
    1. Exception. An engineering study may not be required for fences such as smooth or barbed wire fences that are constructed in a way that the fence will be pushed over or ripped out early in the flood or will swing in the direction of the flood flow. Fencing similar to the styles on pages 159-162 in the book, Fences, released by the Bureau of Land Management, United States Forest Service http://www.fs.fed.us/t-d/pubs/), and the Society for Range Management may also be considered as appropriate.
B. Planting or Removal of Trees and Shrubs. Deep-rooted vegetation within the flood channel provides critical protection against large scale erosion. However, dense stands of sturdy trees and woody shrubs can also obstruct the free flow of floodwaters. The best situation is scattered native trees with a dense groundcover of native shrubs and grasses that offer minimal resistance to the passage of floodwaters. No existing native vegetation shall be removed and no new trees shall be planted within the floodway without the written approval of the City floodplain administrator. For any clearing or revegetation activity, a stabilization plan is required to be submitted to the City for evaluation and approval by city staff.
C. Floodway to Be Kept Clear. The presence of debris such as fallen trees and tree limbs, construction materials, vehicles, or similar uses within the floodway represents a significant hazard to the community as the debris can be transported by the floodwaters and become lodged against one of the several bridge structures. The accumulation of debris or storage of materials is prohibited within the floodway. It shall be the property owner’s responsibility to keep the floodway portion of their property free of any such materials.
D. Prohibited Structures. No permanent structures such as sheds, dwellings, or permanent corrals shall be located in the floodway. (Ord. 15-05 (part), 2015: Ord. 09-06 (part), 2009; prior code § 27-12-4. Formerly 17.33.040)

17.33.060 Enforcement and penalties.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, altered, converted, or extended without full compliance with the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable regulations. Violations of this chapter by failing to comply with any of its requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter through noncompliance with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than one thousand dollars or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both, for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Such associated costs may include attorney fees, all court fees, staff time, and shall include costs associated with the abatement of the violation. Such costs may include, but are not limited to, removal of all prohibited barriers, structures, or fill. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Moab from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord. 15-05 (part), 2015: Ord. 09-06 (part), 2009. Formerly 17.33.050)

Chapter 17.35 MH/RV-1 MOBILE HOME/RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS ZONE

Sections:
17.35.010    Objectives and characteristics.
17.35.020    Permitted uses and regulations.
17.35.030    Area requirements.
17.35.040    Width requirements.
17.35.050    Location requirements.
17.35.060    Special provisions.
17.35.070    Supplementary regulations.

17.35.010 Objectives and characteristics.
The MH/RV-1 zone has been established for the primary purpose of providing for the development of mobile home and recreational vehicle parks in a quality environment. MH/RV-1 zone is not intended for the isolated lot, but shall be for use in areas where larger tracts of land are still available for development, and can be developed to a high standard of quality with landscaping, recreation facilities, etc. The minimum zone site shall be ten acres. (Ord. 87-07 (part), 1987)

17.35.020 Permitted uses and regulations.
A. Permitted Uses. The following uses shall be permitted-by-right. If a use is not listed it is prohibited.
    1. Accessory buildings and uses.
    2. Home occupations subject to the requirements set forth in Section 5.80.050.
    3. Mobile home parks.
    4. Park or playground.
    5. Recreational vehicle parks. The following provisions are intended to manage the development of RV parks within a mobile home park while minimizing land use conflicts and environmental degradation:
        a. Spaces may not be rented for less than thirty days.
        b. Trees and other landscaping serving as a buffer to other adjacent uses must surround the area for a minimum distance of fifteen feet. Landscaping shall be in accordance with the requirements of Section 17.09.360.
        c. A solid decorative privacy wall or wooden privacy fence shall be constructed and maintained around the park perimeter.
        d. A minimum separation of twenty feet shall be maintained between each RV unit.
        e. Adequate sanitation facilities and ADA facilities shall be provided and maintained for the maximum number of units as per the International Building Code Appendices.
        f. A minimum area of ten percent or two hundred square feet, whichever is greater, must be provided as open space for a playground and/or picnic area.
        g. Traffic patterns within the park and ingress and egress from adjacent streets shall be designed to minimize congestion at all intersections.
        h. Hours of operation shall be limited to six a.m. to ten p.m. for the office and other park facilities or be established by resolution of the Planning Commission. (Ord. 18-01 (part), 2018: Ord. 08-03 (part), 2008; Ord. 87-07 (part), 1987)

17.35.030 Area requirements.
See Chapter 15.36 for area requirements relating to mobile home and recreational vehicle parks. (Ord. 87-07 (part), 1987)

17.35.040 Width requirements.
See Chapter 15.36 for requirements relating to mobile home and recreational vehicle parks. (Ord. 87-07 (part), 1987)

17.35.050 Location requirements.
See Chapter 15.36 for location requirements relating to mobile home and recreational vehicle parks. (Ord. 87-07 (part), 1987)

17.35.060 Special provisions.
See Chapter 15.36 for special provisions requirements relating to mobile home and recreational vehicle parks. (Ord. 87-07 (part), 1987)

17.35.070 Supplementary regulations.
See also supplementary requirements and procedures applicable within zones (Chapter 17.09 of this title). (Ord. 87-07 (part), 1987)

Chapter 17.36 I-1 INDUSTRIAL ZONE

Sections:
17.36.010    Objectives and characteristics.
17.36.020    Permitted uses and regulations.
17.36.030    Area requirements.
17.36.040    Width requirements.
17.36.050    Location requirements.
17.36.060    Height requirements.
17.36.070    Special provisions.
17.36.080    Supplementary regulations.

17.36.010 Objectives and characteristics.
The I-1 industrial zone has been established for the primary purpose of providing a location where manufacturing, processing, warehousing and fabrication of goods and material can be carried on most appropriately and with minimum conflict or deleterious effects upon surrounding properties. Other objectives in establishing the zone are to promote the economic well-being of the people and to broaden the tax base.
This zone is characterized by a mixture of industrial, manufacturing and processing establishments with intermittent open land that is served by streets, power, water and other utilities and facilities, or where such facilities can be readily provided.
In order to accomplish the objectives and purposes of this title and to stabilize and protect the essential characteristics of this zone, the following regulations shall apply in the I-1 industrial zone. (Prior code § 27-13-1)

17.36.020 Permitted uses and regulations.
A. Permitted Uses. The following uses shall be permitted-by-right. If a use is not listed it is prohibited.
    1. Agriculture.
    2. Arts and crafts shops.
    3. Asphalt and concrete mixing plants. Asphalt or concrete batching plant for producing asphalt or concrete products used in construction activities on the same or nearby sites is permitted subject to the following standards:
        a. The batching plant site shall comply with all applicable provisions of City, State and Federal laws.
        b. The batching plant shall not be located within six hundred feet of a residence.
        c. Hours of operation will be limited to Monday through Friday, seven a.m. to seven p.m.
        d. The batch plant may operate for up to six months, with a single renewal of a six-month time period permitted by the Zoning Administrator.
        e. No portion of the batch plant or its operation shall be located on a public street.
        f. The batch plant shall only furnish concrete, asphalt, or both, to a specific project. The placement of a temporary batching plant for a private project is restricted to the site of the project.
        g. The site must be clear of all equipment, material and debris upon completion.
        h. All public improvements that are damaged during the operation of the temporary batching plant must be repaired or replaced within thirty days of completion of the project.
        i. At termination and/or removal of the plant operation, the operator shall have the person responsible walk the site with the Building Official or his/her designee to verify the site meets City approval.
    4. Automobile wrecking and salvage yards, when surrounded by a well-maintained sight obscuring fence constructed to a height of at least eight feet so that the material stored in the enclosure cannot be observed from any street adjacent to the yard.
    5. Caretaker dwelling consisting of a maximum footprint of eight hundred square feet when associated with a nonresidential use.
    6. Coal yards.
    7. Earthmoving equipment and equipment storage.
    8. Eating establishments.
    9. Farm machinery storage sheds.
    10. Gas and oil storage facilities.
    11. Gymnasiums.
    12. Livestock raising.
    13. Manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging, fabrication and warehousing of goods and materials. Does not include processing of animal by-products, livestock feed yards, steel manufacturing, oil refineries, wallboard manufacturing and similar establishments which emit offensive fumes, smoke, noise, odor, etc.
    14. Mines including gas and oil wells, gravel pits, sand pits, clay pits, rock quarries, rock crushers and associated buildings and accessory structures.
    15. Processing and packaging plants for fruits and vegetables.
    16. Professional offices. All professional offices in the industrial zone shall have a perimeter buffer area of fifteen feet in depth that shall be:
        a. Screened/buffered from adjacent properties by the use of decorative/solid wooden privacy fencing or decorative block walls. Fences/walls shall be constructed to a minimum of six feet in height when adjacent to other industrial uses and no less than eight feet when adjacent to residential zones.
        b. Landscaping shall be incorporated into the screening effort at the following rate:
            i. Landscape designs shall be in harmony with the environmental context of the site. Preservation of native, on-site vegetation shall be a primary objective of site planning for development. Specimen plants shall be given particular consideration for retention on site;
            ii. Wherever the undisturbed natural desert landscape cannot be preserved, landscape design and construction shall promote the use of transplanted, on-site desert plants, container plants, seeded desert plants and inorganic ground covers. This standard shall be particularly emphasized on all landscaped areas abutting public rights-of-way;
            iii. Trees shall be a minimum of fifteen gallons in size, or of comparable height if bare-rooted, at planting time. If twenty-four-inch box trees or transplanted trees of two-inch caliper or larger are planted for all of the required trees, a reduction of one required tree per one hundred linear feet will be allowed;
            iv. Trees shall be planted at appropriate intervals so that a continuous perimeter canopy will be provided at maturity and not be at a rate of less than four canopy trees and six understory trees per one hundred feet of buffer length;
            v. Shrubs shall be at least five gallons in size or at least thirty-inch-tall pots at planting time. Shrubs shall be either deciduous species planted at two and one-half feet in height with a mature height of at least six feet or a coniferous species planted at two and one-half feet in spread. Shrubs shall be planted at a rate of twenty-four shrubs for each one hundred feet of buffer length, or portion thereof;
            vi. Trees and shrubs shall be planted so that at maturity they do not interfere with service lines, traffic sight lines and the property rights of adjacent property owners;
            vii. Any tree placed in the sight visibility triangle must be of a box size large enough to be immediately pruned up to a seventy-two-inch height for clear sight visibility. All other trees shall be placed so that severe pruning is not required to keep the sight visibility triangle clear;
            viii. Trees located within sight visibility triangles shall not exceed one foot in their greatest cross-sectional dimension at maturity and shall not be planted in a line that could result in a solid wall effect when viewed at an angle;
            ix. Trees planted within ten feet of public sidewalks or curbs shall be provided with suitable root diverters to minimize heaving of those improvements; and
            x. Ground Cover. 
                (A) When inorganic ground covers are used they shall be in combination with live plants and not exceed two-thirds of the total area of applied ground covers.
                (B) The use of turf is prohibited.
                (C) Unpaved areas in any plant bed, median or tree understory within a planter shall be planted with shrubs, accents or vines, or covered with appropriate organic and inorganic ground covers.
                (D) All areas not required for buildings, access drives, parking spaces, trails, and accessory uses shall be landscaped.
        c. Maintenance and replacement of all vegetation is the responsibility of the owner(s) of the property. Dead or dying plants and trees shall be replaced immediately.
        d. All structures shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the adopted versions of the International Building Code.
        e. The total area covered by buildings shall not exceed fifty percent of the site.
    17. Public buildings. This use shall be allowed when in compliance with the following standards:
        a. The proposed use shall be situated on a tract of land sufficient in size to provide for the activities of the use as well as required landscaping, off-street parking, and trails;
        b. Landscaping, screening, and fencing shall be installed and maintained to mitigate impacts on surrounding residential uses;
        c. Parking areas shall be an all-weather surface such as concrete, asphalt or sealed gravel that will not generate dust or deposit gravel on paved roadways;
        d. Dust, glare, odor, and noise shall be confined within the boundaries of the property;
        e. Outside storage of equipment, materials, and supplies shall be contained and located within a building or a sight obscuring fence;
        f. The use shall demonstrate that there is a benefit to the neighborhood or community;
        g. Traffic from the proposed use shall not create a significant negative impact on the neighborhood.
    18. Retail commercial uses.
    19. Scenic railroads and railroad maintenance yards.
    20. Self-storage warehouses.
        a. All new self-storage warehouse facilities or expansions are subject to approval of a site plan as described in Chapter 17.67, Site Plan Review.
        b. All drives and parking area surfaces shall consist of a maintained all-weather dust free surface such as asphalt, concrete, bricks, pavers, cobblestones or some other porous surface, but gravel is not allowed.
        c. Drive lanes must be of a sufficient width to allow vehicles to pass when another is loading or unloading by a unit.
        d. Traffic impacts shall be evaluated and mitigated in accordance with Sections 17.67.040(M) and (N).
        e. Self-storage warehouses shall be screened/buffered from adjacent properties by the use of decorative/solid wooden privacy fencing or decorative block walls. Fences/walls shall be constructed to a minimum of six feet in height when adjacent to other commercial zones and no less than eight feet when adjacent to residential zones. Landscaping shall also be incorporated into the screening effort at the following rate:
            i. Landscape designs shall be in harmony with the environmental context of the development site. Preservation of native, on-site vegetation shall be a primary objective of site planning for development. Specimen plants shall be given particular consideration for retention on site.
            ii. Wherever the undisturbed natural desert landscape cannot be preserved, landscape design and construction shall promote the use of transplanted, on-site desert plants, container plants, seeded desert plants and inorganic ground covers. This standard shall be particularly emphasized on all landscaped areas abutting public rights-of-way.
            iii. Trees shall be a minimum of fifteen gallons in size, or of comparable height if bare-rooted, at planting time. If twenty-four-inch box trees or transplanted trees of two-inch caliper or larger are planted for all of the required trees, a reduction of one required tree per one hundred linear feet will be allowed.
                (A) Trees shall be planted at appropriate intervals so that a continuous perimeter canopy will be provided at maturity and not be at a rate of less than four canopy trees and six understory trees per one hundred feet of buffer length;
                (B) Trees and shrubs shall be planted so that at maturity they do not interfere with service lines, traffic sight lines and the property rights of adjacent property owners;
                (C) Any tree placed in the sight visibility triangle must be of a box size large enough to be immediately pruned up to a seventy-two-inch height for clear sight visibility. All other trees shall be placed so that severe pruning is not required to keep the sight visibility triangle clear.
            iv. Trees located within sight visibility triangles shall not exceed one foot in their greatest cross-sectional dimension at maturity and shall not be planted in a line that could result in a solid wall effect when viewed at an angle; and
                (A) Trees planted within ten feet of public sidewalks or curbs shall be provided with suitable root diverters to minimize heaving of those improvements.
            v. Ground Covers. 
                (A) When inorganic ground covers are used they shall be in combination with live plants and not exceed two-thirds of the total area of applied ground covers.
                (B) Turf use is prohibited.
                (C) Unpaved areas in any plant bed, median or tree understory within a planter shall be planted with shrubs, accents or vines, or covered with appropriate organic and inorganic ground covers.
                (D) All areas not required for buildings, access drives, parking spaces, trails, and accessory uses shall be landscaped.
            vi. Shrubs. 
                (A) Shrubs shall be either deciduous species planted at two and one-half feet in height with a mature height of at least six feet or a coniferous species planted at two and one-half feet in spread. Shrubs shall be at least five gallons in size or at least thirty-inch-tall pots at planting time;
                (B) Shrubs shall be planted at a rate of twenty-four shrubs for each one hundred feet of buffer length, or a portion thereof.
        f. Maintenance and replacement of all vegetation is the responsibility of the owner(s) of the property.
        g. Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the requirements above. Landscaped screening shall be provided and maintained along the perimeter of the property and consist of ten feet in depth.
        h. All structures shall be maintained in accordance with the adopted version of the International Property Maintenance Code.
        i. The lot size shall be between a minimum of two acres and a maximum of five acres.
        j. The total area covered by buildings shall not exceed fifty percent of the site.
        k. The maximum height of the enclosed building or buildings permitted shall not exceed twenty feet.
        l. No outside storage is permitted except for large vehicles and boats that are under a permanent cover. The permanent cover shall not exceed twenty-four feet in height.
        m. The storage of hazardous, toxic, or explosive substances, including, but not limited to, hazardous waste, industrial solid waste, medical waste, municipal solid waste, septage, or used oil, is prohibited.
        n. No business activity other than the rental of storage units shall be conducted on the premises.
        o. One dwelling unit is permitted on the same lot for use as a caretaker dwelling.
    21. Tire recapping establishments.
    22. Utility provider structures. New construction of water lines, sewer lines and electric substations and structures may be constructed subject to the approval of the Planning Commission and Council with a review of a subdivision plat. Such construction is not required to apply for a separate permit but must satisfy the requirements below. Expansions of existing facilities are also subject to the approval of the Planning Commission and Council, and subject to the standards below. The Planning Commission may require standards in accordance with the following language that are reasonably necessary to protect surrounding property values and residential amenities:
        a. These types of facilities include but are not limited to:
            i. Electrical utility facility, provided transmission lines are excluded from the requirements of this section if visibility is essential to safety, security, or maintenance access;
            ii. Solid waste disposal facility;
            iii. Water pumping plants and pipelines;
            iv. Public utility buildings and structures (except power plants);
            v. Flood control structures;
            vi. Substations;
            vii. Sewage treatment plants subject to review and approval of the State Department of Health.
        b. Site Standards. 
            i. Architectural Form and Character. A building housing all or a majority of a utility facility must be compatible with the architectural form of surrounding buildings. This requirement is not applicable to a utility facility where significant elements of the facility are not housed inside of a building or to isolated minor elements such as pad mounted transformers, telephone pedestals and metering stations.
            ii. Screening and Fence Requirements. A utility facility must be site screened with landscaping and/or fencing. Landscape development shall include retention of significant trees, as necessary to maintain and protect property values, to enhance the visual appearance of the City, to preserve the natural character of the area, to promote utilization of natural systems, to reduce the impacts of development on the storm drainage system and water resources, and to provide a better transition between the various land uses permitted in the City.
                (A) The Planning Department and Community Development Director shall review the proposed landscape plan with each application and make a recommendation to the Planning Commission.
                (B) The applicant shall provide site perimeter landscaping that consists of a minimum width of ten feet and includes:
                    (1) Evergreen and deciduous trees, with no more than fifty percent being deciduous, a minimum of six feet in height, and planted at intervals no greater than thirty feet on center;
                    (2) A minimum of three and one-half feet in height, and living ground cover planted so that the ground will be covered within three years.
            iii. If planted to buffer a parking area, access, or site development other than a building, any of the following alternatives may be used unless otherwise noted:
                (A) Shrubs, a minimum of three and one-half feet in height, and living ground cover must be planted so that the ground will be covered within three years.
                (B) Earth-mounding, an average of three and one-half feet in height, planted with shrubs or living ground cover so that the ground will be covered within three years. This alternative may not be used in a downtown land use district.
                (C) A combination of earth-mounding and shrubs to produce a visual barrier at least three and one-half feet in height.
            iv. Equipment and vehicle storage yards require fifteen feet of landscaping on all sides if visible from a public right-of-way.
            v. Parking Area Landscaping. Parking areas require landscaping as follows in addition to any site perimeter landscaping as required.
            vi. Alternative landscaping may be approved by the Planning Commission if the landscaping will provide the desired screening as noted below:
                (A) The proposed landscaping represents an equal or better result than that which could be achieved by strictly following the requirements of this section; and
                (B) The proposed landscaping either:
                    (1) Incorporates the increased retention of significant trees and naturally occurring undergrowth;
                    (2) Better accommodates or improves the existing physical conditions of the subject property;
                    (3) Incorporates elements to provide for wind protection or to maintain solar access;
                    (4) Incorporates elements to protect or improve water quality; or
                    (5) Incorporates native species in a design that buffers a critical area from uses on the site, including parking.
    23. Wireless telecommunication towers subject to the regulations set forth in Chapter 17.76. (Ord. 18-01 (part), 2018: Ord. 18-10, 2018; Ord. 17-21 (part), 2017; Ord. 13-14 (part), 2013: Ord. 08-03 (part), 2008; Ord. 94-12 (part), 1994; prior code § 27-13-2)

17.36.030 Area requirements.
There shall be no area requirements, except that an area sufficient to accommodate location requirements, off-street parking, loading and unloading and vehicular access shall be provided and maintained. (Prior code § 27-13-3)

17.36.040 Width requirements.
Width requirements in the I-1 industrial zone shall be as follows:
No requirements. (Prior code § 27-13-4)

17.36.050 Location requirements.
A. Front Setback. All buildings and structures shall be set back at least twenty-five feet from the front lot line, or fifty-five feet from the centerline of the road, whichever is greater. (Ord. 13-14 (part), 2013: prior code § 27-13-5)

17.36.060 Height requirements.
The maximum building height allowed in the I-1 zone is forty feet. (Ord. 17-14, 2017: prior code § 27-13-6)

17.36.070 Special provisions.
A landscaped strip of at least fifteen feet in width adjacent to the front property line shall be landscaped, except across driveways. The front yard of any caretaker dwelling shall also be landscaped. (Prior code § 27-13-7)

17.36.080 Supplementary regulations.
See also Supplementary Requirements and Procedures Applicable Within Zones (Chapter 17.09 of this title). (Prior code § 27-13-8)

Chapter 17.37 RESERVED1
1 Editor’s note: Ord. No. 09-07, adopted June 9, 2009, repealed Ch. 17.37 §§ 17.37.010--17.37.050, which pertained to the O-1 office-residential zone and derived from Ord. No. 94-15, 1994 and Ord. No. 08-03, 2008.

Chapter 17.42 R-1 SINGLE-HOUSEHOLD RESIDENTIAL ZONE

Sections:
17.42.010    Objectives and characteristics.
17.42.020    Permitted uses and regulations.
17.42.030    Area requirements.
17.42.040    Width requirements.
17.42.050    Location requirements.
17.42.060    Special requirements.
17.42.070    Supplementary regulations.

17.42.010 Objectives and characteristics.
The objective in establishing the R-1 residential zone is to encourage creation and maintenance of a residential area within the City which is characterized by large lots on which single-household dwellings are situated, surrounded by well-kept lawns, trees and other plantings, or other normally accepted landscaping. A minimum of vehicular and pedestrian traffic and quiet residential conditions favorable to household living and the rearing of children shall also be characteristic of this zone.
In order to accomplish the objectives and purposes of this title and to promote the characteristics of this zone, the regulations set out in this chapter shall apply in the R-1 residential zone. (Ord. 19-13 § 21 (part), 2019; prior code § 27-15-1)

17.42.020 Permitted uses and regulations.
A. Permitted Uses. The following uses shall be permitted-by-right. If a use is not listed it is prohibited.
    1. Accessory dwelling units (“ADUs”) as per Chapter 17.70.
    2. Agriculture.
    3. Day care. Day care shall be permitted to operate subject to the following standards:
        a. City of Moab business license is required.
        b. A valid day care license or certificate as issued by the State of Utah is required.
        c. Applicants for a City business license shall submit a conceptual site plan that indicates:
            i. Ingress and egress to the property;
            ii. Drop off/pick up areas;
            iii. Traffic circulation;
            iv. Off-street parking (single-household residence plus space for each FTE staff member);
            v. Landscaping;
            vi. Buffering or separation from dissimilar uses;
            vii. Open space for older kids.
        d. Compliance with all applicable City regulations regarding noise, odor and glare.
    4. Group home.
        a. Such homes must be licensed by the State of Utah.
        b. All exterior aspects of a group home, including its scale and off-street parking configuration, shall conform with the requirements of the R-1 zone.
        c. Such homes shall provide off-street parking pursuant to Sections 17.09.210 through 17.09.340.
        d. Such homes may provide living arrangements for not more than eight residents per home (excluding supervisory personnel).
    5. Home occupations subject to the requirements set forth in Section 5.80.050.
    6. One-household dwellings and accessory uses.
    7. Places of worship. All places of worship shall be subject to the regulations established by Utah State Code Annotated (“UCA”). The Planning Department, in accordance with Chapter 17.67, shall receive a complete site plan which demonstrates that:
        a. Traffic impacts are minimized so that on-street vehicle flows will not be impeded.
        b. Noise, odor, and glare is contained on the property.
        c. Landscaping shall be completed in accordance with the provisions located in Sections 17.09.360 (Landscaping – Required) and 17.09.370 (Landscaping – Specifications generally). A minimum of fifteen percent of the interior of the parking areas must be landscaped. Trees shall be utilized to provide shade for vehicles and must be of a sufficient size and placement to provide shade to forty percent of the parking area within three years.
        d. Possible impacts on adjacent streets, sidewalks, and bike/pedestrian routes have been identified and reduced to minimum levels.
        e. Adequate parking for the intended use is provided.
    8. Planned unit developments subject to the requirements set forth in Chapter 17.66.
    9. Public facilities. This type of use shall be allowed in compliance with the following standards:
        a. The proposed use shall be situated on a tract of land sufficient in size to provide for the activities of the use as well as required landscaping, off-street parking, and trails;
        b. Landscaping, screening, and fencing shall be installed and maintained to mitigate impacts on surrounding residential uses;
        c. Parking areas shall be an all-weather surface such as concrete, asphalt or sealed gravel that will not generate dust or deposit gravel on paved roadways;
        d. Compliance with all applicable City regulations regarding noise, odor and glare;
        e. Outside storage of equipment, materials, and supplies shall be contained and located within a building or a sight obscuring fence;
        f. The use shall demonstrate that there is a benefit to the neighborhood or community;
        g. The proposed use shall not generate traffic in excess of the level of traffic associated with the number of residential dwellings that could be permitted on the parcel.
    10. Public libraries.
    11. Public parks and public recreation buildings.
    12. Schools. All schools shall be subject to the regulations established by Utah State Code Annotated. The City, in accordance with Chapter 17.67, shall receive a complete site plan showing that:
        a. Traffic impacts are minimized so that on-street vehicle flows will not be impeded.
        b. Possible impacts to adjacent streets, sidewalks, and bike/pedestrian routes have been identified and reduced to minimum levels. (Ord. 19-13 § 21 (part), 2019; Ord. 18-01 (part), 2018: Ord. 12-05 (part), 2012; Ord. 95-17 (part), 1995; prior code § 27-15-2)

17.42.030 Area requirements.
An area of not less than ten thousand square feet shall be provided and maintained for each one-household dwelling and uses accessory thereto and at least twenty thousand square feet for all other buildings.
An area of not less than five acres shall be provided and maintained for each planned unit development, except that there shall be no area requirements for additions to an approved planned unit development. (Ord. 19-13 § 21 (part), 2019; prior code § 27-15-3)

17.42.040 Width requirements.
The minimum width of any building site for a dwelling shall be ninety linear feet. (Ord. 97-25 (part), 1997)

17.42.050 Location requirements.
A. Front Setback. All buildings and structures shall be set back at least twenty-five feet from the front lot line or fifty-five feet from the centerline of any public street, whichever is greater.
B. Side Setback. All dwellings shall be set back from the side property line a distance of at least ten feet and the total distance of the two side setbacks shall be at least twenty-four feet. On corner lots, the side setback from any street shall not be less than twenty feet from the property line.
C. Rear Setback. For interior lots, all dwellings and other main buildings shall be set back from the rear property line a distance of at least fifteen feet. For corner lots, all dwellings and other main buildings shall be set back from the rear property line a distance of at least twenty feet.
D. The minimum side setback for accessory buildings on interior and corner lots is listed in Section 17.09.560, Accessory use or structure. (Ord. 19-13 § 10, 2019; Ord. 10-14, 2010; Ord. 97-25 (part), 1997: prior code § 27-15-4)

17.42.060 Special requirements.
The following special provisions shall apply in this zone in order to protect its essential characteristics and to promote the purpose of this title:
A. The ground floor area of the primary dwelling shall be at least one thousand two hundred square feet.
B. The maximum density in a planned unit development shall not exceed five dwellings per acre of land contained within the development. (Ord. 18-01 (part), 2018: Ord. 97-25 (part), 1997: prior code § 27-15-5)

17.42.070 Supplementary regulations.
See also Supplementary Requirements and Procedures Applicable Within Zones (Chapter 17.09 of this title). (Ord. 97-25 (part), 1997: prior code § 27-15-6)

Chapter 17.45 R-2 SINGLE-HOUSEHOLD AND TWO-HOUSEHOLD RESIDENTIAL ZONE

Sections:
17.45.010    Objectives and characteristics.
17.45.020    Permitted uses and regulations.
17.45.030    Area requirements.
17.45.040    Width requirements.
17.45.050    Location requirements.
17.45.060    Special requirements.
17.45.070    Supplementary regulations.

17.45.010 Objectives and characteristics.
The objective in establishing the R-2 residential zone is to provide a residential environment within the City which is characterized by smaller lots and somewhat denser residential environment than is characteristic of the R-1 residential zone. Nevertheless, this zone is characterized by spacious yards and other residential amenities adequate to maintain desirable residential conditions. The principal uses permitted in this zone shall be one-household and two-household dwellings and certain other public facilities needed to promote and maintain stable residential neighborhoods.
In order to accomplish the objectives and purposes of this title, and to promote the essential characteristics of this zone, the regulations set out in this chapter shall apply in the R-2 residential zone. (Ord. 19-13 § 21 (part), 2019; prior code § 27-16-1)

17.45.020 Permitted uses and regulations.
A. Permitted Uses. The following uses shall be permitted-by-right. If a use is not listed it is prohibited.
    1. Accessory dwelling units as per Chapter 17.70.
    2. Agriculture.
    3. Day care. Day care shall be permitted to operate subject to the following standards:
        a. City of Moab business license is required.
        b. A valid day care license or certificate as issued by the State of Utah is required.
        c. Applicants for a City business license shall submit a conceptual site plan that indicates:
            i. Ingress and egress to the property;
            ii. Drop off/pick up areas;
            iii. Traffic circulation;
            iv. Off-street parking (single-household residence plus space for each FTE staff member);
            v. Landscaping;
            vi. Buffering or separation from dissimilar uses;
            vii. Open space for older kids.
        d. Compliance with all applicable City regulations regarding noise, odor and glare.
    4. Foster care homes.
    5. Group home.
        a. Such homes must be licensed by the State of Utah.
        b. All exterior aspects of a group home, including its scale and off-street parking configuration, shall conform with the requirements of the R-2 zone.
        c. Such homes shall provide off-street parking pursuant to Sections 17.09.210 through 17.09.340.
        d. Such homes may provide living arrangements for not more than twelve residents per home (excluding supervisory personnel).
    6. Home occupations subject to the requirements set forth in Section 5.80.050.
    7. One-household dwellings and accessory uses.
    8. Places of worship. All places of worship shall be subject to the regulations established by Utah State Code Annotated (“UCA”). The Planning Department, in accordance with Chapter 17.67, shall receive a complete site plan which demonstrates that:
        a. Traffic impacts are minimized so that on-street vehicle flows will not be impeded.
        b. Noise, odor, and glare is contained on the property.
        c. Landscaping shall be completed in accordance with the provisions located in Sections 17.09.360 (Landscaping – Required) and 17.09.370 (Landscaping – Specifications generally). A minimum of fifteen percent of the interior of the parking areas must be landscaped. Trees shall be utilized to provide shade for vehicles and must be of a sufficient size and placement to provide shade to forty percent of the parking area within three years.
        d. Possible impacts on adjacent streets, sidewalks, and bike/pedestrian routes have been identified and reduced to minimum levels.
        e. Adequate parking for the intended use is provided.
    9. Planned unit developments subject to the requirements set forth in Chapter 17.66.
    10. Public facilities. This type of use shall be allowed in compliance with the following standards:
        a. The proposed use shall be situated on a tract of land sufficient in size to provide for the activities of the use as well as required landscaping, off-street parking, and trails;
        b. Landscaping, screening, and fencing shall be installed and maintained to mitigate impacts on surrounding residential uses;
        c. Parking areas shall be an all-weather surface such as concrete, asphalt or sealed gravel that will not generate dust or deposit gravel on paved roadways;
        d. Compliance with all applicable City regulations regarding noise, odor and glare;
        e. Outside storage of equipment, materials, and supplies shall be contained and located within a building or a sight obscuring fence;
        f. The use shall demonstrate that there is a benefit to the neighborhood or community;
        g. The proposed use shall not generate traffic in excess of the level of traffic associated with the number of residential dwellings that could be permitted on the parcel.
    11. Public libraries.
    12. Public parks and public recreation buildings.
    13. Schools. All schools shall be subject to the regulations established by Utah State Code Annotated. The City, in accordance with Chapter 17.67, shall receive a complete site plan showing that:
        a. Traffic impacts are minimized so that on-street vehicle flows will not be impeded.
        b. Possible impacts to adjacent streets, sidewalks, and bike/pedestrian routes have been identified and reduced to minimum levels.
    14. Two-household dwellings and accessory uses. (Ord. 19-13 § 21 (part), 2019; Ord. 18-01 (part), 2018: Ord. 12-05 (part), 2012; Ord. 11-01 (part), 2011; Ord. 97-26, 1997; prior code § 27-16-2)

17.45.030 Area requirements.
An area of not less than five thousand square feet shall be provided and maintained for each one-household dwelling and uses thereto. For two-household dwellings the lot size shall consist of a minimum of three thousand square feet per dwelling. For child day care centers and foster household care homes the building site shall contain at least ten thousand square feet. An area of not less than five acres shall be provided and maintained for each planned unit development, except that there shall be no area requirements for additions to an approved planned unit development. All church buildings shall have a building site area in which the area of the building is equal to or less than twenty percent of the total parcel size area. (Ord. 19-13 § 21 (part), 2019; Ord. 13-01 (part), 2013: Ord. 99-04 (part), 1999: Ord. 97-03, 1997: prior code § 27-16-3)

17.45.040 Width requirements.
The minimum width of any building site for a one-household dwelling or other building shall be fifty linear feet, measured at a distance of fifteen feet back from the front lot line. (Ord. 19-13 § 21 (part), 2019; Ord. 13-01 (part), 2013: Ord. 11-15 (part), 2011; Ord. 99-04 (part), 1999: prior code § 27-16-4)

17.45.050 Location requirements.
A. Front Setback. The minimum front setback for main buildings shall be fifteen feet.
B. Side Setback. The minimum side setback for any dwelling or any other main building shall be seven feet; provided, that the minimum distance between dwellings located on the same or adjoining lots shall be ten feet. On corner lots, the side yard which faces on a street shall be not less than fifteen feet or seventy-five percent of the front yard setback.
C. Rear Setback. The minimum rear setback for any main building shall be twelve feet. (Ord. 19-13 § 11, 2019; Ord. 13-01 (part), 2013: Ord. 10-14 (part), 2010; Ord. 95-17, 1995; prior code § 27-16-5)

17.45.060 Special requirements.
The following special provisions shall apply in this zone in order to protect its essential characteristics and to promote the purpose of this title:
A. The ground floor area of the primary dwellings shall be at least five hundred square feet.
B. The maximum permitted density of planned unit developments shall be eight dwelling units per acre of land contained within the development. (Ord. 18-01 (part), 2018: Ord. 13-01 (part), 2013; Ord. 93-22, 1993: prior code § 27-16-6)

17.45.070 Supplementary regulations.
See Supplementary Requirements and Procedures Applicable Within Zones (Chapter 17.09 of this title). (Prior code § 27-16-7)

Chapter 17.48 R-3 MULTI-HOUSEHOLD RESIDENTIAL ZONE

Sections:
17.48.010    Objectives and characteristics.
17.48.020    Permitted uses and regulations.
17.48.030    Area requirements.
17.48.040    Width requirements.
17.48.050    Location requirements.
17.48.060    Special provisions.
17.48.070    Supplementary provisions.

17.48.010 Objectives and characteristics.
The objective in establishing the R-3 residential zone is to provide appropriate locations within the City for high density residential development. In general, this zone is located in the central part of the City, adjacent to commercial areas where the impact of vehicular travel and parking is consonant with adjacent use of land, and where multiple dwellings can best be supplied with necessary public facilities. This zone is characterized by more compact development and somewhat higher volumes of traffic than is characteristic of the R-1 and R-2 zones.
Representative of the uses within the R-3 zone are one-household, two-household, three-household and four-household dwellings and apartment houses, and related community facilities. However, commercial and industrial uses are prohibited therein.
Owners and developers of property should bear in mind that primacy is given to multiple household dwellings, boarding houses, rest homes and other high density residential uses, and should develop and maintain their property in recognition thereof.
In order to accomplish the objectives and purposes of this title and to promote the characteristics of this zone, the following regulations shall apply in the R-3 residential zone. (Ord. 19-13 § 21 (part), 2019; prior code § 27-17-1)

17.48.020 Permitted uses and regulations.
A. Permitted Uses. The following uses shall be permitted-by-right. If a use is not listed it is prohibited.
    1. Accessory dwelling units as per Chapter 17.70.
    2. Agriculture.
    3. Day care. Day care shall be permitted to operate subject to the following standards:
        a. City of Moab business license is required.
        b. A valid day care license or certificate as issued by the State of Utah is required.
        c. Applicants for a City business license shall submit a conceptual site plan that indicates:
            i. Ingress and egress to the property;
            ii. Drop off/pick up areas;
            iii. Traffic circulation;
            iv. Off-street parking (single-household residence plus space for each FTE staff member);
            v. Landscaping;
            vi. Buffering or separation from dissimilar uses;
            vii. Open space for older kids.
        d. Compliance with all applicable City regulations regarding noise, odor and glare.
    4. Foster care homes.
    5. Group homes.
        a. Such homes must be licensed by the State of Utah.
        b. All exterior aspects of a group home, including its scale and off-street parking configuration, shall conform with the requirements of the R-3 zone.
        c. Such homes shall provide off-street parking pursuant to Sections 17.09.210 through 17.09.340.
        d. Such homes may provide living arrangements for not more than sixteen residents per home (excluding supervisory personnel).
    6. Home occupations subject to the requirements set forth in Section 5.80.050.
    7. Multi-household dwellings. Developments consisting of seven or more multi-household units shall be subject to the following additional requirements:
        a. Access. Vehicular access shall be provided to the property in such a way that it does not impede traffic patterns on adjacent streets.
        b. Parking. Off-street parking shall be designed in such a way as to allow vehicles to pull forward into the on-street traffic flow.
        c. Garages or Carports. If provided, garages and carports shall not be located in the front yard and shall be set back from the front wall of the principal structure at least fifteen feet or be accessed from the rear or side of the property.
        d. Landscaping. All off-street parking shall be landscaped and buffered from adjacent uses. A minimum of fifteen percent of the interior of the parking area shall be landscaped to provide shade and break up the expanse of asphalt.
        e. Buffering. All adjacent uses shall be buffered by a distance of not less than fifteen feet and contain berms, shrubs, and other plantings. Buffering may be combined with screens, fences and hedges.
        f. Apartments and court apartments shall designate an open space/recreation area that is a minimum of two hundred square feet in size to be developed into recreation, play or landscaped areas. The requirement can be met with the construction of a recreation room (“rec room”) or club house of a similarly sized area that can be used for residents and their guests for recreation/social activities and/or relaxation.
        g. The allowed number of multi-household units shall be determined by Section 17.48.030.
    8. One-household dwellings and accessory uses.
    9. Places of worship. All places of worship shall be subject to the regulations established by Utah State Code Annotated (“UCA”). The Planning Department, in accordance with Chapter 17.67, shall receive a complete site plan which demonstrates that:
        a. Traffic impacts are minimized so that on-street vehicle flows will not be impeded.
        b. Noise, odor, and glare is contained on the property.
        c. Landscaping shall be completed in accordance with the provisions located in Sections 17.09.360 (Landscaping – Required) and 17.09.370 (Landscaping – Specifications generally). A minimum of fifteen percent of the interior of the parking areas must be landscaped. Trees shall be utilized to provide shade for vehicles and must be of a sufficient size and placement to provide shade to forty percent of the parking area within three years.
        d. Possible impacts on adjacent streets, sidewalks, and bike/pedestrian routes have been identified and reduced to minimum levels.
        e. Adequate parking for the intended use is provided.
    10. Planned unit developments subject to the requirements set forth in Chapter 17.66.
    11. Public facilities. This type of use shall be allowed in compliance with the following standards:
        a. The proposed use shall be situated on a tract of land sufficient in size to provide for the activities of the use as well as required landscaping, off-street parking, and trails;
        b. Landscaping, screening, and fencing shall be installed and maintained to mitigate impacts on surrounding residential uses;
        c. Parking areas shall be an all-weather surface such as concrete, asphalt or sealed gravel that will not generate dust or deposit gravel on paved roadways;
        d. Compliance with all applicable City regulations regarding noise, odor and glare;
        e. Outside storage of equipment, materials, and supplies shall be contained and located within a building or a sight obscuring fence;
        f. The use shall demonstrate that there is a benefit to the neighborhood or community;
        g. The proposed use shall not generate traffic in excess of the level of traffic associated with the number of residential dwellings that could be permitted on the parcel.
    12. Public libraries.
    13. Public parks and public recreation buildings.
    14. Schools. All schools shall be subject to the regulations established by Utah State Code Annotated. The City, in accordance with Chapter 17.67, shall receive a complete site plan showing that:
        a. Traffic impacts are minimized so that on-street vehicle flows will not be impeded.
        b. Possible impacts to adjacent streets, sidewalks, and bike/pedestrian routes have been identified and reduced to minimum levels.
    15. Two-household dwellings and accessory uses. (Ord. 19-13 § 21 (part), 2019; Ord. 18-01 (part), 2018: Ord. 12-05 (part), 2012; prior code § 27-17-2)

17.48.030 Area requirements.
An area of not less than five thousand square feet shall be provided and maintained for each one-household dwelling and two-household dwellings. All other multi-household development shall provide a minimum of two thousand square feet per unit for three-household dwellings and above. Schools, churches, boarding houses and other main buildings shall have a building site area in which the area of the building is equal to or less than twenty percent of the total parcel size area.
An area of not less than three acres shall be provided and maintained for each planned unit development, except that there shall be no area requirements for additions to an approved planned unit development. (Ord. 19-13 § 21 (part), 2019; Ord. 13-01 (part), 2013: Ord. 97-04, 1997: prior code § 27-17-3)

17.48.040 Width requirements.
The minimum width of any building site for a one-household dwelling or other buildings shall be fifty linear feet measured at a distance twenty-five feet back from the front lot line. (Ord. 19-13 § 21 (part), 2019; Ord. 13-01 (part), 2013: Ord. 11-15 (part), 2011; prior code § 27-17-4)

17.48.050 Location requirements.
A. Front Setback. The minimum front setback for main buildings shall be fifteen feet. No accessory building shall be constructed on a lot prior to the main building.
B. Side Setback. The minimum side setback for any dwelling or any other main building shall be seven feet; provided, that the minimum distance between dwellings located on the same or adjoining lots shall be more than ten feet. On corner lots, the side yard that faces on a street shall be not less than twelve feet.
C. Rear Setback. The minimum rear setback for any main building shall be twelve feet.
D. The minimum side setback for accessory buildings on interior and corner lots is listed in Section 17.09.560, Accessory use or structure. (Ord. 19-13 §§ 12, 13, 2019; Ord. 13-01 (part), 2013: Ord. 10-14 (part), 2010; prior code § 27-17-5)

17.48.060 Special provisions.
The following special provisions shall apply in this zone in order to protect its essential characteristics and to promote the purpose of this title:
A. The ground floor area of the primary dwelling shall be at least five hundred square feet.
B. The maximum permitted density of planned unit developments shall be ten units per acre of land contained within the development. (Ord. 18-01 (part), 2018: prior code § 27-17-6)

17.48.070 Supplementary provisions.
See Supplementary Requirements and Procedures Applicable Within Zones (Chapter 17.09 of this title). (Prior code § 27-17-7)

Chapter 17.51 R-4 MANUFACTURED HOUSING RESIDENTIAL ZONE

Sections:
17.51.010    Objectives and characteristics.
17.51.020    Permitted uses and regulations.
17.51.030    Area requirements.
17.51.040    Width requirements.
17.51.050    Location requirements.
17.51.060    Special provisions.
17.51.070    Supplementary regulations.

17.51.010 Objectives and characteristics.
The objective in establishing the R-4 residential zone is to provide the most appropriate locations for mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions along with conventional dwellings. The zone is characterized by open fields interspersed by well-maintained mobile home parks, mobile home subdivisions, and other types of dwellings.
In order to accomplish the objectives and purposes of this title and to promote the characteristics of this zone, the regulations set out in this chapter shall apply in the R-4 residential zone. (Prior code § 27-18-1)

17.51.020 Permitted uses and regulations.
A. Permitted Uses. The following uses shall be permitted-by-right. If a use is not listed it is prohibited.
    1. Accessory dwelling units as per Chapter 17.70.
    2. Agriculture.
    3. Boys and girls schools and correctional institutions.
    4. Day care. Day care shall be permitted to operate subject to the following standards:
        a. City of Moab business license is required.
        b. A valid day care license or certificate as issued by the State of Utah is required.
        c. Applicants for a City business license shall submit a conceptual site plan that indicates:
            i. Ingress and egress to the property;
            ii. Drop off/pick up areas;
            iii. Traffic circulation;
            iv. Off-street parking (single-household residence plus space for each FTE staff member);
            v. Landscaping;
            vi. Buffering or separation from dissimilar uses;
            vii. Open space for older kids.
        d. Compliance with all applicable City regulations regarding noise, odor and glare.
    5. Group homes.
        a. Such homes must be licensed by the State of Utah.
        b. All exterior aspects of a group home, including its scale and off-street parking configuration, shall conform with the requirements of the R-4 zone.
        c. Such homes shall provide off-street parking pursuant to Sections 17.09.210 through 17.09.340.
        d. Such homes may provide living arrangements for not more than sixteen residents per home (excluding supervisory personnel).
    6. Home occupations subject to the requirements set forth in Section 5.80.050.
    7. Mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions subject to the regulations as set forth in Title 15.
    8. Multi-household dwellings. Developments consisting of seven or more multi-household units shall be subject to the following additional requirements:
        a. Access. Vehicular access shall be provided to the property in such a way that it does not impede traffic patterns on adjacent streets.
        b. Parking. Off-street parking shall be designed in such a way as to allow vehicles to pull forward into the on-street traffic flow.
        c. Garages or Carports. If provided, garages and carports shall not be located in the front yard and shall be set back from the front wall of the principal structure at least fifteen feet or be accessed from the rear or side of the property.
        d. Landscaping. All off-street parking shall be landscaped and buffered from adjacent uses. A minimum of fifteen percent of the interior of the parking area shall be landscaped to provide shade and break up the expanse of asphalt.
        e. Buffering. All adjacent uses shall be buffered by a distance of not less than fifteen feet and contain berms, shrubs, and other plantings. Buffering may be combined with screens, fences and hedges.
        f. Apartments and court apartments shall designate an open space/recreation area that is a minimum of two hundred square feet in size to be developed into recreation, play or landscaped areas. The requirement can be met with the construction of a recreation room (“rec room”) or club house of a similarly sized area that can be used for residents and their guests for recreation/social activities and/or relaxation.
        g. The allowed number of multi-household units shall be determined by Section 17.51.030.
    9. One-household dwellings and accessory uses.
    10. Places of worship. All places of worship shall be subject to the regulations established by Utah State Code Annotated (“UCA”). The Planning Department, in accordance with Chapter 17.67, shall receive a complete site plan which demonstrates that:
        a. Traffic impacts are minimized so that on-street vehicle flows will not be impeded.
        b. Noise, odor, and glare is contained on the property.
        c. Landscaping shall be completed in accordance with the provisions located in Sections 17.09.360 (Landscaping – Required) and 17.09.370 (Landscaping – Specifications generally). A minimum of fifteen percent of the interior of the parking areas must be landscaped. Trees shall be utilized to provide shade for vehicles and must be of a sufficient size and placement to provide shade to forty percent of the parking area within three years.
        d. Possible impacts on adjacent streets, sidewalks, and bike/pedestrian routes have been identified and reduced to minimum levels.
        e. Adequate parking for the intended use is provided.
    11. Planned unit developments subject to the requirements set forth in Chapter 17.66.
    12. Public facilities. This type of use shall be allowed in compliance with the following standards:
        a. The proposed use shall be situated on a tract of land sufficient in size to provide for the activities of the use as well as required landscaping, off-street parking, and trails;
        b. Landscaping, screening, and fencing shall be installed and maintained to mitigate impacts on surrounding residential uses;
        c. Parking areas shall be an all-weather surface such as concrete, asphalt or sealed gravel that will not generate dust or deposit gravel on paved roadways;
        d. Compliance with all applicable City regulations regarding noise, odor and glare;
        e. Outside storage of equipment, materials, and supplies shall be contained and located within a building or a sight obscuring fence;
        f. The use shall demonstrate that there is a benefit to the neighborhood or community;
        g. The proposed use shall not generate traffic in excess of the level of traffic associated with the number of residential dwellings that could be permitted on the parcel.
    13. Public libraries.
    14. Public parks and public recreation buildings.
    15. Schools. All schools shall be subject to the regulations established by Utah State Code Annotated. The City, in accordance with Chapter 17.67, shall receive a complete site plan showing that:
        a. Traffic impacts are minimized so that on-street vehicle flows will not be impeded.
        b. Possible impacts to adjacent streets, sidewalks, and bike/pedestrian routes have been identified and reduced to minimum levels.
    16. Two-household dwellings and accessory uses. (Ord. 19-13 § 21 (part), 2019; Ord. 18-01 (part), 2018: Ord. 12-05 (part), 2012; Ord. 06-08 (part), 2006; Ord. 94-22 (part), 1994; prior code § 27-18-2)

17.51.030 Area requirements.
An area of not less than five thousand square feet shall be provided and maintained for each one-household dwelling. Two thousand five hundred square feet shall be provided for each unit of a two-household dwelling and one thousand eight hundred square feet shall be provided for each unit in a tri-plex or three-household or more dwelling. For child day care centers the building site shall contain at least ten thousand square feet.
An area of not less than three acres shall be provided and maintained for each planned unit development, except that there shall be no area requirements for additions to an approved planned unit development. All non-residential uses such as church buildings shall have a building site area in which the area of the building is equal to or less than twenty percent of the total parcel size area. The area required to meet minimum off-street parking requirements shall not be included in the calculation of the total parcel size. (Ord. 19-13 § 21 (part), 2019; Ord. 13-01 (part), 2013: Ord. 06-08 (part), 2006: Ord. 97-05, 1997: prior code § 27-18-3(A))

17.51.040 Width requirements.
The minimum width of any building site for a dwelling shall be fifty linear feet. (Ord. 13-01 (part), 2013: Ord. 06-08 (part), 2006: prior code § 27-18-3(B))

17.51.050 Location requirements.
A. Front Setback. The minimum front setback for main buildings shall be fifteen feet. No accessory buildings shall be constructed on a lot prior to the main structure.
B. Side Setback. The minimum side setback for any dwelling or any other main building shall be seven feet; provided, that the minimum distance between dwellings located on the same or adjoining lots shall be ten feet. On corner lots, the side yard that faces on a street shall be not less than twelve feet.
C. Rear Setback. The minimum rear setback for any main building shall be ten feet. On corner lots, the rear setback shall be not less than eight feet.
D. The minimum side setback for accessory buildings on interior and corner lots is listed in Section 17.09.560, Accessory use or structure. (Ord. 19-13 §§ 14, 15, 2019; Ord. 13-01 (part), 2013: Ord. 10-14 (part), 2010; Ord. 06-08 (part), 2006; prior code § 27-18-3(C))

17.51.060 Special provisions.
The special provisions shall apply in this zone in order to protect its essential characteristics and to promote the purpose of this title:
A. The ground floor area of the primary dwelling shall be at least five hundred square feet.
B. The maximum permitted density of planned unit developments shall be eight dwelling units per acre, up to a maximum of ten units per acre utilizing affordable housing density bonuses.
C. The minimum building site for a mobile home park and mobile home subdivision shall be not less than ten acres. (Ord. 18-01 (part), 2018: Ord. 13-01 (part), 2013: Ord. 06-08 (part), 2006; prior code § 27-18-3(D))

17.51.070 Supplementary regulations.
See also Supplementary Requirements of Procedures Applicable Within Zones (Chapter 17.09 of this title). (Prior code § 27-18-4)

Chapter 17.52 KEEPING LIMITED NUMBERS OF FOWL FOR FOOD PRODUCTION

Sections:
17.52.010    Intent.
17.52.020    General conditions.
17.52.030    Prohibited uses.
17.52.040    Standards for containment.
17.52.050    Standards for maintenance.
17.52.060    Application for permit.
17.52.070    Enforcement.
17.52.080    Permit revocation--Grounds.
17.52.090    Permit revocation procedure, right to cure.

17.52.010 Intent.
This chapter shall provide residents of the community the opportunity to maintain up to twelve hen chickens as pets and for the purpose of producing eggs, subject to the described restrictions and regulations. The objective is to cultivate localized self-supporting and sustainable behavior for the betterment of the local, regional, and world community. (Ord. 09-01 (part), 2009)

17.52.020 General conditions.
In all R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 residential zones and planned unit developments in the RA zone of the City of Moab, and only for those single-household residential uses in the commercial zones, up to and not exceeding more than twelve hen chickens for egg production as household food, shall be allowed with the issuance of a permit from the City. This use is solely to allow hens per household as pets and for the purpose of producing eggs, subject to the following restrictions. (Ord. 19-13 § 21 (part), 2019; Ord. 09-01 (part), 2009)

17.52.030 Prohibited uses.
A. No roosters shall be allowed in the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, any commercial zone or in planned unit developments located in the RA-1 zone. If chickens are purchased as chicks and any are determined at a later date to be roosters, they shall be removed immediately upon determination of gender;
B. Fighting chickens are not allowed as per Section 6.04.360;
C. Hen chickens shall not be raised for slaughter for commercial purposes. (Ord. 09-01 (part), 2009)

17.52.040 Standards for containment.
Hens shall be securely fenced and confined to the property of the owner with the use of coops and yards, and not allowed to run at large;
A. Enclosures and coops shall be located at least fifteen feet from neighboring residences, kept clean and with no odors emanating across property lines;
B. Chicken yards shall provide a minimum outside area of ten square feet per hen;
C. Coop areas shall provide a minimum of four square feet of habitable area per laying hen. (Ord. 09-01 (part), 2009)

17.52.050 Standards for maintenance.
A. Removal of Dead Birds. 
    1. The owner of any fowl that dies within city limits shall remove the carcass of such animal from city limits within ten hours after its death.
B. No coop cleanings shall be stockpiled within twenty feet of any dwelling or any property line unless stored in a closed bin covered to prevent pest and insect infestation or kept in a properly maintained compost pile.
C. No coop shall be kept in an unsanitary or improperly ventilated condition by any coop owner, lessee or occupant of a property.
D. Diseased or sick birds shall be handled in such a manner as to not infect other members of the coop. (Ord. 09-01 (part), 2009)

17.52.060 Application for permit.
Any person intending to raise up to a total of twelve domesticated hen chickens shall apply for a permit to do so. The application form shall be provided by the Zoning Administrator and shall include at a minimum:
A. Name and address of property owner and other contact information;
B. Address of subject property;
C. Name and contact information of occupant or renter if not the property owner;
D. The applicant shall provide a narrative and a site plan of the subject property to adequately explain the location of the coop and other improvements on the lot. A nonrefundable fee as established by resolution of council shall be submitted at the time of application;
E. If the applicant is not the owner of the property on which the request for keeping chickens is located, a letter from the owner, signed and notarized agreeing to the use is required. All chicken permits shall be renewed with the Zoning Administrator every two years. (Ord. 09-01 (part), 2009)

17.52.070 Enforcement.
In the event that violations of this section occur, the complainant shall contact the Zoning Administrator and shall file a complaint outlining the nature of the infraction(s) and the time(s) that the violations(s) occurred. The property owner of the subject property shall be notified in accordance with code Chapter 17.78, Zoning Violation--Penalties, and the appropriate fines shall be in effect.
All violations of this chapter are classified as Class B misdemeanors, punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day of violation or noncompliance shall constitute a separate offense and may be prosecuted accordingly. (Ord. 09-01 (part), 2009)

17.52.080 Permit revocation--Grounds.
A permit to keep chickens may be revoked at the discretion of the Zoning Administrator if any of the following occurs:
A. Three complaints are submitted from a neighborhood within a period of one month where definite violations of the above described standards have occurred;
B. Failure to correct violations within an allowed time period not to exceed twenty-one days;
C. A rooster is kept on the premises in violation of the restrictions for roosters;
D. False, inaccurate, or misleading statements by the applicant in the application for a chicken permit, or any supporting documentation;
E. The use of the permit for commercial sale of eggs or poultry meat products. (Ord. 09-01 (part), 2009)

17.52.090 Permit revocation procedure, right to cure.
A. Prior to revocation, the Zoning Administrator shall issue a written notice of violation, which notice shall describe the nature of the violation and permit the licensee a period of not less than twenty-one business days in which to correct or abate the violation. The abatement period may be extended by action of the City Manager upon a showing of good cause. The notice shall also inform the permitee that the permit will be revoked not less than twenty-one business days from the date of notice if violation is not corrected within the period.
B. The notice shall be personally served or delivered by certified mail or first-class mail to the last known address of the permit holder. The permit holder shall be entitled to request a hearing by delivering a written request to the Zoning Administrator any time prior to the effective date of the license revocation, as stated in the notice of violation. Failure to timely request a hearing shall be a waiver of the right to a hearing. Timely request for a hearing shall result in the revocation being stayed until completion of the hearing.
C. Hearings shall be informal and presided over by the City Manager. The permit holder shall be allowed to offer evidence or testimony in support of his/her position. Should the testimony, documents, or other evidence establish a violation the permit shall be immediately revoked. If the infractions are corrected after revocation has taken place, a new application and fee shall be submitted by the former permit holder to the Zoning Administrator for review.
D. Following an informal hearing before the City Manager, a person aggrieved by a revocation may appeal the decision by delivering written notice of same within ten business days of the notice of decision. Timely notice of appeal will result in stay of the revocation pending the appeal hearing. Appeals shall be heard by the City Council no later than ten business days from the delivery of notice of appeal. The Council may sustain or overturn the decision.
E. Any person violating a revocation decision shall be subject to the remedies and penalties as described in Section 17.52.070. (Ord. 09-01 (part), 2009)

Chapter 17.54 RA-1 RESIDENTIAL--AGRICULTURAL ZONE

Sections:
17.54.010    Objectives and characteristics.
17.54.020    Permitted uses and regulations.
17.54.030    Area requirements.
17.54.040    Width requirements.
17.54.050    Location requirements.
17.54.060    Size of dwellings.
17.54.070    Special provisions.
17.54.080    Supplementary regulations.

17.54.010 Objectives and characteristics.
The RA-1 residential-agricultural zone has been established for the primary purpose of providing a location where residential development associated with limited numbers of livestock can be maintained. This zone is currently characterized by large lots or tracts of land interspersed by dwellings, barns, corrals and agricultural service buildings used in connection with farming operations. While the zone is thus characterized, it is intended that the land within this zone shall be further developed into a residential environment exclusive of animals and fowl. Builders and developers of property should bear in mind therefore, that primacy is given in this zone to residential development and that the raising of animals and fowl will likely be curtailed as residential development takes place.
In order to accomplish the objectives and purposes of this title and to stabilize and protect the essential characteristics of this zone, the following regulations shall apply in the RA-1 residential-agricultural zone. (Prior code § 27-19-1)

17.54.020 Permitted uses and regulations.
A. Permitted Uses. The following uses shall be permitted-by-right. If a use is not listed it is prohibited.
    1. Accessory dwelling units as per Chapter 17.70.
    2. Agriculture.
    3. Agriculture buildings.
    4. Cemeteries, public and private. No cemetery, or any extension of an already existing cemetery, shall hereafter be established in the City without a site plan permit process, as outlined in Chapter 17.67.
        a. Application Required. Application for the establishment of a cemetery or for the extension to an existing cemetery shall be made on forms provided by the Zoning Administrator. The application shall include:
            i. The name(s) and address(es) of the owner(s) of the land;
            ii. The area(s) of the property that will be used for burial purposes;
            iii. The area(s) of the property that will be used for screening purposes;
            iv. An appropriate fee as adopted by resolution of the City Council;
            v. Detailed site plans drawn to scale by a licensed professional Utah registered land surveyor or professional engineer as per Chapter 17.67;
            vi. A written legal description of the cemetery;
            vii. A narrative describing the:
                (A) Age and condition,
                (B) Historical significance if applicable,
                (C) Whether the cemetery is religious, family, organizational, or publicly owned,
                (D) Any prehistoric or historic archaeological discoveries on the property, and
                (E) A written description of names and vital dates of those interred.
        b. Expansion/Disruption. If the expansion requires a disruption of existing burial sites, the applicant shall provide a detailed site alteration plan indicating the extent of disruption of the cemetery, methods of construction or removal of human remains, and reburial plan. Such plan shall include a written description and visual drawing of the plan showing the relocation of graves.
        c. Standards of Approval to Be Specified. A resolution shall be prepared establishing specific standards of compliance to create/extend a cemetery. These shall be based on:
            i. The need for the proposed cemetery or extension;
            ii. The desirability of the location;
            iii. Specific areas to be used for burial purposes and screening;
            iv. Type and extent of landscaping;
            v. Amount of guarantee bond for improvements;
            vi. Light, glare, dust, noise;
            vii. Traffic impacts; and
            viii. Parking.
    5. Day care. Day care shall be permitted to operate subject to the following standards:
        a. City of Moab business license is required.
        b. A valid day care license or certificate as issued by the State of Utah is required.
        c. Applicants for a City business license shall submit a conceptual site plan that indicates:
            i. Ingress and egress to the property;
            ii. Drop off/pick up areas;
            iii. Traffic circulation;
            iv. Off-street parking (single-household residence plus space for each FTE staff member);
            v. Landscaping;
            vi. Buffering or separation from dissimilar uses;
            vii. Open space for older kids.
        d. Compliance with all applicable City regulations regarding noise, odor and glare.
    6. Golf courses. Golf courses must contain a minimum of ten acres. Applications for golf courses must follow the site plan requirements of Chapter 17.67 and must address the following standards:
        a. Golf course designs shall implement nonpoint source pollution best management practices (BMPs).
        b. Course designs and best management plans shall be submitted to the Moab City Planning Department for review.
        c. Course designs must show that there are no encroachments into areas restricted from development and to minimize the impact of the overall site development on natural resources of the area. The design must meet the requirements of Chapter 17.67, Site Plan Review, and contain the following supplemental information:
            i. Address stream, wetland, and habitat protection;
            ii. Contain an environmental constraints analysis that includes the existing environmental conditions on the site and a report with plans that provide:
                (A) Field located streams, ponds or other water bodies, name of watershed and sub-watershed and stream use class designation,
                (B) Field located wetlands including documentation of vegetation, soils, and hydrology,
                (C) Wetlands classifications (Cowardin; National Vegetation Classification Standard for wetlands),
                (D) Calculated one-hundred-year floodplain,
                (E) Topography with slopes differentiated as one to twenty-five percent, twenty-six to thirty-nine percent, forty to forty-five percent, and forty-six or more percent,
                (F) Existing land cover (e.g., forest, meadow, old field, etc.),
                (G) Location of significant plant and/or animal habitat including: documentation of species, date of last known sighting, status, and source of documentation.
        d. Application of Regulations and Policies. After verification of the existing environmental conditions by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or other Federal agency, the applicant will identify on the plan those areas of the site that would be restricted from development by: (i) denoting buffer boundaries, (ii) denoting those areas of significant habitat determined to exist on site that will be preserved, and (iii) denoting those existing areas that will be preserved.
        e. Design Standards for Preliminary Plan. After the applicant has determined the areas restricted from development, a plan should be prepared for submission to the Planning Department that shows the proposed lay-out of the golf course. The plan shall include the following:
            i. Tees, greens, fairways, and practice range;
            ii. Buildings (e.g., clubhouse, maintenance facilities, etc.);
            iii. Roads, cart paths, and parking lots;
            iv. Conceptual design for the management of storm water runoff and water quality including locations and methods and documentation that these locations and methods are practical; and
            v. Location of irrigation wells and/or ponds.
        f. Approval of Encroachments. If any of the above facilities would require encroachment on buffers, streams, wetlands or floodplains, approval must be granted by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or other Federal agency.
    7. Group homes.
        a. Such homes must be licensed by the State of Utah.
        b. All exterior aspects of a group home, including its scale and off-street parking configuration, shall conform with the requirements of the RA-1 zone.
        c. Such homes shall provide off-street parking pursuant to Sections 17.09.210 through 17.09.340.
        d. Such homes may provide living arrangements for not more than eight residents per home (excluding supervisory personnel).
    8. Home occupations subject to the standards set forth in Section 5.80.050.
    9. One-household dwellings and accessory uses.
    10. Places of worship. All places of worship shall be subject to the regulations established by Utah State Code Annotated (“UCA”). The Planning Department, in accordance with Chapter 17.67, shall receive a complete site plan which demonstrates that:
        a. Traffic impacts are minimized so that on-street vehicle flows will not be impeded.
        b. Noise, odor, and glare is contained on the property.
        c. Landscaping shall be completed in accordance with the provisions located in Sections 17.09.360 (Landscaping – Required) and 17.09.370 (Landscaping – Specifications generally). A minimum of fifteen percent of the interior of the parking areas must be landscaped. Trees shall be utilized to provide shade for vehicles and must be of a sufficient size and placement to provide shade to forty percent of the parking area within three years.
        d. Possible impacts on adjacent streets, sidewalks, and bike/pedestrian routes have been identified and reduced to minimum levels.
        e. Adequate parking for the intended use is provided.
    11. Planned unit developments which are connected to a public sewer, subject to the requirements set forth in Chapter 17.66.
    12. Premises agricultural occupations. This type of occupation specifically concerns the retail sale of feed, seed, fertilizer, equipment and similar items used in agriculture. The following standards shall be met for this type of business:
        a. Parking areas shall be an all-weather surface such as concrete, asphalt or sealed gravel that will not generate dust or deposit gravel on paved roadways.
        b. Hours of operation shall be confined to seven a.m. to seven p.m.
        c. Dust, glare, odor, and noise shall be confined within the boundaries of the property.
        d. All signs shall comply with the sign regulations of Chapter 15.44 and shall not exceed fifteen square feet.
        e. Outside storage of products for sale is limited to hours of operation.
    13. Public facilities. This type of use shall be allowed in compliance with the following standards:
        a. The proposed use shall be situated on a tract of land sufficient in size to provide for the activities of the use as well as required landscaping, off-street parking, and trails;
        b. Landscaping, screening, and fencing shall be installed and maintained to mitigate impacts on surrounding residential uses;
        c. Parking areas shall be an all-weather surface such as concrete, asphalt or sealed gravel that will not generate dust or deposit gravel on paved roadways;
        d. Compliance with all applicable City regulations regarding noise, odor and glare;
        e. Outside storage of equipment, materials, and supplies shall be contained and located within a building or a sight obscuring fence;
        f. The use shall demonstrate that there is a benefit to the neighborhood or community;
        g. The proposed use shall not generate traffic in excess of the level of traffic associated with the number of residential dwellings that could be permitted on the parcel.
    14. Public parks.
    15. Raising, care and keeping of animals and fowl for household use and consumption.
    16. Schools. All schools shall be subject to the regulations established by Utah State Code Annotated. The City, in accordance with Chapter 17.67, shall receive a complete site plan showing that:
        a. Traffic impacts are minimized so that on-street vehicle flows will not be impeded.
        b. Possible impacts to adjacent streets, sidewalks, and bike/pedestrian routes have been identified and reduced to minimum levels.
    17. Utility provider structures. New construction of water lines, sewer lines and electric substations and structures may be constructed subject to the approval of the Planning Commission and Council with a review of a subdivision plat. Such construction is not required to apply for a separate permit but must satisfy the requirements below. Expansions of existing facilities are also subject to the approval of the Planning Commission and Council, and subject to the standards below. The Planning Commission may require standards in accordance with the following language that are reasonably necessary to protect surrounding property values and residential amenities:
        a. These types of facilities include but are not limited to:
            i. Electrical utility facility, provided transmission lines are excluded from the requirements of this section if visibility is essential to safety, security, or maintenance access;
            ii. Solid waste disposal facility;
            iii. Water pumping plants and pipelines;
            iv. Public utility buildings and structures (except power plants);
            v. Flood control structures;
            vi. Substations;
            vii. Sewage treatment plants subject to review and approval of the State Department of Health.
        b. Site Standards. 
            i. Architectural Form and Character. A building housing all or a majority of a utility facility must be compatible with the architectural form of surrounding buildings. This requirement is not applicable to a utility facility where significant elements of the facility are not housed inside of a building or to isolated minor elements such as pad mounted transformers, telephone pedestals and metering stations.
            ii. Screening and Fence Requirements. A utility facility must be site screened with landscaping and/or fencing. Landscape development shall include retention of significant trees, as necessary to maintain and protect property values, to enhance the visual appearance of the City, to preserve the natural character of the area, to promote utilization of natural systems, to reduce the impacts of development on the storm drainage system and water resources, and to provide a better transition between the various land uses permitted in the City.
                (A) The Planning Department and Community Development Director shall review the proposed landscape plan with each application and make a recommendation to the Planning Commission.
                (B) The applicant shall provide site perimeter landscaping that consists of a minimum width of ten feet and includes:
                    (1) Evergreen and deciduous trees, with no more than fifty percent being deciduous, a minimum of six feet in height, and planted at intervals no greater than thirty feet on center;
                    (2) A minimum of three and one-half feet in height, and living ground cover planted so that the ground will be covered within three years.
            iii. If planted to buffer a parking area, access, or site development other than a building, any of the following alternatives may be used unless otherwise noted:
                (A) Shrubs, a minimum of three and one-half feet in height, and living ground cover must be planted so that the ground will be covered within three years.
                (B) Earth-mounding, an average of three and one-half feet in height, planted with shrubs or living ground cover so that the ground will be covered within three years. This alternative may not be used in a downtown land use district.
                (C) A combination of earth-mounding and shrubs to produce a visual barrier at least three and one-half feet in height.
            iv. Equipment and vehicle storage yards require fifteen feet of landscaping on all sides if visible from a public right-of-way.
            v. Parking Area Landscaping. Parking areas require landscaping as follows in addition to any site perimeter landscaping as required.
            vi. Alternative landscaping may be approved by the Planning Commission if the landscaping will provide the desired screening as noted below:
                (A) The proposed landscaping represents an equal or better result than that which could be achieved by strictly following the requirements of this section; and
                (B) The proposed landscaping either:
                    (1) Incorporates the increased retention of significant trees and naturally occurring undergrowth;
                    (2) Better accommodates or improves the existing physical conditions of the subject property;
                    (3) Incorporates elements to provide for wind protection or to maintain solar access;
                    (4) Incorporates elements to protect or improve water quality; or
                    (5) Incorporates native species in a design that buffers a critical area from uses on the site, including parking.
    18. Veterinary clinic with kennel.
        a. Noise, odor and glare shall be contained on the property.
        b. Fencing, landscaping, the design of parking areas, and downward directed and full cut-off light fixtures shall be used to reduce impacts on adjacent properties.
        c. Parking shall be provided at a rate of one space per one thousand square feet and one space per each employee. ADA handicapped accessible spaces shall be provided as required.
        d. A buffer area of twenty-five feet shall be used to provide a separation from other uses and adjacent properties. Buffering shall include the elements of subsection (A)(18)(b) of this section.
        e. Vehicular ingress and egress traffic patterns shall be designed to not impede existing traffic flows and provide adequate interior circulation.
        f. Hours of operation for public access shall be from seven a.m. to seven p.m.
        g. Landscaping shall consist of berms, solid wooden privacy fence, decorative block wall or combination thereof and be in accordance with the requirements of Sections 17.09.360 (Landscaping – Required) and 17.09.370 (Landscaping – Specifications generally). A minimum of fifteen percent of the interior of the parking areas must be landscaped. Trees shall be utilized to provide shade for vehicles and must be of a sufficient size and placement to provide shade to forty percent of the parking area within three years. (Ord. 19-13 § 21 (part), 2019; Ord. 18-01 (part), 2018: Ord. 12-05 (part), 2012; Ord. 08-03 (part), 2008; Ord. 94-12 (part), 1994; Ord. 85-01 § 2, 1985; prior code § 27-19-2)

17.54.030 Area requirements.
The minimum building site area shall be one recorded lot or parcel of land not less than one acre in area for each one-household dwelling, day care nursery, or rest home and not less than five acres for each planned unit development. (Ord. 19-13 § 21 (part), 2019; prior code § 27-19-3)

17.54.040 Width requirements.
The minimum width requirements for any building site shall be one hundred twenty-five linear feet, measured at a distance of twenty-five feet back from the front lot line, except when a building site is situated in an approved large-scale development. (Ord. 99-05, 1999: prior code § 27-19-4)

17.54.050 Location requirements.
A. Front Setback. All buildings and structures shall be set back at least twenty-five feet from the front lot line or fifty-five feet from the centerline of any public street, whichever is greater.
B. Side Setback. All dwellings shall be set back from the side property line a distance of at least ten feet and the total distance of the two side setbacks shall be at least twenty-four feet. On corner lots, the side setback from any street shall not be less than twenty-five feet for main buildings.
C. Rear Setback. For interior lots, all dwellings and other main buildings shall be set back from the rear property line a distance of at least twenty-five feet. For corner lots, all dwellings and other main buildings shall be set back from the rear property line a distance of at least twenty feet.
D. The minimum side setback for accessory buildings on interior and corner lots is listed in Section 17.09.560, Accessory use or structure.
E. Livestock and Fowl Setback. Uses for the care and keeping of livestock and fowl shall be located at least one hundred feet distance from any existing dwelling and one hundred feet from the front property lines. (Ord. 18-01 (part), 2018: Ord. 10-14, 2010; prior code § 27-19-5)

17.54.060 Size of dwellings.
The ground floor area of any one-household and two-household dwellings shall be not less than one thousand square feet, except as may be approved in a planned unit development. (Ord. 19-13 § 21 (part), 2019; prior code § 27-19-6)

17.54.070 Special provisions.
The maximum density in a planned unit development shall not exceed five units per acre contained in the development. (Ord. 18-01 (part), 2018: prior code § 27-19-7)

17.54.080 Supplementary regulations.
See also Supplementary Requirements and Procedures Applicable Within the Zones (Chapter 17.09 of this title). (Prior code § 27-19-8)

Chapter 17.55 HILLSIDE DEVELOPMENTS

Sections:
17.55.010    Purpose.
17.55.020    Definitions.
17.55.030    Areas subject to these provisions.
17.55.040    Hillside development density standards.
17.55.050    Determination of slope and slope areas.
17.55.060    Hillside development permit required.
17.55.070    Application submittals.
17.55.080    Improvements security and restoration bond.
17.55.090    Building setbacks, height, and construction materials.
17.55.100    Appeals to the appeal authority.
17.55.110    Verification of compliance.
17.55.120    Penalty for violation.
17.55.130    Permit review criteria.
17.55.140    Application fees.
17.55.150    Severability.

17.55.010 Purpose.
The City finds that the health, safety and the general public welfare of the residents of the City will be promoted by establishing standards for the development and excavation of hillside and slope areas located in the City so as to minimize soil and slope instability and erosion and the negative effects associated with construction in geologic hazard zones. In addition the City finds that the preservation of the visual and aesthetic character of the City’s hillsides is an important public goal. The provisions herein are intended to supplement and amplify the City subdivision and zoning ordinances and are designed to accomplish the following:
A. Prohibit development of uses which would likely result in a hazardous situation due to slope instability, rock falls, or excessive erosion;
B. Provide for safe vehicular circulation and access;
C. Encourage the location, design and development of building sites in a manner that will minimize the scarring and erosion effects of cutting, filling and grading of hillsides;
D. Encourage preservation of open space by encouraging clusters or other design techniques to preserve the natural terrain;
E. Where hillside excavation does occur, require that buildings be located in the cut area to minimize the visual effects of scarring. (Ord. 97-12 (part), 1997: Ord. 96-18 § 2 (part), 1996)

17.55.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:
“Cut” means land surface which is re-shaped by man through the removal of soil, rock, or other materials.
“Development” means the carrying out of any building activity or clearing of land as an adjunct of construction.
“Development parcel” means any quantity of land capable of being described with such definiteness that its location and boundaries may be established, which is designated by its owner or developer as land to be used or developed as a unit or which has been used or developed as a unit.
“Excavation” means any disturbance to the ground including but not limited to clearing, grubbing, rock removal, cutting, tunneling, drilling, or any other activity which alters the natural ground.
“Fill” means the deposit of soil, rock, or other materials placed by man.
“Geotechnical engineer” means a person with a four-year degree in civil engineering or engineering geology from an accredited university who is licensed as an engineer and who, through training and experience, is able to assure that geological factors affecting engineering works are recognized, adequately interpreted, and presented for use in engineering practice and for the protection of the public.
“Ledge” means the first substantial abrupt change in slope along the top edge of a plateau or ridge line.
“Major development” means and includes any building activity or clearing of land adjunct to construction involving subdivision of land into three or more lots; the construction of multihousehold housing such as condominiums or townhouses containing three or more residential units; any residential or commercial construction which involves excavation of a surface area larger than one acre; or any excavation creating a vertical cut into a slope greater than four feet in height.
“Minor development” means and includes any building activity or clearing of land adjunct to construction involving less than three lots; construction of multihousehold housing such as condominiums or townhouses containing less than three residential units; residential or commercial construction which involves excavation of a surface area of one acre or less; or any excavation creating a vertical cut into a slope four feet or less in height.
“Plateau” means a flat or predominantly flat area of land which is raised sharply above adjacent land on at least one side as illustrated in Exhibit D and designated on ridge line map attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter and on file in the City Recorder’s office.
“Ridge line” means the junction of a rising steep slope on one side and a descending slope that may either be gentle or steep on the other side.
“Setback” means an area, measured as a distance from a property line or geologic boundary, in which no structure or building is allowed to be constructed.
“Slope” means a vertical rise measured over a horizontal distance, expressed as a percentage, measured generally at right angles to contour lines. (Ord. 19-13 § 21 (part), 2019; Ord. 97-12 (part), 1997: Ord. 96-18 § 2 (part), 1996)

17.55.030 Areas subject to these provisions.
Property within the City limits with slopes greater than fifteen percent. (Ord. 97-12 (part), 1997: Ord. 96-18 § 2 (part), 1996)

17.55.040 Hillside development density standards.
A. Lot size, density and site disturbance for development in lands subject to this chapter shall comply with the density schedule in this section. To the extent this density schedule is contrary to existing zoning standards the provisions of this section shall take precedence.
B. Any portion of a development parcel having a slope greater than forty-five percent shall not be included in the calculation of the area of such parcel for the purposes of determining conformity with the minimum lot parcel size and density requirements in this section.
C. Where more than two-thirds of a single household lot has a slope of twenty-five percent or less, the entire lot shall be considered as having less than twenty-five percent slope for the purpose of determining lot size.
D. Density standards:
+-----------------------+---------------------------------------+
| Percent Natural Slope |          Dwelling Units/Acre          |
+-----------------------+---------------------------------------+
| 1-25%                 | No change in density                  |
+-----------------------+---------------------------------------+
| 26-39%                | One d.u./acre provided the units are  |
|                       | clustered in 30% or less of land area |
|                       | within this slope category. 70% of    |
|                       | the land area of this slope category  |
|                       | shall remain undisturbed.             |
+-----------------------+---------------------------------------+
| 40-45%                | One d.u. per 20 acres                 |
+-----------------------+---------------------------------------+
| 46% +                 | Development not permitted             |
+-----------------------+---------------------------------------+
E. A density bonus shall be available for development that transfers dwelling units from lands with a slope of twenty-six percent to thirty-nine percent to areas with a slope of twenty-five percent or less, either within the same parcel or to an adjacent parcel under the same ownership.
    1. Any person transferring dwelling units as specified in subsection E of this section shall be entitled to a transfer density bonus of 0.75 dwelling units.
F. No development shall be permitted upon lots with an average slope of forty-six percent or more.
G. Where commercial rather than residential development is contemplated, density shall be calculated on the basis of each three thousand square foot increment of building construction being equivalent to one dwelling unit. (Ord. 19-13 § 21 (part), 2019; Ord. 97-12 (part), 1997: Ord. 96-18 § 2 (part), 1996)

17.55.050 Determination of slope and slope areas.
A. Slope shall be determined on an individual basis as an average percent natural slope for purposes of density limitations.
B. The contour interval maps and calculations required by this section shall be prepared in a report by a professional civil engineer or licensed surveyor and shall be submitted with applications for permits or subdivision approvals for lands subject to this chapter. Each report shall bear the certification of the engineer or surveyor as to the accuracy of the report.
C. The location of the natural fifteen percent, twenty-five percent, forty percent and forty-five percent slopes for the purposes of this chapter shall be determined using the following procedure:
    1. Preparation of Contour Maps. Current contour maps shall be prepared and certified by a licensed engineer or surveyor showing contours at intervals no greater than five feet (the “contour map”) drawn at one inch equals two hundred feet scale maximum.
    2. Verification Through Field Surveys. Field surveys may be required of the applicant by the City Engineer or city planner to verify the accuracy of the contour lines shown on the contour map. The contour map shall identify profile lines which shall be used to verify the field survey. Profile lines shall be perpendicular to contour lines and in no case occur at intervals greater than one hundred fifty feet apart or seventy-five feet from a property line.
    3. Determination of Slope Areas for Density Calculations. Using the contour maps, slopes shall be calculated in intervals no greater than forty to eighty feet along profile lines. Points identified as slopes of fifteen percent, twenty-five percent, forty percent and forty-five percent shall be located on the contour map and connected by a continuous line. That area bounded by said lines and intersecting property lines shall be used for determining dwelling unit density. (Ord. 97-12 (part), 1997: Ord. 96-18 § 2 (part), 1996)

17.55.060 Hillside development permit required.
A. All major development on slopes in excess of fifteen percent shall require a hillside development permit granted by the City Council prior to any excavation or construction activity. The Planning Commission shall first review proposed development and make a recommendation to the City Council.
B. All minor development on slopes greater than fifteen percent shall require a hillside development permit granted by the City Council prior to any excavation or construction activity. The Planning Commission shall first review the proposed development and make a recommendation to the City Council.
C. Government Exemptions. Exemptions to this chapter may be granted to government agencies under the following guidelines. Proposed development by the City of Moab and other government agencies, are required to submit the appropriate documentation as established in Section 17.55.070. The application shall be submitted to city staff for review and recommendation to the City Council. Subsequent to review of the proposed project by staff, City Council shall evaluate the project at the next available meeting. In granting an exemption, the City Council may prescribe appropriate reasonable conditions and safeguards to ensure compliance with the requirements of the Moab land development regulations.
Exemptions apply to necessary development of various public works and community development projects including, but are not limited to, flood control structures such as dams and retaining walls, water tanks and water conveyance systems, and structures such as bridges, parking areas, and roadways for transportation projects. In the application of this section, Council shall have the authority to grant exemptions to any of the requirements of this chapter by applying the following review criteria:
    1. The establishment, maintenance or operation of the proposed exemption is not detrimental or injurious to the use and enjoyment of existing uses on adjacent properties;
    2. The establishment, maintenance or operation of the proposed special exception use or structure will not cause traffic hazards in the vicinity;
    3. Adequate provision is made for surface water drainage, ingress and egress to the property, and off-street parking;
    4. Adequate public facilities and services are available for the proposed special exception use or structure;
    5. The application meets all special requirements as detailed within the zoning ordinance for the specific special exception if any apply;
    6. The use will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare;
    7. The location, nature and height of each building, wall and fence, the nature and extent of landscaping on the site and the location, size, nature, and intensity of each phase of the use and its access streets will be compatible with the appropriate and orderly development of the district in which it is located;
    8. The proposed use will not conflict with an existing or programmed public facility, public service, school, or road;
    9. The proposed use has the written recommendations and comments of the public works and engineering departments;
    10. The applicant has presented sufficient evidence of public need for the use.
D. Permit approval under this section shall not be required for preliminary plats that have been approved by the City Council prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter.
E. Upon review of a permit application for either major or minor development the Planning Commission may, in addition to recommending approval or denial of the application, submit to the City Council recommendations as to conditions to be attached to the permit to mitigate specific adverse impacts associated with the application.
F. The City Council may approve the application as submitted; approve subject to conditions; or deny the permit in full where the development does not meet the standards of this chapter or other provisions of the Municipal Code. (Ord. 10-01, 2010)
Editor’s note: Ord. No. 10-01, adopted February 23, 2010, repealed the former § 17.55.060, and enacted a new § 17.55.060 as set out herein. The former 17.55.060 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 96-18, 1996 and Ord. No. 97-12, 1997.

17.55.070 Application submittals.
A. Any applicant for a major development on slopes greater than twenty-five percent, shall be required to submit the following technical information and reports:
    1. Contour maps as provided in this section; site development plan (subsection C1); grading plan (C2); drainage control plan and report (C3); geology and soils report (C4); landscape plan (C5); other reports as required by city staff (C6); and evidence of title (C7).
B. Any application for a minor development on slopes greater than twenty-five percent, shall be required to submit the following technical information and reports:
    1. Contour maps as provided in this section; site development plan (C1); grading plan (C2); geology and soils report (C4); and other reports as required by city staff (C6); and evidence of title (C7).
C. Submittals under this chapter shall contain the following:
    1. Site Development Plans. A scaled site development drawing or plans prepared by a licensed engineer, licensed architect, or licensed surveyor containing:
        a. The proposed location and description of all buildings or structures;
        b. The proposed location and description of all landscaping, irrigation structures, and related structures;
        c. The proposed location and description of all public and private roads or driveways, street lighting, drainage structures, water, sewer, and gas lines, electric and telephone lines and related utilities;
        d. All property lines, new lot lines, existing and proposed easements, and areas dedicated to open space;
        e. All other submittals otherwise required for development under the Municipal Code for lands not subject to this chapter.
    2. Grading Plan. A grading and earth moving plan conforming with all requirements of Appendix Chapter 33 of the Uniform Building Code and showing existing and proposed contours and cross-sections. The grading plan shall show accurate slope conditions and contours for lands extending no less than one hundred feet outside of the application boundaries. The grading plan shall additionally show:
        a. Detailed excavation drawings showing the location and extent of all hillside cuts and fills and all excavations for structures, utilities, or roads, including a description of all methods to be employed for excavation and fill disposal;
        b. A time-table providing a schedule for all grading and construction work with starting and ending dates;
        c. Specific restoration and mitigation techniques to be employed by the developer for cut and fill areas.
    3. Drainage Control Plan and Report. A drainage control plan and report prepared by a licensed civil engineer and containing a site specific evaluation of drainage issues for the site and drainage control problems generated by the proposed development, including:
        a. Detailed plans of all surface and subsurface drainage systems and facilities, retaining walls, cribbing or other drainage or erosion protection devices, to be constructed in connection with, or as part of the proposed project;
        b. A map showing the drainage area and estimated runoff calculations for the area served by any drainage systems or facilities.
    4. Geology and Soils Report. A geology and soils report shall be prepared by a licensed engineer trained and experienced in the practice of geotechnical engineering, and shall contain at least the following information:
        a. Slope stability analysis: conclusions and recommendations concerning the effects of material removal, introduction of water, both on and offsite, including, where applicable, on mesa tops, seismic activity, and erosion on slope stability;
        b. Foundation investigation: conclusions and recommendations concerning the effects of soil conditions on foundation and structural stability, including bearing capacity, sheer strength, and shrink/swell potential of soils;
        c. The location and yield of springs, seeps and wetlands which shall be shown on the site plan;
        d. Structural features, including any geological hazards such as rock falls, ravines, overhangs, cliff faces or the like;
        e. Conclusions and recommendations regarding the effect of geologic conditions on the proposed development, together with recommendations identifying the means proposed to minimize any hazard to life or property, or adverse impact on the natural environment.
    5. Landscape and Vegetation Plan. A landscape plan shall address all existing and proposed landscaping for the development site. It shall address:
        a. Vegetative or other screening in areas of high visual impact and the specific plantings to be installed by the developer, including plantings needed for restoration of cut and fill areas;
        b. Irrigation for all plantings;
        c. Buffering the development from adjoining parcels and any other site specific vegetation issues.
    6. Other Information. Other reports, plans, and information as may be deemed necessary by the City staff or Planning Commission may be required with the application as a condition of the application process.
    7. Evidence of Title. A current legal description for the property subject to the application including a copy of the current deed evidencing title in the applicant and a current title insurance commitment and/or abstract of title. (Ord. 97-12 (part), 1997: Ord. 96-18 § 2 (part), 1996)

17.55.080 Improvements security and restoration bond.
A. The City may require, as a condition for issuance of any hillside development permit or grading permit, that the applicant post adequate security to assure compliance with all permit conditions, including restoration, soil stabilization, landscaping, drainage improvements, or any other permit condition. Any security required by this section shall be an amount, as determined in the discretion of city staff, reasonably calculated to cover anticipated costs for improvements required under the permit and may take the form of the following:
    1. A surety bond or letter of credit naming the City of Moab as beneficiary or payee;
    2. A certified or cashier’s check payable to the City of Moab and held in an escrow account;
    3. An improvements agreement specifying all improvements and permit conditions shall be completed prior to issuance of any certificate of occupancy or building permit for individual lots.
B. In the event the applicant fails to complete development in accordance with the permit conditions within one year from the issuance of the permit the City, upon delivering written notice to the applicant, may proceed to redeem any funds payable to it under this section for the purposes of obtaining completion of the required improvements.
    1. For good cause shown, the City Council, after receiving the recommendation of the Planning Commission, may grant such additional time extension as may be necessary to allow compliance by the applicant with all restoration or improvement conditions of the permit.
C. Where a project is to be completed in phases according to a phasing plan, the applicant can secure a proportionate partial release of any improvements security upon certification by the Zoning Administrator that all permit conditions have been complied with as to that particular phase. (Ord. 97-12 (part), 1997: Ord. 96-18 § 2 (part), 1996)

17.55.090 Building setbacks, height, and construction materials.
A. Where a ridge line or ledge occurs, the minimum setback shall be one hundred feet measured normal (perpendicular) to the closest point of the ridge, unless a greater setback is recommended in the geotechnical report. The Planning Commission may recommend a lesser setback where the applicant can demonstrate that the one hundred foot setback makes the property unbuildable.
B. All buildings constructed upon lands subject to this chapter shall be one story only, or twenty feet maximum, in height. Height shall be measured as described in Section 17.55.020, definitions.
C. Buildings constructed upon lands subject to this chapter shall be constructed with materials appropriate to mitigate significant visual impacts. Wherever possible, buildings should be constructed of materials that closely resemble and blend in with native vegetation and hillside features. (Ord. 10-01, 2010; Ord. 97-12 (part), 1997: Ord. 96-18 § 2 (part), 1996)

17.55.100 Appeals to the appeal authority.
The appeal authority shall hear any appeal from staff action; request for variance; or appeal regarding the grant, denial, or conditions attached to any permit under this chapter. (Ord. 10-14, 2010; Ord. 97-12 (part), 1997: Ord. 96-18 § 2 (part), 1996)

17.55.110 Verification of compliance.
Compliance with all permit conditions shall be verified by the Zoning Administrator. Restoration bonds or other security shall not be released, and certificates of occupancy or building permits shall be withheld for such a development until such time as the Zoning Administrator shall certify compliance. (Ord. 97-12 (part), 1997: Ord. 96-18 § 2 (part), 1996)

17.55.120 Penalty for violation.
In addition to those penalties prescribed in Chapter 17.75 of this title, the City staff shall have the right to order a halt to construction of any improvements where, in his/her discretion, there exists a condition which violates or threatens to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. Such suspension of construction activities shall continue until the City Public Works Director or Zoning Administrator is satisfied that measures have been implemented for substantial compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 97-12 (part), 1997: Ord. 96-18 § 2 (part), 1996)

17.55.130 Permit review criteria.
A. Any permit application under this section shall be reviewed to determine compliance with the following criteria:
    1. Compliance with setback, lot area, density, and height limitations contained in this chapter;
    2. Compliance with comprehensive plan goals for the area including the development site, including all other Municipal Code provisions;
    3. The compatibility of the proposed development with existing land uses in the immediate vicinity of the project site, including aesthetic concerns and visual impacts;
    4. Adequacy of the vegetation and landscaping plans, including restoration, vegetative screening, regrading and irrigation;
    5. Geotechnical suitability of the development and the potential for geologic hazards to persons or property, whether natural or man-made, including erosion, rockfall, stormwater runoff, or similar concerns;
    6. The availability of adequate municipal services, including police and fire protection, schools, culinary water, sanitary sewer service, or the like;
    7. Suitability of the proposed drainage and reclamation plans, including the extent to which the design meets the following specific engineering standards:
        a. The height of any cut or fill shall not exceed ten feet when measured vertically from the finished grade to the intersection of the slope with the natural undisturbed ground. The combined height of cuts and fill shall not exceed twenty feet unless otherwise approved by the Planning Commission and the City Council. Approval is subject to incorporating, retaining, terracing, and landscaping or other approved techniques for stabilizing cuts and fills. All excavation and fills shall conform to Appendix Chapter 33 of the Uniform Building Code.
        b. All drainage systems shall be separate and independent from the sanitary sewer system.
        c. Drainage and flood control shall be designed in conformance with the City flood control master plan where applicable.
        d. Property development shall not cause a natural drainage channel to be filled in, obstructed, or diverted. When modification to a natural drainage channel is proposed within the development, such changes will be addressed in the drainage study and shown on the improvement plans, and the developer may be required to dedicate right-of-way or record drainage easements for structures and/or improvements needed to carry storm runoff in the event approval is given for the proposed modifications.
        e. The point of location where the natural drainage channel enters and leaves the property may not be changed without the approval of the City Engineer.
        f. All of the drainage basin upstream of the development shall be considered to be fully developed in conformance with the City’s current land use master plan. Effects on the downstream property owners relative to increased flood potential and nuisance water shall also be considered in the design, including acquisition of easements or agreements where necessary, or construction or modification of improvements where needed.
        g. The applicant shall provide the necessary means to assure drainage within the property being developed by making use of existing facilities or natural washes and constructing master planned improvements.
        h. It shall be required that each new development handle its stormwater runoff in such a manner that no net increase in storm runoff above the natural state will occur on the downstream properties. Pre-project flows must not be exceeded by the post-project flows.
        i. Projects shall be designed to provide that stormwater from a one hundred year frequency storm shall be adequately conveyed either within the limits of the street right-of-way or in storm drain easement without creating flood hazards to dwellings.
        j. When an underground pipe system is required, it shall be designed to carry a ten year storm. Major hydraulic structures shall be designed to carry a twenty-five year storm. The minimum storm drain size shall be ten inches.
        k. Unless specifically permitted, retention basins on hillsides shall not be allowed.
        l. Detention shall be allowed where it is compatible with all required reports. Detention basins shall be used for the purpose of eliminating the effects of the peak runoff of storms and releasing water flow at the pre-project, or approved rate.
        m. Cross-gutter drains on streets shall be avoided whenever possible. They shall not be allowed on collector and higher order streets.
        n. Drainage design must be constructed in accordance with accepted engineering standards and must be consistent with data in other reports such as soils, landscaping, and the like.
        o. All buildings shall be constructed outside the limits of and eighteen inches above the two hundred year flood stage except on drainages subject to FEMA flood control regulations, in which case construction shall be no less than two feet from any such flood line.
        p. Necessary measures shall be taken to prevent erosion and scour at all points throughout the development. Erosion shall be mitigated at all points of discharge and at the face of any cut or fill slope throughout the development.
        q. During grading or construction on any property (including off-site construction) the developer shall control both water used for construction and storm runoff in such a manner as to not affect any adjoining properties, nor add silt or debris to any existing storm drain, wash, channel or roadway.
        r. Applications shall be evaluated for compliance with applicable state and federal environmental statutes and regulations promulgated thereunder, including, but not limited to the Federal Water Pollution Control Act. (Ord. 97-12 (part), 1997: Ord. 96-18 § 2 (part), 1996)

17.55.140 Application fees.
An applicant for a hillside development permit shall submit an application fee as established by resolution with the completed application. No action shall be taken on any application for a hillside development permit without payment of the proper application fee. (Ord. 06-11 (part), 2006: Ord. 97-12 (part), 1997: Ord. 96-18 § 2 (part), 1996)

17.55.150 Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this chapter is, for any reason, held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall not effect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. (Ord. 97-12 (part), 1997: Ord. 96-18 § 2 (part), 1996)

Chapter 17.57 A FEE STRUCTURE FOR DEVELOPERS TO UNDERWRITE CITY STAFF EXPENSES FOR LARGE-SCALE PROJECTS*

Sections:
17.57.010    Definitions.
17.57.020    Purpose.
17.57.030    Scope.
17.57.040    Evaluation of estimated city professional staff services charges.
17.57.050    Billing procedure.
17.57.060    Failure to pay charges.
* Prior History: Prior code Sections 27-20-1 through 27-20-2 as amended by Ord.94-19.

17.57.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of these regulations, unless otherwise defined in other sections of these regulations, the following terms, phrases and words shall have the meaning herein given:
A. “Large scale projects” means a project that exceeds forty Moab City nonexempt staff hours to execute.
B. “Staff expenses” means the in-effect wage and benefit rates for all nonexempt city employees participating in a project at the time that employee hours are billed using the City’s standard time reporting methods. (Ord. 95-09 (part), 1995)

17.57.020 Purpose.
These regulations establish minimum standards to require large-scale project developers to pay their fair share of the costs of nonexempt city staff time necessary to complete the project approval process. (Ord. 95-09 (part), 1995)

17.57.030 Scope.
All provisions set forth in this chapter shall be in effect within the City and/or within the urban development zone as set forth within Utah State Code (Section 10-2-418). (Ord. 95-09 (part), 1995)

17.57.040 Evaluation of estimated city professional staff services charges.
The City Manager shall oversee the preparation of an evaluation of estimated city professional staff service charges for projects that, in the opinion of the City Manager, due to the complexity of planning issues, site design, research and analysis and public review processes may exceed the forty hour professional staff service threshold.
The City Manager shall prepare an itemized evaluation for all of the anticipated work requirements, the projected professional staff hours and the in-effect wages and benefit rates for all nonexempt employees responsible for the work. This evaluation shall be submitted to both the City Council and the project applicant as a guidepost for the estimation of total staff hours necessary to complete the project under consideration. (Ord. 95-09 (part), 1995)

17.57.050 Billing procedure.
The City Recorder, at the end of each month, shall mail a written statement to each large-scale project applicant, stating the amount of hours charged to those nonexempt employee(s) undertaking professional work on the large-scale project and the nonexempt employee(s) wage and benefit rate in effect during the billing cycle. (Ord. 95-09 (part), 1995)

17.57.060 Failure to pay charges.
If any person or organization refuses or fails to pay a bill issued by the City for nonexempt city staff time directly related to a large-scale development project within thirty days from the date of billing thereof, the City Recorder shall notify said person or organization that the City shall cease all technical and administrative work on the designated project after ten days from the date of notification. Before city staff shall resume any technical or administrative work, all delinquent charges including a penalty of one and one-half percent per month shall be paid in full. The City Recorder is authorized to enforce the payment of all delinquent charges by an action in law in the corporate name of the City. (Ord. 95-09 (part), 1995)

Chapter 17.65 MASTER PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS

Sections:
17.65.010    Objectives and characteristics.
17.65.020    Applicability.
17.65.030    Considerations for approval.
17.65.040    Standards and requirements.
17.65.050    Reduction of physical design requirements.
17.65.060    Supplementary regulations.
17.65.070    Phasing.
17.65.080    MPD review procedures.
17.65.090    Concept MPD.
17.65.100    Preliminary MPD.
17.65.110    Final MPD.
17.65.120    Development agreements.
17.65.130    Amendment procedures.
17.65.140    Compliance with the approved development plan.

17.65.010 Objectives and characteristics.
A. The intent of the master planned development (MPD) process is to provide greater flexibility and, consequently, more creative and imaginative design than generally is possible under conventional zoning regulations. An MPD should promote more economical and efficient use of the land by providing better coordination of necessary infrastructure, site amenities, and protection of natural systems.
B. The MPD process should encourage innovative planning and provide a variety of housing types and configurations, resulting in more mixed-use development, improved protection of open spaces, and increased transportation options.
C. Encourage developments that recognize the relationship between buildings and their use, open space and public spaces, pedestrian vitality, ecological process, and varied forms of transportation, providing opportunities for innovative and diversified development.
D. Preserve, to the greatest extent possible, the existing natural and cultural landscape features and amenities that may not otherwise be protected through conventional development. (Ord. 15-04 (part), 2015: Ord. 06-17 (part), 2006)

17.65.020 Applicability.
The master planned development designation may be applied as an overlay within the City’s sensitive area resort zone (SAR). An applicant may elect to develop a project as a master planned development in compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
A. Sensitive Area Resort (SAR) Zones. Residential or mixed-use master planned developments shall be required in the SAR zone pursuant to this chapter and all other applicable ordinances. The minimum size for an MPD in the SAR zone is forty acres.
+-------------+-----------+
|    Type     |    SAR    |
+-------------+-----------+
| Residential | Permitted |
| MPD         |           |
+-------------+-----------+
| "           | 40 ac.    |
+-------------+-----------+
| Mixed-Use   | Permitted |
| MPD         |           |
+-------------+-----------+
| "           | 40 ac.    |
+-------------+-----------+
B. Conflicts. When provisions within this chapter expressly allow for a deviation from an existing city code, all provisions herein shall apply.
C. Exceptions. The land use authority shall have the discretion to grant exceptions from portions of this chapter for any of the following conditions:
    1. Commercial establishment size limits may be increased.
    2. Open space/amenities dedications in a mixed-use MPD may be varied to allow up to fifty percent of the required “public amenities” area to be privately owned.
    3. Adjustments may be made in open space allocations for purposes of satisfying the requirements for differing types of open space, provided the adjustments are consistent with the overall intent of this chapter.
    4. Public street widths may be less than thirty-three feet with public works and engineering approval.
    5. Commercial floor space requirements in mixed-use MPD may be reduced when supplemented by moderate-income housing.
    6. Mixed-use MPD setback requirements when adjacent to residential zones may be decreased when supplemented with other buffering or public amenities.
    7. Setback requirements on commercial buildings adjacent to public streets may be reduced to a zero lot line when the areas are used for outdoor gathering spaces, courtyards, pocket parks and other pedestrian amenities.
D. Allowed Uses. Uses allowed in the MPD overlay are those specified in the SAR zone as identified in Chapter 17.32. (Ord. 15-04 (part), 2015: Ord. 07-07 (part), 2007; Ord. 06-17 (part), 2006)

17.65.030 Considerations for approval.
A. Review Criteria. In reviewing a master planned development, the land use authority shall determine whether:
    1. The site plan satisfies the requirements pursuant to this chapter and all other applicable ordinances;
    2. Buildings and structures are adequately grouped so that the corresponding required acreage is set aside as common open space or public amenity as required by this chapter. To the greatest degree practicable, common open space shall be designated as larger contiguous parcels and not divided into small unconnected parcels located in various parts of the development;
    3. Pedestrians can easily access common open space;
    4. The site plan establishes, where applicable, a consciously designed buffer to sensitive natural features, including natural drainages and visually significant ridges or other landscape features included in the required site inventory;
    5. Individual lots, buildings, structures, streets, and parking areas are situated to minimize and mitigate the alteration of natural features, natural vegetation and topography;
    6. The site plan accommodates and preserves any features of historic, cultural or archaeological value;
    7. Floodways, ridges as expressed within the hillside development ordinance, areas of geologic hazard, and slopes in excess of forty-five percent shall be protected from development;
    8. The master planned development advances the purposes of this chapter as stated in the objectives and characteristics.
B. Special Conditions. The land use authority may, in its discretion, apply such special conditions or stipulations to the approval of a master planned development as may be required to maintain harmony with neighboring uses or landscape and to further promote the objectives of this chapter, the Moab City General Plan, and other applicable land use ordinances. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, increased buffering or screening, special landscape requirements, architectural material or color requirements, and site layout for view shed and vista preservation. (Ord. 15-04 (part), 2015: Ord. 06-17 (part), 2006)

17.65.040 Standards and requirements.
A. General Provisions. The following provisions shall apply to any master planned development:
    1. Yield Density Determination. There shall be no area, width and location requirements; provided, that minimum open space acreage is met, and floodways and all slopes in excess of forty-five percent are protected from development.
    2. MPD Density Bonus. A residential density bonus of fifteen percent (0.15 times maximum yield density) shall be granted for master planned developments in the SAR zone.
    3. Moderate-Income Housing Density Bonus. An additional moderate-income housing density bonus of fifteen percent (0.15 times the maximum yield density) may be granted; provided, that a majority (greater than fifty percent) of total bonus density units meet moderate-income housing requirements as outlined in the Moab moderate-income housing plan.
        a. Moderate-income dwelling units used as the basis for approving a moderate-income housing density bonus shall be subject to a recorded deed restriction conforming with all applicable city affordable housing ordinances and policies.
    4. Lot Size. No minimum area of lots shall apply within an MPD.
    5. Setbacks. No minimum per-lot setbacks shall apply within an MPD.
    6. Emergency Access. Each lot shall have a minimum of one twenty-foot-wide dedicated emergency access to a public or private street. Staff may approve the sharing of access between multiple lots; provided, that emergency vehicle access is available.
B. Open Space Required. All master planned developments shall be required to convey common open space as outlined in the provisions and matrix below. In cases where acreage of floodways or slopes in excess of forty-five percent is greater than required minimum open space acreage, all floodways and slopes in excess of forty-five percent shall be protected from development and shall increase the required open space.
    1. SAR Zones. Not less than seventy percent of the site area within a SAR zone shall be conveyed as open space in the manner provided for in subsection (C) of this section.
    +------+-----------------+---------------+
    | Zone | Residential MPD | Mixed-Use MPD |
    +------+-----------------+---------------+
    | SAR  | 70%             | 70%           |
    +------+-----------------+---------------+
C. Types of Open Space. In order to allow maximum design flexibility while providing the required open space dedications, all preliminary or final MPDs shall designate types of open space within the approved plan. Open space designations are not required to be separate parcels, but shall act as a general guide in balancing the need for both natural open areas and recreational or public amenities. These provisions intend to allow a certain percentage of the required open space dedication to be developed with recreational or public amenities and infrastructure, as outlined in the matrix below. The following open space classifications shall be allowed as per the maximum allowable type of open space list below:
    1. Natural or Naturalized Open Space. “Natural” or “naturalized” means open space left in its current natural state or returned to a traditionally native natural state by means of landscape restoration.
        a. Whenever practical, natural open space should be conveyed in areas adjacent to the master planned development site boundaries and specifically adjacent to other off-site natural open space, thus creating larger contiguous areas of natural open space across parcel boundaries.
        b. Vegetation should reflect and compliment the natural characteristics of the surrounding landscape within the master planned development and adjacent properties.
    2. Passive Recreation. “Passive recreation areas” means open space that has minimal introduced infrastructure. Passive recreation areas may contain trail-based hiking, biking, horseback riding, wildlife viewing, picnicking, landscaped parks and similar minimally invasive activities and related infrastructure.
        a. Any introduced infrastructure for passive recreation shall be visually unified with the surrounding natural landscape or overall architectural design motif in terms of color, materials and scale.
    3. Active Recreation. “Active recreation areas” means open space that may contain introduced infrastructure related to sports fields and other facilities. Active recreation areas may contain equestrian facilities, courts and fields, outdoor entertainment areas, plazas and other gathering spaces.
        a. Infrastructure for active recreation shall be developed in a visually unified design scheme directly related to other development infrastructure such as dwellings or commercial uses in terms of color, materials, and scale.
    4. Public Pedestrian Amenities. “Public pedestrian amenities” means open space that contains introduced infrastructure related to the public streetscape and has a pedestrian priority, including public plazas, outdoor gathering areas, pedestrian malls, outdoor entertainment areas, sidewalk cafes, pocket parks, fountains and other public gathering spaces.
    +------+---------------------------------------------+-----------------+---------------+
    | Zone |               Open Space Type               | Residential MPD | Mixed-Use MPD |
    +------+---------------------------------------------+-----------------+---------------+
    | SAR                                                                                  |
    +------+---------------------------------------------+-----------------+---------------+
    |      | Natural or Naturalized                      | Max. 100%       | Max. 100%     |
    +------+---------------------------------------------+-----------------+---------------+
    |      | Passive Recreation (minimal infrastructure) | Max. 30%        | Max. 30%      |
    +------+---------------------------------------------+-----------------+---------------+
    |      | Active Recreation (infrastructure)          | Max. 15%        | Max. 15%      |
    +------+---------------------------------------------+-----------------+---------------+
D. Conveyance of Open Space. Common open space tracts provided by a master planned development shall be conveyed as follows:
    1. To a nonprofit corporation, homeowners association, or trust owned or to be owned by the owners of lots or dwelling units within the master planned development, or via an undivided conveyance to the owners of units within a cooperative or condominium development. If such a corporation or trust is used, ownership shall pass with the conveyances of the lots of dwelling units; or
    2. To the City of Moab and accepted by it for a park, open space, agricultural, or other specified use or uses;
    3. In all cases, the conveyance shall be approved by the City’s land use authority and shall be in a form approved by the Moab City Attorney; and
    4. In all cases, where common open space in a master planned development is conveyed pursuant to the requirements above, a deed restriction enforceable by the City of Moab shall be recorded in conjunction with the final MPD plan that provides that the common open space shall be used and maintained solely for purposes consistent with the MPD approval, and that it shall not be subject to further development. (Ord. 15-04 (part), 2015: Ord. 07-07 (part), 2007; Ord. 06-17 (part), 2006)

17.65.050 Reduction of physical design requirements.
A. Right-of-Way Width. In approving a master planned development, the land use authority may reduce the total right-of-way width of any private streets that would otherwise be required by subdivision regulations and other provisions of this code to a minimum of twenty feet. Streets dedicated to the City for public use shall have a minimum right-of-way width of thirty-three feet.
B. Sidewalks. In lieu of required sidewalks the land use authority may approve acceptable substitutes such as accessible trail ways or separated multi-use paths; provided, that the substitute promotes pedestrian circulation and suitable access by persons with disabilities within and through the development and will be maintained.
C. Curb and Gutter. Master planned developments may substitute required city standard curb and gutter improvements with an acceptable alternative that fulfills similar purposes.
The alternative to curb and gutter shall be approved by the City Engineer and public works director and should be incorporated into the stormwater management plan. (Ord. 15-04 (part), 2015: Ord. 06-17 (part), 2006)

17.65.060 Supplementary regulations.
A. Commercial Establishment Size Limits. The gross floor area of any single retail commercial establishment, building or commercial tenant space within any master planned development shall not exceed twenty-five thousand square feet.
B. Site Layout for Residential and Commercial Buildings. Buildings shall be oriented to the street, pedestrian plazas or landscaped courtyards, and streetscapes shall include pedestrian-friendly amenities such as wider sidewalks, enhanced landscaping, pedestrian-scale lighting, and street furnishings.
    1. Ground-floor residential units shall be directly accessed from landscaped courtyards or pedestrian plazas when not adjacent to public streets.
    2. Townhomes and all other multihousehold dwelling units with private exterior ground-floor entries shall provide at least twenty square feet of landscaping adjacent to the entry. Landscaped area may be shared between units at a minimum of ten square feet per unit.
    3. Single-Household Detached, Two-Household Dwelling Housing and Cottage Housing. All proposed ground-floor single-household units shall contain a minimum of four and a maximum of twelve cottages/units located in a cluster to encourage a sense of community among the residents. A development site may contain more than one cottage housing development.
        a. All cottages shall be within sixty feet walking distance of the common open space or pedestrian amenities.
C. Pedestrian Priority. Pedestrian priority areas are areas within a mixed-use MPD development where primary design consideration shall be given to pedestrians rather than vehicles. Such areas shall be subject to the following provisions:
    1. All mixed-use developments shall include at least one pedestrian priority area.
    2. A pedestrian priority area shall be located between all residential and nonresidential areas or uses and shall be designed to integrate the different types of land uses to the greatest extent practicable.
    3. Additional pedestrian priority areas may be required based on site design variables such as the number and location(s) of residential and nonresidential components. In all cases there shall be at least one pedestrian area meeting the requirements of this section for each three hundred feet of public street frontage.
    4. The required pedestrian area, plaza or similar gathering space shall have a minimum area of one thousand square feet and a minimum dimension of twenty feet.
    5. Outdoor seating areas used by restaurants may be counted toward the total open space and pedestrian priority area requirement.
    6. The developer(s) and/or property owner(s) of a mixed-use development shall establish an arrangement to assure the City of a continued standard of maintenance and responsibility of the common open space and recreational facilities. The management and maintenance arrangement shall be approved by the City prior to the occupancy of any buildings within the development.
    7. Applicants must successfully demonstrate how the proposed pedestrian area meets all of the following criteria:
        a. Paved walking surfaces of either concrete or approved alternative paving;
        b. At least two linear feet of seating area (bench, ledge, etc.) or one individual seat per sixty square feet of plaza area or open space (up to fifty percent of seats may be moveable);
        c. Location in areas with significant pedestrian traffic to provide interest and security, such as adjacent to a building entry; and
        d. Utilization of decorative pavement patterns, tree grates, artwork, landscaping, information kiosks, lighting, fountains or other visual amenities.
D. Sidewalks. Sidewalks and pathways along the facade of mixed-use and retail buildings shall include an eight-foot minimum unobstructed walking surface and street trees placed no more than thirty feet on center per landscaping requirements.
E. Perimeter Setbacks. Perimeter setbacks shall be no less than ten feet in width and shall be adequately landscaped. A landscape plan must bear the stamp of a Utah licensed landscape architect or landscape designer approved by the City.
F. Parking. All off-street parking areas within a mixed-use MPD shall be, when possible, located at the rear or side of a building or complex of buildings, away from public streets and screened from view. Shared drive access routes between commercial developments and parking areas are encouraged to reduce the number of curb-cuts and pedestrian conflicts on a public street.
    1. The total number of parking spaces required for a mixed-use project may be reduced by five percent.
    2. A reduction of parking standards up to twenty percent may be granted based upon justification shown within a parking impact study. The study shall be subject to review and modification by the City of Moab planning and engineering staff.
G. Facade Transparency. A minimum of fifty percent of any street-facing building facade between three feet and eight feet in height shall be comprised of windows that allow views into and out of indoor spaces. Where unavoidable conflicts with mechanical or other engineering structures occur, this requirement may be reduced and substituted with staff approved architectural detailing.
H. Entrances and Doors. Commercial or mixed-use buildings adjacent to public streets shall have a primary entrance door facing a public sidewalk. Entrances at building corners are encouraged and may be used to satisfy this requirement for corner lots with two public street frontages.
I. Landscaping and Trees Required. In addition to the landscaping requirements of Chapters 17.09 and 12.24, Tree Stewardship, the following landscaping treatments shall be required of all mixed-use MPD in established commercial zones:
    1. Street trees of an approved variety shall be planted along all public streets unless otherwise agreed upon during the pre-application conference. All trees shall be a minimum of two inches caliper measured at four feet above the root ball at the time of planting and shall be planted at minimum intervals of thirty feet on center.
    2. As an alternative to some of the required street trees, developments may provide pedestrian-scaled light fixtures at the same spacing. However, no less than one tree per sixty lineal feet of the required walkway shall be required. To increase business visibility and accessibility, the responsible official may allow breaks in the required tree coverage adjacent to major building entries.
    3. Nonvegetative ground covers, including but not limited to rocks and small stones, crushed rock, cinders, and bark, shall cover no more than twenty percent of the landscaped ground surface. Areas covered by such non-vegetative ground covers shall be broken up as much as possible by live plant materials.
    4. A landscape plan must be submitted and bear the stamp of a Utah licensed landscape architect or landscape designer approved by the City. (Ord. 19-13 § 21 (part), 2019; Ord. 15-04 (part), 2015: Ord. 13-09 (part), 2013; Ord. 06-17 (part), 2006)

17.65.070 Phasing.
A. Phasing. If the proposed MPD is to be constructed in phases, the project as a whole shall be portrayed in the application and shall require preliminary MPD approval. Subsequent development phases shall be approved through final MPD approval process. (Ord. 15-04 (part), 2015: Ord. 06-17 (part), 2006)

17.65.080 MPD review procedures.
The master planned development review process is intended to provide a means of consolidating various reviews for large scale projects into a single master plan application and review. A master planned development that has an approved preliminary development plan shall only be required to complete a final plat or site plan review for individual phases or portions of the development. Any master planned development without phasing shall complete a final development plan review.
All master planned developments shall be required to follow the following approval process:
A. Steps to Approval. There are four required review steps to a master planned development approval:
    1. MPD Pre-application Meeting. A pre-application conference shall be held with the planning staff and/or Planning Commission in order for the applicant to generally describe the proposed development concept and receive professional recommendation based upon the City’s requirements, and to become acquainted with the master planned development procedures and related requirements;
    2. Concept MPD review;
    3. Preliminary MPD review;
    4. Final MPD review, or site plan review.
    +------+-----------------------+---------------------+--------------+----------------------+--------+
    | Step |         Task          |      Advisory       |   Approval   |    Public Hearing    | Appeal |
    +------+-----------------------+---------------------+--------------+----------------------+--------+
    | 1    | Pre-Application       | Staff               | Staff        | *                    | *      |
    |      | Meeting(s)            |                     |              |                      |        |
    +------+-----------------------+---------------------+--------------+----------------------+--------+
    | 2    | Complete Application, | Staff               | Staff        | *                    | *      |
    |      | Fees                  |                     |              |                      |        |
    +------+-----------------------+---------------------+--------------+----------------------+--------+
    | 3    | Concept MPD           | Staff               | Staff        | *                    | *      |
    +------+-----------------------+---------------------+--------------+----------------------+--------+
    | 4    | Preliminary           | Planning Commission | City Council | Planning Commission1 | **     |
    |      | MPD                   |                     |              |                      |        |
    +------+-----------------------+---------------------+--------------+----------------------+--------+
    | 5    | Final MPD             | Planning Commission | City Council | *                    | **     |
    +------+-----------------------+---------------------+--------------+----------------------+--------+
    *Not required
    **Appeals authority
    1If a plat is required by state law.
B. Appeal Procedure. Any person who is a party to the application, the applicant, or the owner may appeal to the appeal authority by filing a notice of appeal with the City Recorder within fifteen days from the date of the administrative decision in issue. In any appeal, the complaining party shall have the burden of proof, and the appeal body shall not overturn the decision unless it was clearly erroneous under applicable law. The appeal authority decision shall be issued in writing.
C. Exhaustion of Remedies. No person may challenge in district court any decision under this chapter until that person has exhausted all administrative remedies and a final decision is issued by the appeal body. Any such action shall be commenced no later than thirty days from the date of the final appeal decision. (Ord. 15-04 (part), 2015: Ord. 13-11, 2013; Ord. 10-06 (part), 2010; Ord. 08-30, 2008; Ord. 06-17 (part), 2006)

17.65.090 Concept MPD.
The concept development plan shall include an area plan that depicts the development site concept including the locations of existing infrastructure and buildings and shall include the following:
A. Vicinity Plan. The vicinity plan shall include the location of the property, all adjacent parcels, and existing public or private streets and trails.
B. Site inventory including:
    1. Topography at minimum two-foot contour intervals;
    2. Slope inventory showing slopes between twenty-five and forty-five percent and slopes in excess of forty-five percent, including areas of geologic hazard;
    3. Natural streams, drainages, washes, and mapped floodways or FW zoned areas;
    4. Tree or shrub groupings of four thousand square feet or more;
    5. Specimen trees, to include all noninvasive trees measuring five-inch caliper and greater;
    6. Significant rock outcroppings or formations;
    7. Historically or culturally significant landscapes or structures; and
    8. Prominent viewpoints and vista areas.
C. Conceptual Development Plan. The concept development plan shall include a conceptual layout of all parcels, open space, rights-of-way, building envelopes, and other features, including the conceptual phasing of the development and a statement of the overall project design features; and listing or depiction of the following:
    1. Total gross acreage of the site;
    2. Proposed total number of lots or units;
    3. Total estimated square footage residential and commercial footprint; and
    4. Existing easements, rights-of-way, and interests affecting the site.
D. Architectural Concepts. Architectural concepts shall include information sufficient to describe architectural styles, color schemes, general building heights, and materials.
E. Key Observation Points. During the concept review phase, the Planning Commission shall establish areas of critical viewshed concern by determining key observation points that may exist along nearby public roads, public gathering spaces, or other areas deemed by the Planning Commission to be visually impacted by the proposed development. (Ord. 15-04 (part), 2015: Ord. 06-17 (part), 2006)

17.65.100 Preliminary MPD.
The preliminary development plan shall identify the final proposed location of all lots, tracts, parcels, open space, rights-of-way, building envelopes, and other significant features. Components of this submittal may be combined into one or more site plans or reports; provided, that they are clear, legible and successfully demonstrate their purpose.
A complete preliminary development plan application shall include the following components:
A. Significant Features Plan. A significant features plan shall include natural and cultural features from the concept site inventory that will be protected through delineation of open space or have been integrated into the design of the MPD by other means. Areas of natural or geologic hazard shall be delineated in the significant features plan.
B. Open Space Plan. The open space plan shall include delineated areas within the development conveyed to common open space as described in Section 17.65.040(B); and shall consist of the following:
    1. The total acreage of open space and acreage of each open space tract;
    2. The percentage of open space in relation to the gross acreage of the development;
    3. The delineation of all open space types as outlined in Section 17.65.040(C), including:
        a. Listed acreage of all designated natural or naturalized open space, passive recreational open space, active recreational open space, and public pedestrian amenities,
        b. Percent of designated open space types in relation to the total acreage of all open space.
C. Traffic, Trails and Circulation Plan. The traffic, trails and circulation plan shall incorporate the location and design features of all motorized and non-motorized streets, trails and parking areas; including:
    1. Circulation of automobile traffic;
    2. Cross-sections of all street types;
    3. Emergency vehicle access areas;
    4. Parking areas and total numbers of spaces;
    5. Proposed trails or other pedestrian infrastructure; and
    6. Proposed links to off-site trails and public access areas.
D. Utility Plan. The utility plan shall show existing and proposed utility infrastructure within the site, including sewers, water mains, all underground facilities including telephone, cable television, or data lines, location of fire hydrants or other emergency infrastructure.
E. Grading and Drainage Plan and Report. The grading and drainage report shall include stormwater management, erosion control, and grading plans describing the methods by which surface water, natural drainages, flooding, erosion and sedimentation loss, and hydrological hazards will be controlled during and after construction. Individual plans shall include:
    1. Existing topography, including elevations, and the clearly delineated location and depth of all proposed fills and cuts of finished earth surfaces, as well as any mapped floodways or FW zoned areas; and
    2. Locations and proposed details for storm sewers, detention/retention structures, diversions, waterways, drains, culverts and other water management or erosion control measures.
    3. All grading and drainage plans shall demonstrate that the proposed development will result in no net increase in off-site stormwater discharge and no net increase in the base flood discharge depth, as defined in the City’s flood damage prevention ordinance.
F. Landscape and Irrigation Plan. The landscape plan shall show all existing and proposed landscaping, planting details, and irrigation. The plan shall include information such as the total number of existing trees on site, the trees to be removed, trees to be planted on site, and a plant list that indicates plant quantity, spacing, size, and root type. The landscape plan shall be prepared by a licensed landscape architect.
G. Signage Plan. A signage plan shall be submitted in order to ensure long term aesthetic compatibility of signage throughout the MPD. The signage plan shall describe the location, size, materials and design of all signage in the development, including, but not limited to:
    1. Temporary signs and signs that will exist during the sales and marketing of the development;
    2. Individual tenant or building signage;
    3. Directional and wayfinding signage;
    4. Sign colors, materials, and illumination methods;
    5. Location and size;
    6. Sign lettering style and logos;
    7. Accompanying ornamental structures;
    8. Landscaping beds around permanent signs; and
    9. Drawings and illustrations of proposed sign types.
H. Exterior Lighting Plan. The exterior lighting plan shall indicate the location, size, height, typical design, material, color, and method and direction of proposed illumination and lighting.
I. Architectural Design Plan. Conceptual architectural renderings or perspective drawings that indicate elevations, exterior wall finishes, and visual character of proposed buildings types.
J. Phasing Plan. If applicable, the phasing plan shall delineate construction and anticipated platting schedule of various sub-areas within the development.
K. Codes, Covenants and Restrictions. An MPD shall submit a proposed set of codes, covenants and restrictions which shall be recorded following approval of their content and the approval of the final MPD. Covenants shall demonstrate compliance with the use restrictions, architectural plans, and attributes of the development, and shall provide a mechanism for enforcement of restrictions, as well as provisions for the ownership and maintenance of common areas, open space, and other project improvements.
L. Other. Any other applicable studies or reports as required by the land use authority or staff, or as required by other provisions of the Moab Municipal Code. Such reports include, but are not limited to, geotechnical reports, soils reports, slope inventories, and traffic impact analysis reports.
M. Illustrative Renderings. Illustrative conceptual design, drawings, visual aides, models, sections, or any other requirements the land use authority feels would help understand the concept.
N. Title Report. The applicant shall deliver an ownership and encumbrance report, title commitment, or similar report showing current ownership of the subject real property and including copies of all deeds or other instruments affecting title to the MPD site. The application shall be signed by the current owner of record. (Ord. 15-04 (part), 2015: Ord. 06-17 (part), 2006)

17.65.110 Final MPD.
After the preliminary plan has been approved by the Planning Commission, the applicant shall submit prints of a final plan to the Planning Commission through the Zoning Administrator for approval thereof, showing in detail the following information:
A. Site Plan. Detailed site plan with complete dimensions showing precise locations of all buildings and structures, lot or parcel sizes and locations, designations of open spaces and special use areas, detailed circulation pattern including proposed ownership;
B. Building Plans. Preliminary building plans, including floor plans and exterior elevations;
C. Landscape Plan. Detailed landscaping plans produced and stamped by a registered landscape architect showing the types and sizes of all plant materials and their locations, decorative materials, recreation equipment, special effects, and sprinkler or irrigation systems;
D. Parking Plan. Dimensioned parking layout showing location of individual parking stalls and all areas of ingress or egress;
E. Engineering Plan. Detailed engineering plans and final subdivision plat showing site grading, street improvements, drainage and public utility locations. Also, submission of the engineering feasibility studies if required by the Zoning Administrator;
F. Covenants. A copy of protective covenants, articles of incorporation, bonds and guarantees, as required by the Zoning Administrator and/or the City Attorney;
G. Title. A certificate of title showing the ownership of the land;
H. Certificate of Acceptance. A certificate of acceptance by the City Council for any dedication of public streets and other public areas, if any, that are made by the owners;
I. Accuracy of Survey. A certificate of accuracy by an engineer or land surveyor registered to practice in the state of Utah;
J. Consistency with Approvals. All final MPD submittals shall be reviewed for consistency with this chapter and all preliminary MPD approval conditions. (Ord. 15-04 (part), 2015: Ord. 06-17 (part), 2006)

17.65.120 Development agreements.
Once the land use authority has approved either the (A) phased preliminary master planned development, or (B) final master planned development, the approval shall be put in the form of a development agreement. The development agreement shall be in a form approved by the City Attorney, and shall contain, at a minimum, the following:
A. A legal description of the land;
B. All relevant zoning parameters including all findings, conclusions and conditions of approval;
C. An express reservation of the future legislative power and zoning authority of the City;
D. A copy of the approved master plan, architectural plans, landscape plans, grading plan, trails and open space plans, and other plans which are a part of the Planning Commission approval;
E. A description of all developer exactions or agreed upon public dedications;
F. The developer’s agreement to pay all specified impact fees;
G. The form of ownership anticipated for the project and the specific project phasing plan;
H. Financial guarantees for all required improvements;
I. Final covenants, conditions, and restrictions.
J. All fees associated with the approval documents are the responsibility of the applicant.
The development agreement shall also contain language which allows for minor, administrative modifications to occur to the approval without revision of the agreement. To obtain approval, the development agreement must be signed by the applicant and submitted to the City Council within six months of the date the project was approved by the land use authority, or said approval of the plat or plan shall expire. The development agreement shall be signed by the City Council and recorded with the county recorder. All agreements and plans or plats shall be recorded within six months of approval or the agreement and all approvals are null and void. If the applicant chooses to pursue the development, a new application and all fees shall be submitted by the applicant to the City planning and zoning department in accordance with the municipal code sections above. (Ord. 15-04 (part), 2015: Ord. 06-17 (part), 2006)

17.65.130 Amendment procedures.
An approved MPD, or subsequent revision thereto, shall be binding as to the general intent and apportionment of land for buildings, sewage disposal, storm water management, sensitive area protection, stipulated use, circulation pattern, domestic water and landscaping. Amendments that change the character, basic design, building density and intensity, open space or any other requirements and conditions contained in the MPD shall not be permitted without prior review and approval by the Planning Commission. If approved, amendments shall be clearly depicted as a revision to approved plans.
A. Minor Changes. Minor changes in the location and placement of buildings may be authorized by the Moab City planning department staff where unforeseen circumstances, such as engineering requirements, dictate such change. When in question, the Moab City planning staff may determine whether the changes shall be classified as minor or major, or may refer the question to the land use authority, if deemed necessary.
B. Major Changes. Major changes, such as alterations in structural types, in the shapes and arrangements of multiple lots and blocks, in the allocation of open space or other land uses which increase density and/or intensity of the project, in project phasing, and all other changes which significantly affect the overall design or intent of the project shall be referred to the land use authority, after which the authority shall consider and shall either approve or deny the changes in the final development plan. If such changes are authorized, the developer shall submit a revised plan showing the authorized changes. (Ord. 15-04 (part), 2015: Ord. 06-17 (part), 2006)

17.65.140 Compliance with the approved development plan.
A. Enforcement. If the Moab City planning staff determines that the development substantially differs from the approved plans, the City shall notify the developer in writing. Thereafter, if the violation or departure from approval conditions is not cured or abated, the building official or Zoning Administrator may issue orders to the developer including, but not limited to:
    1. Revoking MPD plan approval;
    2. Revoking or terminating the issuance of building permits;
    3. Commencing a civil action to enjoin or abate the violation of this chapter or any MPD plan or development agreement;
    4. Enforcing any remedies in any development agreement; and/or
    5. Proceeding with any other remedies authorized pursuant to U.C.A. Sections 10-9a-802 and 10-9a-803.
B. Fees and Costs. In any civil enforcement action under this chapter the City, upon showing proof of a violation under this chapter or any approval or agreement pursuant to this chapter, shall be entitled to recover its reasonable attorney fees and court costs in addition to any other relief authorized herein. (Ord. 15-04 (part), 2015: Ord. 06-17 (part), 2006)

Chapter 17.66 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS*

Sections:
17.66.010    Intent.
17.66.020    Small scale planned unit developments.
17.66.030    Large scale planned unit developments.
17.66.040    Permitted uses.
17.66.050    Standards and requirements.
17.66.060    Design standards.
17.66.070    Procedures generally.
17.66.080    Vicinity plan and environmental analysis.
17.66.090    Preliminary plan.
17.66.100    Preliminary documents.
17.66.110    Planning Commission actions.
17.66.120    Planning Commission procedures.
17.66.140    Public hearing.
17.66.150    Final plan and approval.
17.66.160    Filing fees.
17.66.170    Stage construction permitted.
17.66.180    Performance guarantee.
17.66.190    Bond duration.
17.66.200    Default.
17.66.210    Final disposition and release.
17.66.220    Failure to comply.

17.66.010 Intent.
The intent of this chapter shall be to set down regulations under which development can be carried out that will achieve a better relationship between open space and buildings, greater harmony between the development and the surrounding area, wider variety of residential settings, more economical development, accommodation of affordable housing, superior maintenance of buildings and premises, and a better living environment than is possible to achieve by developing on a lot-by-lot basis. Upon approval of a planned unit development, the features and dimensions shown on the approved plan will constitute the zoning restrictions and regulations as applied to the territory shown on the approved plan. (Ord. 99-06 (part), 1999: prior code § 27-23-1)

17.66.020 Small scale planned unit developments.
Small scale planned unit developments shall be allowed in the R-3, R-4 and C-1 zones, provided that a parcel has a minimum of three acres and is owned by one continuous property owner. The standard allowable density shall be eight dwellings per acre, up to a maximum of ten units per acre utilizing affordable housing density bonuses. At least twenty-five percent of the gross area of the planned unit development shall be retained in permanent open space. Parks, playgrounds, sidewalks, nonmotorized pathways and trails may be computed in the twenty-five percent open space requirement. Land proposed to be devoted to vehicular streets or roads, parking, and driveways, shall not be included in the computation of open space, park or playground areas.
The Planning Commission may approve two additional units per acre over and above the standard density otherwise allowed in a planned unit development if the petitioner increases the number of affordable housing units according to the following formula:
+-------------------------+---------------------------------------+
| % of Area Median Income | Bonus Units to be Used for Affordable |
|                         |                Housing                |
+-------------------------+---------------------------------------+
| 60                      | 2 out of 10 dwelling units            |
+-------------------------+---------------------------------------+
| 80                      | 3 out of 10 dwelling units            |
+-------------------------+---------------------------------------+
A. Every affordable housing unit shall be sold or conveyed pursuant to a deed restriction (covenant) containing the following requirements:
    1. The purchaser must qualify with verified income meeting affordable housing guidelines;
    2. Each unit must be owner-occupied for at least the first five years, and no individual shall be entitled to own more than one affordable unit;
    3. Appreciation in value over purchase cost of each residential unit shall be capped at four percent per annum;
    4. The City shall be designated as a necessary grantor in every conveyance of an affordable housing unit;
    5. Leasing shall be permitted no sooner than five years from the date of purchase, with lease rates being no greater than the amount of the monthly first mortgage payment, plus ten percent; and
    6. The City shall be designated as a third-party beneficiary entitled to enforce, enjoin, or seek damages for violations of the deed restrictions.
B. The City may require additional deed restrictions to affordable housing units incident to approval of the final plat/plan to the extent dictated by the attributes of the particular development, lender requirements, or state or federal regulations. (Ord. 99-06 (part), 1999)

17.66.030 Large scale planned unit developments.
Large scale planned unit developments will be allowed in all R-1, R-2, and RA-1 zoning districts provided that a parcel has a minimum of five acres and is owned by one continuous property owner. The standard allowable density shall be six dwellings per acre, up to a maximum of eight units per acre utilizing the additional open space alternative or the affordable housing density bonus alternative. At least forty percent of the gross area of the planned unit development shall be retained in permanent open space. Parks, playgrounds, sidewalks, nonmotorized pathways and trails may be computed in the forty percent open space requirement. Land proposed to be devoted to vehicular streets or roads, parking, and driveways, shall not be included in the computation of open space, park or playground areas.
A. Additional Open Space Alternative. For large scale planned unit developments, the Planning Commission may approve a density bonus over and above the standard density otherwise allowed if the petitioner increases the percentage of open space provided in the development according to the following formula:
+------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| % of Area Used as Open Space |  Bonus Units to be Used for Open Space  |
+------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| Over 50% open space          | 1 additional dwelling unit (7 maximum)  |
+------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| Over 60% open space          | 2 additional dwelling units (8 maximum) |
+------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
The petitioner shall enter into an agreement with the City ensuring that the area remain in open space for set period of time agreeable to the City, and shall provide any other insurance required by the City to guarantee that the intent of the ordinance codified in this chapter is achieved.
B. Affordable Housing Bonus Density Alternative. The Planning Commission may approve additional units per acre over and above the standard density otherwise allowed in a planned unit development if the petitioner increases the number of affordable housing units according to the following formula:
+-------------------------+---------------------------------------+
| % of Area Median Income | Bonus Units to be Used for Affordable |
|                         |                Housing                |
+-------------------------+---------------------------------------+
| 60                      | 2 out of 8 dwelling units             |
+-------------------------+---------------------------------------+
| 80                      | 3 out of 8 dwelling units             |
+-------------------------+---------------------------------------+
C. Every affordable housing unit shall be sold or conveyed pursuant to a deed restriction (covenant) containing the following requirements:
    1. The purchaser must qualify with verified income meeting affordable housing guidelines;
    2. Each unit must be owner-occupied for at least the first five years, and no individual shall be entitled to own more than one affordable unit;
    3. Appreciation in value over purchase cost of each residential unit shall be capped at four percent per annum;
    4. The City shall be designated as a necessary grantor in every conveyance of an affordable housing unit;
    5. Leasing shall be permitted no sooner than five years from the date of purchase, with lease rates being no greater than the amount of the monthly first mortgage payment, plus ten percent; and
    6. The City shall be designated as a third-party beneficiary entitled to enforce, enjoin, or seek damages for violations of the deed restrictions.
D. The City may require additional deed restrictions to affordable housing units incident to approval of the final plat/plan to the extent dictated by the attributes of the particular development, lender requirements, or state or federal regulations. (Ord. 99-06 (part), 1999)

17.66.040 Permitted uses.
The following uses shall be permitted in a planned unit development:
A. Single-household dwellings;
B. Townhouses;
C. Modular homes;
D. Rest homes;
E. Golf courses;
F. Swimming pools;
G. Recreation buildings;
H. Parks and playground facilities;
I. Churches;
J. Schools;
K. Similar facilities, for use by only the occupants of the development or the public-at-large as the Planning Commission deems appropriate. (Ord. 19-13 § 21 (part), 2019; Ord. 99-06 (part), 1999: Ord. 94-04 (part), 1994: prior code § 27-23-3(C))

17.66.050 Standards and requirements.
All parking spaces, parking areas and driveways must be hard-surfaced (paved) and properly drained with no drainage running across public or private walkways. Hard surface shall be paved concrete, asphalt or other pavement systems that perform similarly for the intended use as approved by the public works director. All weather, nonpaved driveways and parking areas may be permitted within planned unit developments containing three or fewer total dwelling units. All nonpaved driveways and parking areas shall be approved by the public works director. (Ord. 07-01, 2007: Ord. 06-02, 2006: Ord. 99-06 (part), 1999: Ord. 94-04 (part), 1994; prior code § 27-23-3(D))

17.66.060 Design standards.
Property development standards in excess of the minimums set forth in this section may be imposed by the Planning Commission where it is determined that such increases are necessary to ensure that the integrity and desirability of the planned unit development will be maintained.
A. Minimum Design Standards. 
    1. Setbacks shall be maintained along the peripheral property lines of the planned unit development which shall be at least equal to that required by the zone on the property immediately adjacent thereto;
    2. In those instances where a proposed planned unit development will front upon one or more existing streets, the setback from the street shall be equal to that required by the most restrictive zoning on the property immediately adjacent along the same street frontage;
    3. Minimum right-of-way width shall be forty feet;
    4. Minimum street width shall be thirty feet;
    5. Minimum sidewalk width shall be five feet; and
    6. Dead end streets shall not exceed four hundred feet in length and must have a cul-de-sac with a minimum radius of at least fifty feet and a diameter of eighty feet curb to curb. (Ord. 99-06 (part), 1999)

17.66.070 Procedures generally.
Any person wishing to construct a planned unit development shall obtain from the Zoning Administrator information pertaining to the City’s plan of land use, streets, public facilities and other requirements affecting the land to be developed. The petitioner shall then prepare plans and obtain approval thereof as hereinafter set forth. (Ord. 99-06 (part), 1999: prior code § 27-23-2)

17.66.080 Vicinity plan and environmental analysis.
A. The design team shall prepare a vicinity plan which shows a simple sketch of the major features of the development in relation to existing conditions and planned development within one-fourth mile of the outside boundaries of the development and shall submit the same to the Zoning Administrator, together with an environmental analysis. The plan may be a pencil sketch or may be made directly on an aerial photograph.
B. The environmental analysis statement shall be prepared by an engineer, landscape architect, land planner or other person qualified by training and experience to prepare such a statement as determined by the Planning Commission, indicating and describing the measures that will be taken with respect to the following:
    1. Revegetation of cuts and fills and area which will be denuded in constructing the planned unit development;
    2. Prevention of fire and control of dust;
    3. Prevention of the accumulation of weeds and debris;
    4. Management of surface water and elimination of flood hazards; and
    5. Reduction in the need for the allocation of public funds for upkeep and maintenance of streets, water and sewer lines, landscaped areas, etc., within the territory to be included in the development. (Ord. 99-06 (part), 1999: prior code § 27-23-3(A))

17.66.090 Preliminary plan.
Upon approval of the vicinity plan by the Zoning Administrator, the petitioner shall then prepare a preliminary plan and shall submit five copies of the same to the Zoning Administrator. The plan must be submitted at least two weeks prior to the meeting of the Planning Commission. An administrative fee as established by resolution shall accompany the preliminary plan. The preliminary plan shall be drawn to a scale not smaller than one inch equals one hundred feet, or as recommended by the Zoning Administrator, and shall show the following information:
    1. Type of development;
    2. Name of development;
    3. Name and address of the petitioner; a current deed and an abstract of title or an ownership and encumbrance report showing the record title holder and all liens and encumbrances, affecting title;
    4. Name and address of the designer;
    5. Position of all buildings and structures to be constructed in the development. Also, the design of dwellings shall be shown, accompanied by estimates of the cost to purchasers or renters;
    6. Proposed parks, playgrounds, school sites, and other open spaces. Also, proposed buildings and other facilities for the common use of the occupants or for the public;
    7. Facilities and services to be supplied by the petitioner or by the association and the cost thereof to the occupants;
    8. North point and scale;
    9. Township, range, and section lines;
    10. Zone boundary lines and zone designations;
    11. Topography shown by contours at an interval no greater than two feet, except that a greater interval may be permitted when specifically authorized by action of the Zoning Administrator or authorized representative;
    12. Boundary of the development including a legal description thereof;
    13. Total acreage of the development;
    14. Adjacent property ownership;
    15. Preliminary subdivision plan showing layout of all proposed lots;
    16. Proposed circulation pattern including private and public streets, sidewalks and nonmotorized pathways and trails;
    17. Typical street or roadway cross-sections;
    18. Existing and proposed canals and waterways, public utility lines and easements, etc.;
    19. Proposed sewage disposal facilities;
    20. Existing and proposed storm drains, bridges and other storm water management measures;
    21. The location and type of water sources. Such sources shall be shown either on the preliminary plan or on an accompanying map drawn at a scale not smaller than one-inch equals two thousand feet. Appropriate supporting documents showing that potable water will be available to the project in quantities as required by the water superintendent, State Health Department, and fire marshal and that such water will be made available to each dwelling site through a properly designed distribution system shall be included as part of the preliminary plan;
    22. Tentative location and size of water mains;
    23. Tentative location of fire hydrants;
    24. Location and size of sewers; and
    25. Any other information which the Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission considers necessary to enable the Planning Commission to determine whether or not to recommend the plan to the City Council. (Ord. 99-06 (part), 1999: prior code § 27-23-3(B))

17.66.100 Preliminary documents.
The following documents shall be submitted along with the preliminary plan:
A. Proposed declaration of management policies, covenants and restrictions setting forth the responsibilities and duties of the owners, renters or occupants within the planned unit development;
B. In the event that the development is to be divided into two or more ownerships, the document must provide for adequate control and maintenance of all phases of the development;
C. An agreement between the petitioners and the City stating among other things:
    1. That in the event of failure or neglect on the part of the owners, successors or assigns to maintain the water and sewerage facilities, common areas, landscaping and other improvements in good condition, the City may perform the necessary work and may enter upon the land and do the work and charge the cost thereof, including reasonable attorneys fees, to the owners or their successors or assigns,
    2. That the owners, successors or assigns will reimburse the City for all costs which the City incurs in performing the necessary work,
    3. That the petitioner will construct and maintain the project in accordance with approved plans and in accordance with city standards,
    4. That the terms of the contract shall be binding upon the heirs, assigns, receivers and successors of the project for the life of the project or buildings, and
    5. Any other conditions that the Planning Commission deems to be reasonably necessary to carry out the intent of this title. (Ord. 99-06 (part), 1999: prior code § 27-23-3(E))

17.66.110 Planning Commission actions.
Upon presentation of the preliminary plan and documents, the Planning Commission shall either approve them as submitted or shall refer them back to the petitioner for one or more of the following reasons:
A. The development has been found to be inconsistent with either this title or the General Plan;
B. The Planning Commission requires that certain specific changes be made within the plans;
C. The plans or documents have not been completed;
D. Before approving the preliminary plan, the Planning Commission must make the following findings:
    1. That the proposed development will provide a more pleasant and attractive living environment than a conventional residential development,
    2. That the proposed development will create no detriment to adjacent properties nor to the general area in which it is located; and that it will be in substantial harmony with the character of existing developments in the area,
    3. That the project will provide more efficient use of the land and more usable open space than a conventional development permitted in the surrounding area,
    4. That increased densities allowed within the proposed planned unit development will be compensated by better site design and by the provision of increased amenities and recreational facilities, and
    5. That the development will not create increased hazards to the health, safety or general welfare of the residents of the proposed planned unit development or adjacent areas. (Ord. 99-06 (part), 1999: prior code § 27-23-4)

17.66.120 Planning Commission procedures.
A. The Planning Commission may impose such conditions on preliminary development plans as it may deem appropriate to meet the goals and objectives of this chapter, or may disapprove a planned unit development which is found to be deficient in meeting the intent of these provisions. Any such disapproval may be appealed to the City Council by filing such appeal with the Zoning Administrator within ten days after the decision of the Planning Commission.
B. Any failure to submit a final development plan within one year of the approval of the preliminary development plan shall terminate all proceedings and render the preliminary development plan null and void. (Ord. 99-06 (part), 1999: prior code § 27-23-5)

17.66.140 Public hearing.
The Planning Commission, shall after receiving all of the information and documentation required by this section, hold a public hearing after proper legal notice. (Ord. 06-01 (part), 2006: Ord. 99-06 (part), 1999: prior code § 27-23-7)

17.66.150 Final plan and approval.
After the preliminary plan has been approved by the City Council, the petitioner shall submit five prints of a final plan to the Planning Commission through the Zoning Administrator for approval thereof, showing in detail the following information:
A. All of the information required for submission with preliminary development plans;
B. Tabulations of all dwelling units to be constructed by types and number of bedrooms per unit;
C. Detailed site plan with complete dimensions showing precise locations of all buildings and structures, lot or parcel sizes and locations, designations of common open spaces and special use areas, detailed circulation pattern including proposed ownership;
D. Preliminary building plans, including floor plans and exterior elevations;
E. Detailed landscaping plans in accordance with Chapters 17.09 and 12.24, Tree Stewardship, showing the types and sizes of all plant materials and their locations, decorative materials, recreation equipment, special effects, and sprinkler or irrigation systems;
F. Dimensioned parking layout showing location of individual parking stalls and all areas of ingress or egress;
G. Detailed engineering plans and final subdivision plat showing site grading, street improvements, drainage and public utility locations. Also, submission of the engineering feasibility studies if required by the Zoning Administrator;
H. A copy of protective covenants, articles of incorporation, bonds and guarantees, as required by the Zoning Administrator and/or the City Attorney;
I. A certificate of title showing the ownership of the land;
J. A certificate of acceptance by the City Council for any dedication of public streets and other public areas, if any, that are made by the owners;
K. A certificate of accuracy by an engineer or land surveyor registered to practice in the state; and
L. Approval from the Planning Commission. (Ord. 13-09 (part), 2013; Ord. 99-06 (part), 1999: prior code § 27-23-8)

17.66.160 Filing fees.
A filing fee as established by resolution shall accompany the final plan. (Ord. 99-06 (part), 1999: prior code § 27-23-9)

17.66.170 Stage construction permitted.
Large scale planned unit developments may be carried out in progressive stages, provided assurance is given to the City that the requirements and intent of this title will be fully complied with. Each stage shall be considered as a separate application. No final plan for the initial stage shall cover less than two and a half acres when such projects are part of the overall project as shown on the approved preliminary plan. (Ord. 99-06 (part), 1999: prior code § 27-23-10)

17.66.180 Performance guarantee.
A. Adequate guarantees shall be provided for permanent retention of the open space area as follows:
    1. The City shall require the petitioner to furnish and record protective covenants, which will guarantee the retention of the open land area. The City shall also require the creation of a corporation granting beneficial rights to the open space to all owners or occupants of land within the development.
    2. The petitioner shall be required to develop and maintain all open space, unless part of or all of it is contiguous to and is made a part of an existing park.
    3. In the case of private reservation, the open space to be reserved shall be protected against subsequent building development by conveying to the City as part of the condition for project approval, an open space easement over such open areas, restricting the area against future building or use, except as approved on the final development plan.
    4. The care and maintenance of such open space reservation shall be ensured by the petitioner by establishing a private association or corporation responsible for such maintenance which shall levy the cost thereof and an assessment of the property owners within the planned unit development. Ownership and tax liability of private open space reservations shall be established in a manner acceptable to the City and made a part of the conditions of the final plan approval.
B. The applicant (owner) of any planned unit development which is being developed as a condominium project under the provisions of the Condominium Ownership Act of Utah, or subsequent amendments thereto, shall, prior to the conveyance of any unit, submit to the Zoning Administrator a master deed consisting of a declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions relating to the project, which shall become part of the final development plan and shall be recorded to run with the land. Such master deed shall include management policies which shall set forth the quality of maintenance that will be performed, and who is to be responsible for such maintenance within such condominium development. The document shall, as a minimum, contain the following:
    1. The establishment of a private association or corporation responsible for all maintenance, which shall levy the cost thereof as an assessment to each unit owner within the condominium development;
    2. The establishment of a management committee with provisions setting forth the number of persons constituting the committee, the method of selection and the powers and duties of such committee;
    3. The method of calling a meeting of the members of the corporation or association, with the members thereof that will constitute a quorum authorized to transact business;
    4. The method proposed for maintenance, repair and replacement of common areas and facilities, and distribution of costs therefor;
    5. The manner of collection from unit owners for their share of common expenses, and the method of assessment;
    6. Provisions as to percentage of votes by unit owners which shall be necessary to determine whether to rebuild, repair, restore or sell property in the event of damage or destruction of all or part of the project; and
    7. The method by which the declaration may be amended. The declaration required herein, any amendment and any instrument affecting the property or any unit therein shall be approved by the Planning Commission and recorded with the City Recorder. Neither the declaration nor any amendment thereto shall be valid until approved and recorded. The declaration and amendments thereto shall be maintained as part of the final development plan for the planned unit development.
C. In order to ensure that the planned unit development will be constructed to completion in accordance with approved plans, the petitioner shall post a bond or mortgage or other valuable assurance acceptable to the City Council in the form of a surety bond, letter of credit, cash escrow, first deed of trust, or similar collateral in an amount equal to one hundred twenty-five percent of the estimated cost of all required landscaping, road improvements, pedestrian ways, curbs and gutters, hard-surfacing, water and sewer lines and domestic sewage disposal facilities and common facilities as shown on the final plat/plan. city staff shall verify the correct amount of the bond based upon review of the cost of the required improvements. The duration of the bond shall be equivalent to the time deadlines specified in the improvements agreement, which, in any case shall not exceed twenty-four months from the date of approval. Final determination of the amount of the bond or other assurance shall be made by the legislative authority. No building permit for any portion of a planned unit development shall be issued until the final plan thereof has been approved by the Planning Commission. Compliance with all material terms of the improvements agreement and the final plat/plan shall be a prerequisite to the developer obtaining a building permit for individual dwellings and/or a certificate of occupancy or zoning compliance. (Ord. 99-06 (part), 1999: prior code § 27-23-12)

17.66.190 Bond duration.
The duration of the bond or other assurance shall be for two years from the date of approval of the development by the legislative authority. An extension of time may be granted by the legislative authority upon application by the petitioners, provided such application is submitted at least sixty days prior to the expiration of the bond and provided the issuer of the bond is willing to extend the time of the assurance. (Ord. 99-06 (part), 1999: prior code § 27-23-13)

17.66.200 Default.
Developers who: (a) fail to timely complete required improvements; (b) fail to complete construction in a workmanlike manner; (c) allow mechanic’s liens to attach to improvements; or (d) otherwise fail to comply with the improvements agreement shall be issued a notice of violation and informed of their default under the improvements agreement and guarantee. Each such developer shall be given a reasonable period of time, not to exceed thirty days, in which to cure any noncompliance with the improvements agreement. A developer contesting a notice of violation may request a hearing before the City Council by submitting a written request no later than ten days from the issuance of the notice of violation. Any action to forfeit the bond or collateral shall be stayed until completion of the hearing.
1. Default of any portion of the improvements agreement will result in the City recording an affidavit of lapse of improvements agreement. Thereafter, the developer shall be enjoined from any conveyance or transfer of platted lots, no further building permits will be issued, and a certificate of zoning compliance will not issue for any structures completed to that date. In addition, the City may, at its option, complete all or a portion of the remaining improvements required by the agreement or solicit bids for the completion of all such improvements. In such case the City shall be entitled to recover from the developer, the surety, and the holder of the collateral sufficient sums to cover all costs of construction, including incidental costs, and reasonable attorney fees.
2. Upon certification of completion by the Public Works Director and Zoning Administrator and acceptance of the improvements, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances, the City shall execute a written acceptance and release the bond or other collateral. Partial releases of collateral are authorized as improvements are completed and accepted in accordance with the phasing plan approved as part of the final plat/plan. (Ord. 99-06 (part), 1999: prior code § 27-23-14)

17.66.210 Final disposition and release.
The petitioner shall be responsible for the quality of all materials and workmanship. At the completion of the work, or not less than ten days prior to the release date of the bond or other assurance, the Zoning Administrator shall make a preliminary inspection of the improvements and shall submit a report to the City Council setting forth the conditions of such facilities. If all liens are paid and other conditions thereof are found satisfactory, the City Council shall release the bond or other assurance. If the condition of material or workmanship shows unusual depreciation or does not comply with the acceptable standards of durability, or if any outstanding liens are not paid, the City Council may declare the petitioner in default. (Ord. 99-06 (part), 1999: prior code § 27-23-15)

17.66.220 Failure to comply.
In case of failure or neglect to comply with any and/or all of the conditions and regulations as herein established, and as specifically made applicable to a planned unit development, the Zoning Administrator shall not issue a certificate of zoning compliance therefore. Such failure or neglect shall be cause for termination of the approval of the project. Such failure or neglect to comply with the requirements and to maintain the buildings and premises in accordance with the conditions of approval thereafter shall also be deemed a violation of this title. (Ord. 99-06 (part), 1999: prior code § 27-23-16)

Chapter 17.67 SITE PLAN REVIEW

Sections:
17.67.010    Purpose.
17.67.020    Site plan required--Exemptions.
17.67.030    Definitions.
17.67.040    Submittal requirements.
17.67.050    Review procedures.
17.67.060    Approval criteria.
17.67.070    Improvements agreements, dedications, and warranty.
17.67.080    Amendment procedures--Lapse of site plan.
17.67.090    Appeals.

17.67.010 Purpose.
Site plan review is required to assure that new development and redevelopment of existing structures is compliant with City of Moab ordinances, advisory policies, and building codes. Unless exempted, an approved site plan issued under this chapter is required prior to the issuance of a building permit. (Ord. 17-18 (part), 2017)

17.67.020 Site plan required--Exemptions.
A. A site plan review is required for the following:
    1. All new development unless exempted by this section;
    2. Remodeling of existing commercial development involving an addition of two thousand square feet or more to the finished square footage of an existing structure; or
    3. A use change as defined by this chapter involving an addition of two thousand square feet or more to the finished square footage of an existing structure.
B. Site plan review is not required for the development of the following, as defined in this title:  a single-household dwelling; a twin home or two-household dwelling; multi-household dwellings of three to six units; an accessory dwelling unit; subdivisions; planned unit developments; master planned developments; development requiring a conditional use permit; or remodeling or additions of existing structures comprising less than two thousand square feet of new construction. (Ord. 19-13 § 21 (part), 2019; Ord. 18-22, 2018; Ord. 18-01 (part), 2018; Ord. 17-18 (part), 2017)

17.67.030 Definitions.
A. “Adversely affected” means a person or entity who claims an interest in real property which may be negatively affected by any decision issued under this chapter.
B. “Adjacent” means a parcel of land which shares a boundary with the parcel of real property which is the subject of an application under this chapter. For purposes of this chapter, a parcel is adjacent to another if it is separated only by a public street.
C. “Advisory documents” means planning documents adopted by the City from time to time, including: the Moab General Plan; Moab storm water management master plan; Moab sanitary sewer master plan; Moab water storage distribution and master plan; natural hazards pre-disaster mitigation plan, Utah Southeastern Region; Moab area housing plan; Grand County/Moab nonmotorized trails master plan; or similar publicly adopted planning documents. Applications under this chapter should conform to the advisory documents; however, the land use authority may deviate from those documents upon a showing of good cause.
D. “Appeal authority” means the person or persons designated by ordinance enacted by the City to hear land use appeals under this title.
E. “Architect” means a professional architect licensed in the state of Utah who exercises responsible charge over the preparation and submittal of materials required under this chapter. Architects shall sign and stamp all submittals required by this chapter.
F. “Base flood elevation (BFE)” means the computed elevation to which floodwater is anticipated to rise during a flooding event having a one percent chance of occurring in any given year. The BFE is typically shown on flood insurance rate maps, and is a regulatory requirement for the elevation and floodproofing of structures, as provided under Chapter 15.40.
G. “Buffer” means a structure or area provided to reduce the conflict between two different land uses. Buffers may consist of fencing, walls, landscaping, or land set aside to separate particular uses.
H. “Development review team (DRT)” means the committee of city employees including the Planning Director, Zoning Administrator, Public Works Director, building official, and such other persons as may be designated by the City from time to time.
I. “Engineer” means a professional engineer licensed in the state of Utah who exercises responsible charge over the preparation and submittal of materials required under this chapter. Engineers shall sign and stamp all submittals required by this chapter.
J. “HVAC” means heating, ventilation, and air-conditioning equipment installed in a building.
K. “Land use authority” means the person or entity designated by ordinance to approve or deny a land use application.
L. “Lot” means an existing parcel of real estate which is proposed for development. As used in this chapter, one or more lots may be subject to a site plan application, and individual areas within those lots may be designated as plots set aside for particular uses. In no instance shall the designation of lots or plots on an application under this chapter be deemed to create a subdivision of real estate.
M. “Level I application” means a site plan application for the development of six or fewer residential units, or the development or remodeling of not more than eight thousand square feet of finished commercial space.
N. “Level II application” means a site plan application for the development of seven or more residential units or the development or remodeling in excess of eight thousand square feet of finished commercial space.
O. “Refuse area” means an area for the location of solid waste disposal containers which is screened from view using a solid wall or fence. In no case shall a refuse area be screened using a chain link or similar fence utilizing slats to obscure the view.
P. “Surveyor” means a professional land surveyor licensed in the state of Utah who exercises responsible charge over the preparation and submittal of materials required under this chapter. Surveyors shall sign and stamp all submittals required by this chapter.
Q. “Use change” means the conversion of an existing residential or commercial structure from one use to another use permitted within the zoning district. Without limitation, examples of a use change include changing a warehouse to a restaurant; converting office space into apartments; changing retail space into professional offices; or the like. Any use change that would require a building permit under applicable city building codes shall also constitute a use change under this chapter. (Ord. 17-18 (part), 2017)

17.67.040 Submittal requirements.
A. An application for site plan approval must be submitted to the planning department on the approved site plan application form, together with the required review fee. The application must be signed by the record property owner or, if the applicant is not the owner, the applicant must deliver proof of approval signed by the owner. Components of the application submittal may contain multiple plan sets or reports; provided, that they are clear, legible, and successfully demonstrate the purposes required under this chapter. Unless waived by the planning director, the application must include four copies of all design drawings. The application must include the following:
    1. Preliminary Site Plan. Applicants shall submit a preliminary site plan (with requirements as listed below), drawn by an engineer, surveyor, or architect, to a scale of not less than one inch equals fifty feet (on paper no larger than twenty-four inches by thirty-six inches), and one copy reduced to eleven inches by seventeen inches that shall include:
        a. Parcel Boundary Lines. Include all easements, setbacks and construction limits of the project site;
        b. Drives, Streets, and Rights-of-Way. Include widths of pavement, curb and gutter, and dimensions of rights-of-way;
        c. Parking and Loading. The parking plan must include a count of spaces and details of handicap parking spaces as well as indicating the location and types of exterior lighting proposed for security lighting of the area;
        d. Access. Include all points of ingress, egress. For developments adjacent to and accessed by a state or federal highway, a completed highway access permit application from the Utah Department of Transportation (UDOT) must be submitted with the application, with a permit issued prior to building permit approval;
        e. Refuse Areas. Drawings of the refuse enclosures must be included;
        f. Common Open Space. All open space, common areas, parks, sidewalks, and trails (with required connectivity) must be clearly depicted;
        g. Topography. All site conditions including terrain contours, drainage areas, and other physical features on or within one hundred feet of the site must be shown; existing and finished grades must be clearly shown in different shades or contour depictions; all elevations shall be shown in the most current North American Vertical Datum (NAVD). Level I applications may contain this topographic survey on the site plan. Level II applications must show a separate topographic survey;
        h. Use Types. Specific areas proposed for specific types of land use shall be shown, and must include the acreage or square footage for each area;
        i. Public Dedications. Areas proposed for public dedication (i.e., utility easements, trails, open space, or the like) shall be depicted;
        j. Lots or Plots. The dimensions and areas for each lot or plot must be shown;
        k. Adjacent Zoning. Zoning for adjacent properties within three hundred feet of the subject property shall be shown;
        l. Fire Hydrants. The locations of all fire hydrants;
        m. Title Block. A title block shall appear in the lower right hand corner of all pages of plans and plats and shall contain the name of the development; legal location of the property; name and contact information of the site designer/engineer/surveyor; the name of the development; and the drawing scale and north point;
        n. A regional or vicinity map shall accompany the submitted application to indicate the location of the project; and
        o. The legal description of the property.
    2. Floor Plan and Elevations. A floor plan, at a minimum, shall consist of a drawing to scale showing a view from above, of the relationships between rooms, spaces and other physical features at each floor level of a structure. All dimensions shall be drawn between the walls to specify room sizes and wall lengths. The floor plan shall show the physical layout of:
        a. Interior walls and hallways;
        b. Restrooms;
        c. Windows, doors, landings, decks, and patios;
        d. Plumbing features such as sinks, showers, bathtubs, HVAC elements, etc.;
        e. Interior features such as fireplaces, saunas, hot tubs, and whirlpools;
        f. Locations of electrical panels and service connections;
        g. The planned uses of all buildings and rooms;
        h. All finished first floor elevations;
        i. Elevation view drawings shall show all side elevations of existing and proposed structures, and shall depict exterior architectural elements and materials, as well as heights of the structure.
B. Narrative. The narrative shall describe in reasonable detail the purpose of the proposed development, the types of all land uses that are anticipated, the phasing of development, and information regarding all accessory uses, structures, or major features. Statistical information as to the project area, developed area square footage, number of parking spaces, and the like shall be included.
C. Conceptual Master Sign Plan. If signage is anticipated, applicants shall submit a master sign plan showing the location, dimensions, materials, and type of illumination for all signs. All signage shall comply with Chapter 15.44, Sign Code, and is subject to permitting under that process.
D. Lighting Plan. The lighting plan shall show number and types of fixtures for walkways, building exterior lighting, and parking areas. An acceptable lighting plan shall consist of full cutoff, fully shielded, downward directed lighting types. The plan shall include manufacturer’s information detailing the fixtures to be used. Internal or external shielding may be used to prevent glare toward other properties or into the roadway. Lighting of required parking areas shall be a minimum of one-half foot-candle at all areas of the parking lot. Wall mounted flood lights that direct outward toward other properties and roadways are prohibited.
E. Landscape Plan. The landscape plan shall include size and species of all plantings, an irrigation plan, xeriscape plan, and a care and maintenance plan. All applicable code sections of the Moab Municipal Code must be used to develop the landscape plan, including Chapter 12.24, Tree Stewardship. Proposed erosion control structures and details as to ground cover must also be noted on the landscape plan.
F. Wetlands, Riparian Areas, and Floodways. If the development is adjacent to riparian areas, flood zones, probable wetlands, or areas where stream channels may be altered by planned development, a wetlands, riparian areas, and floodway plan drawn by an engineer, surveyor, or other appropriate consultant must be submitted. Probable wetlands shall be described and delineated. All applications shall show compliance with Chapter 15.40, Flood Damage Prevention. Flood zone boundaries and the base flood elevation must be shown. Where the application includes areas which may be subject to flooding the applicant shall show that the elevation of the lowest floor of all structures exceeds the elevation which is above the base flood elevation. All elevations on the plan shall be shown in the most current North American Vertical Datum (NAVD).
G. Drainage Plan. A storm water drainage plan, signed and stamped by an engineer, shall be submitted and show calculations and other information specified below:
    1. Storm Water Drainage Plan. This report shall comply with the City of Moab/Grand County Design Criteria for Drainage Studies, as adopted or updated by the City from time to time. The storm water drainage plan shall be reviewed for compliance with other applicable advisory documents. The storm water drainage plan shall include, at a minimum, the following information:
        a. The project site, including areas three hundred feet beyond its boundaries;
        b. Existing contours at two-foot intervals shown as dashed lines;
        c. Proposed contours at two-foot intervals shown as solid lines;
        d. Indication of a permanent benchmark referenced to mean sea level;
        e. Drainage system shown in plan view with estimated cubic-feet-per-second flow for a one-hundred-year storm event;
        f. Locations of all natural drainage channels and water bodies;
        g. Existing and proposed drainage easements;
        h. Type, size, and location of existing and proposed drainage structures such as pipes, culverts, inlets, ditches, swales, retention ponds, detention areas, etc.;
        i. One-hundred-year event (base) flood areas;
        j. Additional grading and drainage elements may be required to be depicted to satisfy Federal Emergency Management Administration (FEMA) floodplain requirements or other applicable city flood damage prevention ordinances; and
        k. Erosion control plans showing adequate sedimentation control which shall be accomplished throughout construction phases as well as during the ongoing use of the site (e.g., sedimentation ponds, dikes, seeding, retaining walls, rip-rap, etc.).
    2. Minimum Standards. All structures for drainage and flood control shall be designed, at a minimum, to successfully convey the anticipated one-hundred-year frequency storm event for maximum period of intensity over the entire drainage basin. The applicant shall submit calculations to show that all structures have adequate capacity to accommodate flows expected to result from the designated storm event.
    3. Water and Sewer System Protection. All storm water facilities shall be designed to avoid or minimize damage to, or infiltration of, culinary water and sanitary sewer facilities.
H. Planned Grading. A grading plan for surface drainage (shown by contours and spot elevations) shall be prepared by an engineer or surveyor. It shall show the planned grading and paving of driveways, access roads, and parking areas. Grading and paving shall be shown on plans, profiles, cross sections, and details as necessary to describe new construction. Details of curbs, gutters, sidewalks, drainage structures, and conveyance systems, dimensions of all improvements, size, location, thickness, materials, strengths, and necessary reinforcement can be shown on the site plan in the case of a Level I application, or on a separate drawing based on the complexity of the project.
I. Utility Plan. A utility plan shall be prepared by an engineer. It shall show the locations, dimensions, and elevations of all sewer facilities and culinary water facilities needed to serve the site. The utility plan shall specify in reasonable detail the types of equipment and materials to be used, and shall comply with all applicable advisory documents or City engineering requirements. Plans showing the locations of natural gas, electric, and telephone/data lines must also be shown.
J. Evidence of Title. A current title insurance commitment, ownership and encumbrance report, or abstract of title prepared by a title insurance company or attorney showing all ownership interests, easements, and encumbrances which apply to the parcel(s) comprising the application must be submitted. If requested, the applicant shall provide copies of all recorded documents which may affect the property subject to the application. If common elements or private use restrictions are anticipated, the applicant must submit draft covenants, conditions, and restrictions (CC&Rs) for review.
K. Slopes. If proposed development is likely to result in grading of hillsides, city staff may require submittal of a slope study prepared by an engineer or surveyor. Applications will also be reviewed for compliance with Chapter 17.55, Hillside Developments.
L. Surface and Subsurface Soils Report. The application shall include a surface and subsurface soils report establishing soil suitability for the proposed development. The report shall be prepared by a geotechnical engineer or other professional, if approved by city staff. At a minimum, the report shall include:
    1. A description of soil types;
    2. Locations and characteristics with supporting soil maps;
    3. Soil logs of test pits and bore holes;
    4. All other information necessary to determine soil suitability for the scope of the development and constraints on development based on the findings;
    5. Analysis and evaluation of such information with recommendations regarding structural constraints, erosion control, and requirements for building design.
M. Traffic Study. A traffic study and parking and circulation study are required for projects which will generate in excess of five hundred peak daily trips. The study shall be prepared by an engineer. The following table shall be used to determine if a traffic study is required:
+-------------------------------+------------------------------+
| Land Use                      | 500 Daily Trips              |
+-------------------------------+------------------------------+
| Residential: Single-Household | 50 units                     |
+-------------------------------+------------------------------+
| Apartments                    | 85 units                     |
+-------------------------------+------------------------------+
| Condos/Townhouses             | 85 units                     |
+-------------------------------+------------------------------+
| Mobile Home Park              | 100 units                    |
+-------------------------------+------------------------------+
| Shopping Center               | 1,800 sq. ft.                |
+-------------------------------+------------------------------+
| Fast Food Restaurant (GFA)    | 800 sq. ft.                  |
+-------------------------------+------------------------------+
| Convenience Store w/Gas (GFA) | 870 sq. ft. or 5 pumps       |
+-------------------------------+------------------------------+
| Bank w/Drive-In               | 1,870 sq. ft.                |
+-------------------------------+------------------------------+
| Hotel/Motel                   | 60 rooms                     |
+-------------------------------+------------------------------+
| General Office                | 30,000 sq. ft.               |
+-------------------------------+------------------------------+
| Medical/Dental Office         | 17,400 sq. ft.               |
+-------------------------------+------------------------------+
| Research and Development      | 47,000 sq. ft or 2.75 acres  |
+-------------------------------+------------------------------+
| Light Industrial              | 77,000 sq. ft. or 7.75 acres |
+-------------------------------+------------------------------+
| Manufacturing                 | 130,000 sq. ft.              |
+-------------------------------+------------------------------+
N. The planning director has discretion to require a traffic study for applications which do not generate the level of trips specified above where:
    1. High traffic volumes on surrounding streets may affect movement to and from the proposed development;
    2. There is a lack of existing left turn lanes on streets adjacent to the proposed access drive;
    3. There are inadequate sight distances at access points;
    4. Proposed access points are close to other existing drives or intersections; or
    5. The proposed development includes a drive-through pick-up window.
O. Street Design Drawings. The application shall include drawings by an engineer showing the design, grades, widths, and profiles of all streets, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, traffic control devices, traffic signs, and associated public improvements. All street designs shall conform to street classifications and design standards adopted by the City.
P. Additional Submittals--Waiver of Certain Submittals. The planning director has discretion to require other or additional submittals where necessary for the review of a particular application, or as required for Level II development under Chapter 17.80. Alternatively, the planning director has discretion to waive or modify any requirement for a particular submittal if it is determined that the document or report is not necessary, or if an alternate submittal is justified for the review of a particular application. Any waiver shall be in a writing labeled as a submittal waiver, shall identify the project by name and application number, and shall be signed and dated by the planning director.
Q. Conformity with Submittal Standards. All submittals must conform to the land use submittal standards adopted by the City. Submittals which do not clearly or accurately depict elements required for review of the project may be rejected, or staff may require revisions during the review process. (Ord. 19-13 § 21 (part), 2019; Ord. 17-18 (part), 2017)

17.67.050 Review procedures.
A. Pre-Application. All applicants shall participate in a pre-application meeting with the planning department staff prior to application submittal. The pre-application meeting is intended to identify project elements and issues which may need to be addressed in the review process. Applicants must bring to the pre-application meeting those items identified on the pre-application checklist available from staff.
B. Review for Completeness. All applications shall be promptly reviewed for completeness and accuracy by the planning director. If an application is found to be incomplete or deficient the planning director shall notify the applicant in writing as to the deficiencies and allow the applicant to submit additional or supplemental materials as needed. Incomplete or deficient applications will not be scheduled for further review.
C. Level I Applications. Level I applications shall be reviewed by city staff comprising the development review team (DRT), which shall be the land use authority. The DRT may approve, approve subject to conditions, or deny a Level I application.
D. Level II Applications. Level II applications shall first be reviewed by the DRT, which shall issue a staff report identifying recommendations for the project. The land use authority for Level II applications shall be the Planning Commission, which may approve, approve subject to conditions, or deny the application.
    1. Level II applications are not subject to a public hearing; however, the applicant shall deliver notice of the pending application, in a form approved by the City, to adjacent property owners, who shall be permitted to submit written comments or testimony as to the compliance of the application with applicable approval criteria and city ordinances. Any written comments or testimony from adjacent property owners or interested persons may be considered by the Planning Commission in reaching its decision. The Planning Commission shall consider the application at a public meeting without further public testimony. Within a reasonable period of time following the conclusion of the meeting, the Planning Commission, as land use authority, shall issue a written decision, which may approve, approve subject to conditions, or deny the Level II application.
E. When a Site Plan Is Deemed Granted. For purposes of this chapter, a site plan approved by the applicable land use authority subject to conditions is not deemed granted until the planning director certifies in writing that all pre-construction conditions of approval have been satisfied, all applicable fees are paid, and all ancillary documents (dedications, development improvements agreement, or the like) are executed and delivered to the City. Satisfaction of all such conditions must occur before a building permit will be issued. For purposes of this subsection, pre-construction conditions means those conditions pertaining to design of the development, permitting by other agencies, corrective submittals, or the like.
F. Concurrent Review. To the extent possible, where an application under this chapter requires other city approvals, the City shall attempt to consolidate all such approvals in one proceeding to provide for efficient and timely review. However, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to repeal or abrogate review procedures or criteria in other ordinances.
G. Certificate of Occupancy. A certificate of occupancy will be issued; provided, that all fees have been paid and construction is completed in conformity with the approved site plan, conditions of approval, the building permit, applicable city code provisions, and building codes. (Ord. 17-18 (part), 2017)

17.67.060 Approval criteria.
A. The following criteria govern site plan approval:
    1. Compliance with applicable Moab ordinances and building codes;
    2. Availability of necessary utilities, including culinary water, sewer, electricity, natural gas, and the like;
    3. Consistency of the design with Moab advisory documents; and
    4. Accuracy and truthfulness of submittals or representations in the application.
B. Discretion to Grant Conditional Approval. The applicable land use authority has discretion to impose conditions during the review process that address: (1) deficiencies in the application; (2) performance of the design in providing efficient access, vehicle circulation, connectivity, pedestrian/nonmotorized vehicle access; (3) buffering of off-site impacts; (4) storm water management and flood damage prevention; (5) landscaping and architectural design; (6) utility design issues; and/or (7) other provisions of Moab ordinances or advisory documents.
C. Statement of Reasons in the Event of Denial. Where an application is denied, the land use authority shall provide a statement of reasons explaining the basis for its denial.
D. Code Violations. The City may properly decline to review or approve any application where the property that is the location of the application has outstanding municipal code or building code violations. Where such violations exist, the City may decline further review of the application until such time as all violations are abated and applicable fines, fees, or taxes applicable to the property are paid. (Ord. 17-18 (part), 2017)

17.67.070 Improvements agreements, dedications, and warranty.
A. Development Improvements Agreement. The City may require the applicant to deliver a development improvements agreement (DIA), which will specify in detail: the site-specific development plan for the property; the public improvements which must be constructed to serve the development; engineer’s estimates for the cost of required improvements; deadlines for construction and the phasing of development; provisions for a financial assurance and warranty deposit to secure completion of public improvements; required property dedications; and such other terms as may be specifically required for the development. The amount of the financial assurance and warranty deposit shall be equal to one hundred forty percent and ten percent, respectively, of the approved construction costs, as verified by the City Engineer or other City designee. At the election of the City, the DIA may be recorded in the Grand County land records, and constitutes an encumbrance on the subject real property for the duration of the life of the development authorized under this chapter. The form of any financial assurance shall be as authorized by the City Attorney.
B. Dedications. The City may require an applicant to dedicate an interest in land to the City, in fee simple or an easement, where it is necessary for the siting of public infrastructure, such as public streets, sidewalks, pedestrian paths, or underground utilities made necessary by a particular site plan application. Additionally, dedications may be required incident to site plan approval to conform to advisory documents. Property dedications will be confirmed by a separate deed or easement, in a form acceptable to the City Attorney, which shall be executed by the property owner and recorded. All applicants are encouraged to consider access dedications and connectivity with adjacent parcels during the design process.
C. Public Improvements Warranted and Delivered Free of Liens. All public improvements installed and dedicated to the City (e.g., culinary water lines, sewer lines, curbing, gutters, roads, hydrants, street lights, and the like) shall be delivered free of liens and encumbrances, and shall be warranted by the applicant to be free of defects in design, materials, and workmanship for a period of one year from the date of acceptance.
D. Release of DIA. If the City determines that the DIA serves no further purpose, as in the case of abandonment or termination of the development contemplated by the site plan approval, then the DIA may be released via a writing duly executed by the City and recorded in the land records. (Ord. 17-18 (part), 2017)

17.67.080 Amendment procedures--Lapse of site plan.
A. Binding on Successors. An approved site plan shall be binding upon the applicant and any of its successors in title. Amendments which change the character, building design, density, or any other requirements or conditions contained in the site plan shall not be permitted without prior review and approval as set forth in this section.
B. Minor Changes. A minor change in the location or placement of buildings or specific improvements may be authorized by the DRT where unforeseen circumstances, such as site constraints, engineering problems, or the like require a change.
C. Major Changes. Major changes, such as alterations in the size, configuration, or change of use as defined in this chapter; significant realignments or changes to access, utilities, or storm water facilities; other changes which increase the density, scope, or intensity of occupancy; significant changes to project phasing; or other changes which significantly affect the overall design or intent of the project shall be treated as a major change, and shall be referred for review to the land use authority that originally authorized the site plan.
D. Review of Amendments. A land use authority reviewing an amendment application may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application.
E. Lapse of Plan--Extension. If, within twelve months from the date of approval of a site plan, the applicant fails to satisfy approval conditions or diligently proceed with construction, then the City may declare a lapse of plan by delivering written notice to the applicant. A lapse of plan shall result in all prior approvals under this chapter being void and of no further effect. An extension of any site plan approval may be granted by the applicable land use authority upon a showing by the applicant of good cause, and provided that an extension is sought in writing within twelve months of the date of approval. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to alter or impair a phasing plan or construction schedule approved in a valid DIA. (Ord. 17-18 (part), 2017)

17.67.090 Appeals.
A. Appeals. Any person adversely affected by a decision under this chapter may file an appeal of that decision no later than thirty days from the date of the decision, permit, or action which is the subject of the appeal. Untimely appeals are subject to dismissal with prejudice.
B. Staff Appeals or Planning Commission Appeals. Decisions of the staff, the DRT, or the Planning Commission shall be appealed to the appeal authority. Any subsequent appeal shall be to the Seventh Judicial District Court.
C. Review on Record. Appeals shall be a review of the record which was submitted to the applicable land use authority. Upon the filing of an appeal the staff shall assemble the record of proceeding and forward same to the appeal body or court, as applicable, and the parties. If the record is particularly voluminous, the City may require the appellant to pay the reasonable costs of assembly and copying of the record.
D. Standard of Review. In any administrative or judicial appeal the decision under review shall be reviewed on the basis of the record before the land use authority. The decision of the land use authority shall be affirmed unless it is found to be arbitrary, capricious, or illegal. The appellant has the burden of proof in any appeal, which shall clearly and concisely state reasons why the land use authority decision was erroneous. Except in the case of Level I appeals by adversely affected persons, to preserve an issue for judicial review, the appellant must first have exhausted its administrative remedies by presenting any claimed point of error to the attention of the applicable land use authority prior to seeking appellate review. In the case of a Level I appeal by an adversely affected person, that party shall be permitted to supplement the record and provide additional information to the appeal authority in support of its appeal.
E. Time for Judicial Review. A judicial action seeking review of the appeal authority must be commenced no later than thirty days from the date of the final written decision or order of the appeal authority. Untimely appeals are subject to dismissal with prejudice. (Ord. 17-18 (part), 2017)

Chapter 17.68 PLANNED AFFORDABLE DEVELOPMENT

Sections:
17.68.010    Purpose.
17.68.020    Definitions.
17.68.030    Permitted locations and housing types.
17.68.040    Minimum project area--Subdivision lot sizes.
17.68.050    Performance standards.
17.68.060    Application review procedures.
17.68.070    Submittal requirements.
17.68.080    Miscellaneous provisions.
17.68.090    Appeal procedures.
17.68.100    Development improvements agreement.
17.68.110    Affordability controls.
17.68.120    Land use restriction agreement and covenants.
17.68.130    Impact fees.
17.68.140    Enforcement.
17.68.150    Interpretation.
17.68.160    Implementation.

17.68.010 Purpose.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to allow planned affordable developments (PAD) that provide incentives for the development of affordable housing. To qualify, PAD affordable housing units are subject to deed restrictions that preserve the affordability of the units for a period of not less than fifty years. The affordability controls provided in this chapter are voluntary, entered into by contract between the City and the applicant in exchange for the zoning concessions authorized herein.
B. As applicable to PAD developments, the provisions of this chapter supersede any conflicting or inconsistent provisions which may be found elsewhere in the Moab Municipal Code. (Ord. 19-02 (part), 2019)

17.68.020 Definitions.
The following definitions apply to this chapter:
A. “Adjacent” means a parcel of land that shares a boundary with the parcel of real property included in an application under this chapter.
B. “Advisory documents” means planning documents adopted by the City from time to time, including: the Moab General Plan; Storm Water Management Master Plan; Sanitary Sewer Master Plan; Water Storage Distribution Master Plan; Natural Hazards Predisaster Master Plan; or similarly adopted planning documents.
C. “Affordable housing” or “affordable units” means housing developed pursuant to this chapter in which the sales price of the unit, or the rental rate for each unit, does not exceed the sums deemed affordable to individuals and households with annual incomes of one hundred percent or less of Grand County area median income (AMI), as determined by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) and the requirements of this chapter. “Affordable housing” is further defined by the following income subcategories:
    1. “Moderate income” means household income which is between eighty percent and one hundred percent of Grand County area median income as defined by HUD.
    2. “Low income” means household income which is between sixty percent and seventy-nine percent of Grand County area median income.
    3. “Very low income” means household income which is between thirty percent and fifty-nine percent of Grand County area median income.
    4. “Extremely low income” means household income which is below thirty percent of the Grand County area median income.
D. “Area median income (AMI)” means the published estimate of median income in Grand County that is determined periodically by HUD, as adjusted for household size.
E. “Development” means new construction or remodeling of buildings or real property.
F. “Development review team (DRT)” means the committee of City employees including the Planning Director, Public Works Director, Building Official, and such other persons as may be designated by the City from time to time.
G. “Developer” means a person offering affordable housing units developed pursuant to this chapter for lease or rent to eligible persons.
H. “Development improvements agreement (DIA)” means a written agreement between an applicant for a planned affordable development and the City of Moab containing specific requirements to ensure the construction of specified public or private improvements, the phasing of construction, and security to ensure completion of improvements as a condition for final plat/plan approval.
I. “Eligible persons” means those persons authorized to occupy PAD affordable housing units, as further defined in Section 17.68.110.
J. “Final approval” means the approval, with or without conditions, given by the City Council, providing the necessary authority for an applicant to: (1) in the case of a PAD subdivision, record the final plat and convey subdivision lots; or (2) in the case of a PAD rental development, proceed with development of rental units.
K. “Final plat” means a map of a subdivision under this chapter which has been surveyed by a licensed professional land surveyor and acknowledged by the owner, and which accurately depicts streets, alleys, easements, blocks, lots, survey monuments, public/private improvements, and other attributes of a PAD subdivision.
L. “Final site plan” means a map of a rental development under this chapter which has been surveyed by a licensed professional land surveyor and acknowledged by the owner, and which accurately depicts streets, alleys, easements, blocks, lots, survey monuments, building envelopes, public/private improvements, and other attributes of a PAD rental development.
M. “Habitable room” means a heated room in a dwelling that is intended for human occupation. Habitable rooms do not include bathrooms, closets, storage rooms, utility spaces, or the like.
N. “Household” means a person living alone, or two or more persons, whether related by blood or marriage or not, who reside together in a single dwelling unit.
O. “HUD” means the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.
P. “Land use restriction agreement (LURA)” means a contract between the City of Moab and an affordable housing developer or subdivider that is recorded as an encumbrance upon the real property to be developed, and that provides for continued enforcement of the affordability provisions and other requirements of this chapter for a duration of not less than fifty years. A LURA shall run with the land and be binding upon the parties and their successors in title, as provided by its terms.
Q. “Lot” means a tract of land defined in an approved plat which is developed for housing and which may be conveyed to a buyer by deed.
R. “Market rate” means a housing unit offered for sale or lease that is not subject to limitations as to sales price or rental rates otherwise applicable to affordable units under this chapter.
S. “Monitoring agency” means the City of Moab, or its designee, charged with monitoring and/or enforcement of the affordability controls or development approval conditions for housing developed pursuant to this chapter, including LURA provisions.
T. “Original purchase price” means the actual sales price for affordable housing units developed under this chapter calculated as follows: principal, interest, taxes, and insurance (PITI) on the unit shall not exceed thirty percent of the Grand County AMI for a household of four divided by twelve months. Assumptions used to calculate the OPP shall be (1) a five percent down payment; (2) a thirty-year mortgage term; and (3) a mortgage rate equal to the prevailing first home rate, or its equivalent, of the Utah Housing Corporation (or similar agency).
U. “Overnight accommodations” means short-term rental housing provided to short-term tenants for a period of thirty consecutive days or less.
V. “Public dedication” means streets, sidewalks, parks, open space, trails, or other areas of land or improvements to be dedicated to public use under this chapter.
W. “Preliminary plan” means a map of a rental development proposed under this chapter which has been surveyed by a licensed professional land surveyor and acknowledged or authorized by the owner, and which accurately depicts streets, alleys, easements, blocks, lots, survey monuments, building envelopes, public/private improvements, utilities, and other attributes of a proposed PAD rental development. The preliminary plan shall include such other submittals as to planned improvements as are required by this chapter.
X. “Preliminary plat” means a map of a subdivision development proposed under this chapter which has been surveyed by a licensed professional land surveyor and acknowledged or authorized by the owner, and which accurately depicts streets, alleys, easements, blocks, lots, survey monuments, building envelopes, public/private improvements, utilities, and other attributes of a proposed PAD subdivision. The preliminary plat shall include such other submittals as to planned improvements as are required by this chapter.
Y. “Preliminary approval” means an approval, with or without conditions, given by the land use authority that provides the necessary authority for an applicant to proceed with the preparation of the final plat or the final plan.
Z. “Project area” means a defined tract of land, including all subsequent development phases, that is proposed for a PAD development application.
AA. “Setback” means the minimum distance from a specified boundary that a structure or other feature must be located.
BB. “Subdivider” means any person creating a subdivision pursuant to this chapter and offering affordable housing units or lots for sale to eligible persons.
CC. “Subdivision” means a described tract of land that has been surveyed by a licensed professional land surveyor and acknowledged or authorized by the owner, that describes two or more lots which may be conveyed to buyers, and that accurately depicts streets, alleys, easements, blocks, lots, survey monuments, and other attributes of a proposed PAD subdivision development.
DD. “Site plan” means a described tract of land proposed for rental development under this chapter which has been surveyed by a licensed professional land surveyor and acknowledged or authorized by the owner, and which accurately depicts streets, alleys, easements, blocks, lots, survey monuments, building envelopes, public/private improvements, utilities, and other attributes of a proposed PAD rental development.
EE. “Unit” means a residential dwelling containing, at minimum, a permanently installed kitchen (including, a sink, stove, refrigerator, counters, and cabinets), bathroom (sink, toilet, and a shower or bathtub), bedroom (or sleeping area), living room (or area), parking, and storage space. All habitable rooms shall be separate from the bathroom(s). A residential unit may contain more than one bedroom, depending upon the needs of the development. Each housing unit shall have nonexclusive access to common elements within the particular development. (Ord. 19-13 § 21 (part), 2019; Ord. 19-02 (part), 2019)

17.68.030 Permitted locations and housing types.
A. Subject to the provisions of this chapter, planned affordable developments shall be allowed in the following zoning districts:
    1. Residential zones: R-3, R-4 zones;
    2. Commercial zones: C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, and C-5 zones.
B. Housing types for a PAD development shall conform to the types permitted in the underlying zoning district and the other provisions of this chapter. All PAD units constructed in the C-3 zoning district shall be located on the second or higher floors of each building. (Ord. 19-02 (part), 2019)

17.68.040 Minimum project area--Subdivision lot sizes.
A. Provided that all requirements of this chapter can be met, there is no minimum project area required for a PAD development.
B. Provided that all requirements of this chapter can be met, there is no minimum lot size for lots within a PAD subdivision. (Ord. 19-02 (part), 2019)

17.68.050 Performance standards.
A. Affordability Concept. Applicants are encouraged to include a mix of one-bedroom (or studio), two-bedroom, or three-bedroom units. PAD units shall have a maximum of three bedrooms. The application shall demonstrate that the units for sale or rent qualify as affordable housing, as defined by this chapter. Units developed under this chapter (including affordable and market rate units) shall not be used or offered as overnight accommodations. Where an application includes phased development, affordable units shall be constructed as part of each phase with not less than the minimum required ratio of market rate and affordable units in each phase.
B. Market Rate Limits and Income Tiers. For PAD developments proposing up to five units in a project area the number of market rate units shall not exceed one. In all other PAD developments the percentage of market rate units shall not exceed thirty percent of the total number of units. Applicants are encouraged to provide a mix of units that are affordable to moderate-income, low-income, very-low-income, and extremely-low-income households. Where the percentage of any required type of unit in a PAD development, as applied to the total number of units, results in decimal of 0.5 or higher, the number of required units of a particular type shall be rounded upward.
C. Minimum Unit Sizes. All housing units developed under this chapter shall contain, at minimum: a permanently installed kitchen (including, at minimum, a sink, stove, refrigerator, counters and cabinets); bathroom (including a sink, toilet, shower (or bathtub)); bedroom (or sleeping area); living area; parking; and storage space. Housing units may contain multiple bedrooms or other functional spaces as needed. The minimum total area of the habitable rooms of PAD units (excluding closets, storage spaces, bathrooms, and utility spaces) shall be not less than two hundred seventy-five square feet, measured from the interior of the unit. All housing units, and all habitable rooms within those units, shall comply with applicable building code minimum requirements, including the International Residential Code, as adopted by the State of Utah.
D. Height of Structures. The maximum building height of all buildings in a PAD development shall be as follows:
+------------------------------+---------+
| R-3 and R-4:                 | 30 feet |
+------------------------------+---------+
| C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, and C-5: | 40 feet |
+------------------------------+---------+
Building height shall be measured from the average finished grade of the building to the midpoint of the highest plane of the roof.
E. Setbacks--Adjacent Solar Access. Except as necessary to preserve solar access, the front, back, and side setbacks of a PAD development relative to other properties shall be provided by the underlying zoning district. PAD developments may be required to provide additional setbacks where necessary to provide adequate solar access to adjacent properties located immediately to the north of the project boundary.
F. Open Space/Common Facilities. PAD rental developments shall include open space for residents consistent with the size and scope of the project area. Open space, such as landscaping, recreation areas, entryways, commons spaces, bicycle racks, and setback areas shall comprise not less than five percent of the project area. Required parking spaces, stairways, elevators, and hallways shall not be calculated as open space. PAD subdivisions are not subject to the five percent requirement of this subsection (F).
G. Storm Water. Projects shall include engineered plans for the detention and conveyance of reasonably anticipated storm water attributable to the project. Storm water conveyances shall not connect to sanitary sewers.
H. Sidewalks/Trails. PAD developments shall incorporate elements to facilitate pedestrian and bicycle access. Sidewalks are required along at least one side of all public street frontages. Trails may be required to connect to existing or planned trail systems or public streets.
I. Parking. Vehicle parking shall be provided for all PAD developments at a rate of not less than one off-street space per one-bedroom unit and a maximum of two off-street parking spaces for each two-bedroom or larger unit. Wherever possible, parking areas shall be located within the perimeter of the building envelope. Hardscape semi-permeable materials may be used for parking spaces.
J. Lighting. Adequate lighting must be provided for public spaces and common areas. Light fixtures shall consist of a full cutoff, fully shielded, downward directed fixture. Wall mounted flood lights that direct outward toward other properties and roadways are prohibited.
K. Manufactured Housing. All manufactured housing to be utilized in developments under this chapter shall comply with all other provisions of the Building Code.
L. Culinary Water/Wastewater. All housing units shall be served by municipal culinary water and wastewater service. Fire flows shall be provided and hydrants installed in conformity with building codes and fire department requirements.
M. Streets. Developments shall provide adequate public street access to each dwelling. All streets within an application shall be hard surfaced or paved and constructed in conformity with City design specifications, as determined by staff. Streets shall include concrete curb, gutter, and sidewalk, and be configured to allow adequate vehicle and emergency access. Streets shall be designed to promote efficient circulation and connectivity to other parcels and the remainder of the City street system. Street signage must be installed consistent with staff requirements.
N. Utilities. Applications must include a utility plan showing feasibility and placement of electrical, telephone, cable, and internet services.
O. Site Specific Elements or Standards. Depending on the scope of the project area, the City may require that site-specific design elements or standards be incorporated into an application as needed to address public safety, recreation, construction requirements, access, connectivity, or future phases of development.
P. Storage. Each dwelling unit shall be provided with a separate, covered lockable storage space that is at least large enough to store as many adult bicycles as there are bedrooms in the unit.
Q. Advisory Document Consistency. All applications shall demonstrate substantial consistency with advisory documents. The land use authority may deviate from advisory documents on a case-by-case basis upon a showing of good cause.
R. Lot Sales with Finished Dwellings. PAD subdivisions shall include the sale of an affordable housing unit together with the sale of a lot, unless exempted by the terms of a development agreement. (Ord. 19-02 (part), 2019)

17.68.060 Application review procedures.
A. General Procedures. PAD applicants shall comply with the following review procedures:
    1. Pre-Application Meeting. A pre-application conference shall be held with planning staff to discuss the proposed development concept, likely development issues, and the requirements of this chapter.
    2. Application Submittal/Completeness Review. Upon submittal of an application and payment of the required fees, City staff will review the application to determine if it includes, in form adequate for substantive review, all of the submittal materials required by this chapter. If an application is found to be deficient, City staff will notify the applicant of the deficiency in writing.
    3. Staff Review. In every case the application will be reviewed by the DRT and review agencies. The DRT may require that the applicant correct errors or incorporate design changes consistent with applicable codes, design standards, and/or review criteria. Where an application is substantially incomplete or grossly deficient, the staff may notify the applicant in writing that the application will not be subject to further review until such time as the enumerated defects are cured.
    4. Planning Commission Review. Preliminary plat or preliminary site plans that have completed staff review will be forwarded to the Planning Commission with a staff recommendation. The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing to review the application and receive public comment, and it may: (a) approve the application; (b) deny the application; (c) approve the application subject to conditions; or (d) table the application pending receipt of additional information.
        a. At preliminary plat/plan review the applicant shall demonstrate that the plat or plan meets all submittal and performance criteria. Final construction drawings are not required, but all submittals must demonstrate the feasibility of the final design and conformity with this chapter, applicable codes, and design standards.
    5. Final Plat/Final Site Plan Review Procedures. When an applicant is ready to request final site plan or final plat approval a final plat or site plan shall be submitted for review by staff. Staff will review the design documents for completeness and verify that they incorporate changes or conditions required at the preliminary approval stage. Additionally, all related documents and agreements, including a subdivision improvements and phasing agreement, land use restriction agreement, and covenants, conditions and restrictions (if applicable), and final construction drawings shall be reviewed and in final form prior to submittal to the City Council for final approval.
        a. Final approval shall be in the form of an ordinance adopted by the City Council incorporating all the design drawings, the final plat or final plan, the conditions, and all development agreements comprising the PAD. Final approval is a legislative decision of the City and constitutes a site-specific development plan for all lands included in the project area. (Ord. 19-02 (part), 2019)

17.68.070 Submittal requirements.
A. A PAD application must be submitted to the Planning Department on the approved application form, together with the required review fee. The application must be signed by the record property owner or, if the applicant is not the owner, the applicant must deliver proof of approval signed by the owner. Components of the application submittal may contain multiple plan sets or reports; provided, that they are clear, legible, and successfully demonstrate the purposes required under this chapter. Unless waived by the Planning Director, the application must include four copies and electronic PDF copies of all design drawings and submittals.
B. PAD applications shall conform to the submittal requirements of Chapter 17.67, Site Plan Review, except that site plan submittal requirements are waived for development of up to six dwelling units. Developments subject to this subsection (B) shall submit all required building permit submittals with the application, and City staff may require supplementation of submittals to assure compliance with this chapter. Subdivision developments subject to this subsection (B) shall also submit a proposed final plat for review and approval.
C. Additional Submittals--Waiver of Certain Submittals. The Planning Director has discretion to require other submittals where appropriate for the review of a particular application. Alternatively, the Planning Director has discretion to waive or modify any requirement for a particular submittal if it is determined that the document or report is not necessary, or if an alternate submittal is justified for the review of a particular application. Any waiver shall be in writing labeled as a submittal waiver, shall identify the project by name and application number, and shall be signed and dated by the Planning Director.
D. Conformity with Submittal Standards. All submittals must conform to the land use submittal standards adopted by the City. Submittals which do not clearly or accurately depict elements required for review of the project may be rejected, or staff may require revisions during the review process.
E. Affordable Housing Development Plan. The affordable housing development plan shall contain, at a minimum, the following information:
    1. A general description of the development, including whether the development will contain units for rent or sale;
    2. The total number of market rate units and affordable housing units (with descriptions of the income subcategories) and a depiction of where those units will be situated on the plat/plan;
    3. The square footage of each market rate unit and of each affordable unit measured from the interior walls of the unit;
    4. The estimated sale price or monthly rent for each market-rate unit or lot and each affordable housing unit;
    5. If construction of dwelling units is to be phased, a phasing plan stating the number of market rate and affordable housing units in each phase;
    6. Statistical information as to the project area, developed area square footage, open space area, number of parking spaces, and the like shall be included; and
    7. Affordability calculations and assumptions demonstrating that the housing will be affordable under current economic conditions.
F. Departmental Standards. All developments pursuant to this chapter shall comply with departmental standards published by the City. (Ord. 19-02 (part), 2019)

17.68.080 Miscellaneous provisions.
A. Variances--Exceptional Conditions. In cases where unusual topographic or other exceptional conditions would pose a hardship on the applicant, variances from the strict requirements of this chapter may be made by the appeal authority prior to final plat/plan review. Staff shall provide a recommendation with respect to the proposed variance. The appeal authority may grant a variance; provided, that it will not result in substantial detriment to the public good and will not substantially impair the intent and purpose of this chapter.
B. Accessory Dwelling Units Prohibited. Accessory dwelling units, as defined in the Moab Municipal Code, are not permitted within a PAD development.
C. Vacating or Changing a Subdivision Plat. Any proposed vacation, alteration, change, or amendment to an approved PAD plat must be reviewed in conformity with the procedures and standards applicable under Utah law. An amendment that would violate one or more provisions of this chapter or applicable development approvals may be grounds for denial.
D. Decision Matrix. Decisions under this chapter shall be made by the following:
+-----------------------+---------------+---------------------+----------------+-----------------+
|  Application/Action   | Advisory Body | Land Use Authority  |  Appeal Body   | Required Public |
|                       |               |                     |                |     Hearing     |
+-----------------------+---------------+---------------------+----------------+-----------------+
| Prelim. Plat/ Prelim. | City Staff    | Planning Commission | AA**           | Yes, (PC)       |
| Site Plan             |               |                     |                |                 |
+-----------------------+---------------+---------------------+----------------+-----------------+
| Final Plat/Site Plan  | City Staff    | City Council        | District Court | No              |
+-----------------------+---------------+---------------------+----------------+-----------------+
**“AA” means the appeal authority, as specified in Section 17.72.120.
E. Proof of Service Availability for Non-City Authorities. Where the City is not able to provide culinary water or wastewater service to a proposed development, the applicant will be required to provide a current letter from the water or wastewater service provider demonstrating that water and wastewater service is available to the subject site. (Ord. 19-02 (part), 2019)

17.68.090 Appeal procedures.
A. Any person adversely affected by a preliminary land use decision, including a decision by the Planning Commission approving or denying a preliminary plat or plan, may appeal that decision to the appeal authority, and the appeal shall be governed by the procedures in Sections 17.72.120 through 17.72.170.
B. Any person adversely affected by a final land use decision of the City Council under this chapter may appeal that decision by filing an action in the District Court for Grand County, Utah.
C. Exhaustion of all administrative remedies shall be required prior to any applicant seeking judicial review of any final decision pursuant to this chapter. Failure to exhaust administrative remedies shall result in the action or suit being dismissed.
D. A judicial action seeking review or appeal of a final decision or action under this chapter must be filed no later than thirty calendar days from the date of the decision or order that is the subject of the appeal.
E. Upon the commencement of a judicial appeal challenging any decision under this chapter, the City shall promptly transmit to the district court true and correct copies of all submittals, testimony, orders, and file documents comprising the record pertaining to the application, including any transcripts or tape recordings of proceedings.
F. There shall be no judicial review of legal claims or points of error which are not first presented for review or decision to the land use authority.
G. In any review pursuant to this chapter (whether administrative or judicial), the reviewing body shall presume the decision made under this chapter is valid. A final decision of the City Council shall be affirmed if it is found to be within the scope of legislative discretion.
H. Disputes concerning or arising from the administration of this chapter after final land use approval, including but not limited to enforcement of the land use restriction agreement, affordability controls of this chapter, or the like, shall be heard by the District Court for Grand County, Utah. (Ord. 19-02 (part), 2019)

17.68.100 Development improvements agreement.
A. The development improvements agreement (DIA) shall be approved by the City Council at the time of approval of the final plat or final site plan. A DIA between the City and the applicant is required to specify the overall development plan in writing and is a condition precedent to the commencement of construction. The DIA shall set forth the commitments and obligations of the City of Moab and the applicant, including, as necessary, a financial assurance for required public improvements, the applicant’s phasing plan, and other details particular to the development. The DIA shall be subject to review and approval by the City Council and must be consistent with all prior approval conditions applicable to the approved plan.
B. The DIA may require that an applicant provide a performance bond, letter of credit, or other financial assurance to secure completion of required improvements, and/or as a condition for final plat or final site plan approval. The financial assurance shall be provided in an amount equal to one hundred fifty percent of the estimated cost of all required public improvements, including: landscaping; road improvements; pedestrian ways, trails, sidewalks, curbs, and gutters; street lighting and signage; culinary water lines and fire hydrants; wastewater lines and wastewater disposal facilities; and storm water improvements. City staff shall verify the correct amount of the financial assurance based upon review of the cost of the required improvements. Not more than ten percent of the financial assurance may be held to secure any warranty claims, as provided in the DIA.
C. With respect to a PAD subdivision, no final plat for the subdivision, or any phase thereof, and no building permit for construction upon any lot within the subdivision shall be executed by the City until such time as either: (1) all public improvements are completed in accordance with the DIA and accepted by the City; or (2) a financial assurance as required by this chapter is provided to the City. A subdivider or owner shall not convey or attempt to convey any lot prior to the recording of the final plat, and any purported conveyance in violation of this subsection shall be void.
D. With respect to a PAD rental development, no final site plan for the development, or any phase thereof, and no building permit for construction of housing units within the development, shall be executed by the City until such time as either: (1) all public improvements are completed in accordance with the DIA; or (2) a financial assurance as required by this chapter is provided to the City. A developer or owner shall not convey or attempt to enter into any lease prior to the execution of the final site plan, and any purported lease or rental contract entered into in violation of this subsection shall be void.
E. All public improvements shall be warranted against defects in materials and workmanship for a period of not less than one year from the date of acceptance by the City. Upon expiration of any warranty period the financial assurance provided by this section shall be released. (Ord. 19-02 (part), 2019)

17.68.110 Affordability controls.
A. Eligibility--General Policy. All affordable housing developed pursuant to this chapter, including rental units and units (or lots) for sale, shall be leased or sold to eligible persons. The developer or subdivider shall at all times assure that affordable housing units are transferred to eligible persons, and it shall provide proof of its compliance with all eligibility and affordability controls to the City or its designated monitoring agency annually and/or upon written request. The City may require advance approval of eligibility. Prospective tenants or purchasers of affordable housing shall provide verification of their eligibility to either the developer or subdivider at the time they apply for housing subject to this chapter. To be an eligible person for affordable housing, the person(s) must satisfy, at the time of application and continuing at all times thereafter, the following criteria:
    1. The persons comprising the household must have a combined household income that does not exceed one hundred percent of the Grand County, Utah, area median income (AMI), as published by HUD from time to time;
    2. At least one person in the household must be either: (a) employed full time in Grand County; (b) disabled; (c) a retired person over sixty years of age who was a full-time employee of an entity located within Grand County for at least five continuous years immediately preceding his or her retirement; or (d) a parent residing with one or more minor children; and
    3. All persons occupying PAD affordable housing units must utilize the housing as their sole place of residence.
B. Occupancy Restrictions. Leasing of affordable sales units and subleasing of rental agreements for affordable rental units shall not be permitted, except upon advance written approval by the City where the proposed occupants qualify as eligible person(s). Overnight accommodation uses shall not be permitted in any PAD housing units (including market rate units). Persons occupying PAD market rate units must utilize the housing as their sole place of residence; the use of market rate units as second homes is prohibited.
C. Rent Calculation. The developer or owner offering affordable housing units for lease shall set the monthly rental rate at an amount that does not exceed thirty percent of the area median income (AMI) for a Grand County household, less a reasonable utility allowance, divided by twelve months (the allowed rental rate). The allowed rental rate shall be adjusted proportionately, depending upon the size of the unit and the income tier (moderate, low, very low, or extremely low) of the persons occupying the unit. Inflation adjustments in the allowed rental rate shall be made annually, as of January of each calendar year, and shall be based upon the year to year increase in the Consumer Price Index (CPI-U), West Region, as published by the United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. The City or the monitoring agency will publish the inflation adjustment and provide same to developers or owners for purposes of calculating allowed rental rate increases.
    1. Nothing in this chapter shall preclude a developer or owner from entering into a fixed rental rate lease with a tenant who is otherwise compliant with this chapter at the time of execution.
D. Sales Eligibility, Additional Requirements. In addition to the general qualifications set forth in subsections (A) and (B) of this section, eligible persons who purchase affordable housing units pursuant to this chapter shall demonstrate that their total household net assets (asset value after deduction of the value of any liens--such as a car loan) shall not exceed forty percent of the original purchase price (OPP) or the subsequent sales price of the housing unit.
E. Sales Price Calculation--Subsequent Sales. The OPP for affordable housing units developed pursuant to this chapter shall be calculated as follows: principal, interest, taxes, and insurance (PITI) on the unit shall not exceed thirty percent of the Grand County AMI for a household of four divided by twelve months. Assumptions used to calculate the OPP shall be: (1) a five percent down payment; (2) a thirty-year mortgage term; and a mortgage rate equal to the prevailing first home rate, or its equivalent, of the Utah Housing Corporation (www.utahhousingcorp.org) (or equivalent). The City will determine OPP at the time of land use approval in a manner that reflects proportionate changes in OPP based on housing unit size.
F. Maximum Appreciation. To assure continued affordability, each affordable housing unit developed under this chapter shall be subject to a deed restriction, in a form approved by the City, which caps appreciation which may be earned upon subsequent sale of the unit. The maximum resale price (MRP) shall be:
    1. The OPP plus three percent per year from the date of purchase to the date of sale, prorated for each month less than a calendar year; and
    2. The actual cost of any capital improvements to the unit, including by way of example: (a) the addition of finished living space; (b) remodeling of a kitchen or bath; (c) replacement of major components such as heating systems, cooling systems, windows, roofing, siding or the like; provided, that the improvements have been permitted and inspected by the City Building Official. The property owner is responsible for documenting the value of all such improvements at the time of permitting. In no event shall capital improvements exceed five percent of the MRP. (Ord. 19-02 (part), 2019)

17.68.120 Land use restriction agreement and covenants.
A. At the time of final approval of every PAD, the City and the developer/subdivider shall execute and record in the land records a land use restriction agreement (LURA) implementing and providing for enforcement of the affordability controls specified in this chapter. The LURA shall be a deed restriction running with the land, and binding upon the original grantor, and all successors and assigns in title. The LURA shall provide, at a minimum, the following:
    1. The affordable housing units shall at all times be leased or sold to, and occupied by, eligible persons;
    2. The affordable housing units shall be leased at rent levels affordable to eligible persons for a period of not less than fifty years from the date of the initial certificate of occupancy;
    3. The affordable housing units shall be sold at sales prices affordable to eligible persons for a period of not less than fifty years from the date of the initial certificate of occupancy;
    4. Subleasing of PAD affordable rental units and leasing of PAD affordable sales units is prohibited, except that eligible persons may lease or sublease affordable units as otherwise provided in this chapter, and as verified by the City;
    5. The offering or use of any PAD units (including market rate units) as overnight accommodations is prohibited;
    6. The number of affordable units shall not be reduced and shall remain at the originally approved affordability level for a period of not less than fifty years; and
    7. Provisions for enforcement and monitoring of the affordability controls, including (as applicable) specific performance, damages, and an award of attorney fees and costs in the event of a violation.
B. Maintenance. For PAD rental developments the LURA shall contain provisions providing that the owner shall maintain all units in a safe, sanitary, and functional condition in accordance with the provisions of the International Property Maintenance Code, as adopted by the City, or its equivalent.
C. Recording Deed Restrictions. The LURA shall be recorded in the land records prior to the recording of the final plat for a PAD subdivision or prior to the execution of a final site plan for a PAD rental development.
D. Monitoring. The developer/owner shall manage and operate all affordable units and shall submit an annual report to the City of Moab, or its monitoring agency, identifying which units are affordable units in a PAD, the monthly rent for each unit, vacancy information for each year for the prior year, monthly income for tenants of each affordable units, and other information as required by the LURA. The annual report shall contain information sufficient to determine whether tenants are eligible for affordable housing as provided by this chapter.
    1. A subdivider/owner marketing affordable units for sale shall submit an annual report to the City identifying all affordable units sold in the last calendar year, the original purchase price for each unit, and information sufficient to verify purchaser eligibility, as required by the LURA. The annual report shall contain information sufficient to determine whether home purchasers are eligible for affordable housing as provided by this chapter.
    2. The City or its monitoring agency shall be authorized to audit and review all developer, subdivider, and owner records pertaining to housing developed under this chapter to verify compliance with this chapter and all affordability controls.
E. Extension of the LURA. The duration of the LURA may be extended for additional successive ten-year terms if the City Council certifies in writing at or before the expiration that there is a continuing need for affordable housing, and that it is reasonable that the affordability controls continue. In that case the City may execute any necessary documents to give effect to this provision.
F. Covenants. Covenants, conditions, and restrictions (CCRs) for a PAD subdivision shall be reviewed and subject to approval by the City contemporaneous with final plat approval. The CCRs shall provide mechanisms for enforcement of community rules, collection of assessments (if applicable), and maintenance of common areas. (Ord. 19-02 (part), 2019)

17.68.130 Impact fees.
In conjunction with final approval of any PAD development the City Council may waive all or a part of the impact fees otherwise payable for the development. Any waiver shall be vested in the discretion of the City Council, based on the merits of the application in attaining the affordability goals of this chapter. (Ord. 19-02 (part), 2019)

17.68.140 Enforcement.
A. A developer, subdivider, or successor in title who fails to comply with the development, improvements agreement, the LURA, or any other agreements, development approvals, or provisions of this chapter shall be issued a notice of violation and informed of the default under the applicable agreement. Each such person shall be given a reasonable period of time, not to exceed thirty days, in which to cure any default or breach under the applicable agreement.
B. Upon declaration of default the City may exercise any remedies for violation available under City ordinances or Utah statutes, including, without limitation: (1) proceeding against the financial assurance; (2) withholding building permits, certificates of occupancy, or certificates of zoning compliance; (3) obtaining an injunction to halt or abate zoning violations or breach of the agreement; (4) recording an affidavit of a lapse of plat/plan, in whole or in part; (5) commencing an action for damages, including, but not limited to, damages for costs incurred in completing, repairing, or replacing required improvements or abating any violations; and/or (6) any other remedies available at law or equity, including the remedy of specific performance. The City may combine remedies in its discretion and pursue some or all at different times, as may fit the applicable breach. In any action for injunctive relief the City need only prove a default or violation under this chapter, and such relief shall be granted without the necessity of bond.
C. The recording of an affidavit of lapse of plat/plan by the City shall result in the lapse of all prior land use approvals and the voiding of the subdivision of lots or the site plan within the real property specified in the affidavit.
D. With respect to any default under the LURA or any other affordability controls of this chapter, in addition to the remedies specified above, the City may obtain restitution or disgorgement of any proceeds realized by a subdivider, developer, or any successor in title from any leasing, sale, or other disposition of affordable housing units in violation of the affordability controls of this chapter. In the alternative, the City may levy liquidated damages in the amount of five thousand dollars per violation.
E. In any enforcement proceedings under this section the City shall be entitled to recover its reasonable attorney fees and court costs, in addition to any other relief provided. (Ord. 19-02 (part), 2019)

17.68.150 Interpretation.
This chapter shall be interpreted and construed in a manner that conforms to applicable law. If any provision shall be found to be unlawful or otherwise unenforceable, it shall be stricken or reformed in a manner that conforms with applicable law, without invalidating the entire ordinance. (Ord. 19-02 (part), 2019)

17.68.160 Implementation.
City staff may develop and implement program rules consistent with this chapter. (Ord. 19-02 (part), 2019)

Chapter 17.69 ASSURED WORKFORCE HOUSING

Sections:
17.69.010    Intent.
17.69.020    Definitions.
17.69.030    Workforce housing required – Alternatives – Exemptions.
17.69.040    Fee in lieu of construction.
17.69.050    Construction requirement.
17.69.060    Dedication.
17.69.070    Independent feasibility analysis.
17.69.080    Standards for construction requirement units.
17.69.090    Eligibility – General policy.
17.69.100    Land use restriction agreement.
17.69.110    Impact fee waiver.
17.69.120    Enforcement.
17.69.130    Appeals.
17.69.140    Periodic review.
17.69.150    Severability.
17.69.160    Legislative history.

17.69.010 Intent.
The City, in conjunction with Grand County, has undertaken to study the lack of affordable housing and identify policies that can increase the supply of affordable housing for the Moab/Grand County workforce. The City finds that tourist lodging-related commercial development is causing demand for affordable housing units, and that there is a deficit of housing units available for occupancy by persons employed in tourism-related occupations. Based on the results of market data, the City finds that it is appropriate and feasible that tourism-related lodging development construct affordable housing units or pay a fee in lieu of construction for the purpose of offsetting the impacts from that type of development. (Ord. 18-20 (part), 2018)

17.69.020 Definitions.
A. The following definitions apply in this chapter:
    1. “Adjacent” means a parcel of land that shares a boundary with the parcel of real property included in an application under this chapter.
    2. “Advisory documents” means planning documents adopted by the City from time to time, including: the Moab General Plan; Storm Water Management Master Plan; Sanitary Sewer Master Plan; Water Storage Distribution Master Plan; Natural Hazards Predisaster Master Plan; or similarly adopted planning documents.
    3. “Affordable housing” means housing developed pursuant to this chapter in which the sales price of the unit, or the rental rate for each unit, does not exceed the sums deemed affordable to individuals and households with annual incomes of one hundred percent or less of Grand County area median income (AMI), as determined by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) and the requirements of this chapter. Affordable housing is further defined by the following income subcategories:
        a. “Moderate income” means household income which is between eighty percent and one hundred percent of Grand County area median income as defined by HUD.
        b. “Low income” means household income which is between sixty percent and seventy-nine percent of Grand County area median income.
        c. “Very low income” means household income which is between thirty percent and fifty-nine percent of Grand County area median income.
        d. “Extremely low income” means household income which is below thirty percent of the Grand County area median income.
    4. “Affordable housing unit” means a unit of housing that is affordable to individuals and households with annual incomes of one hundred percent or less of area median income.
    5. “Area median income (AMI)” means the published estimate of median income in Grand County that is determined periodically by HUD, as adjusted for household size.
    6. “Condominium” means a type of subdivision which may be utilized as an overnight accommodation in which owners hold title to a defined unit, together with an undivided interest in common elements pursuant to a recorded declaration.
    7. “Construction requirement” means the requirement that new commercial uses construct a specified number of affordable housing units pursuant to the formula specified by Section 17.69.050.
    8. “Dedication requirement” means the conveyance of real property for affordable housing purposes as provided by Section 17.69.060.
    9. “Development” means new construction or remodeling of buildings or real property.
    10. “Development review team (DRT)” means the committee of City employees including the Planning Director, Public Works Director, Building Official, and such other persons as may be designated by the City from time to time.
    11. “Developer” means a person offering affordable housing units developed pursuant to this chapter for lease or rent to eligible persons.
    12. “Development improvements agreement (DIA)” means a written agreement between an applicant for a planned affordable development and the City of Moab containing specific requirements to ensure the construction of specified public or private improvements, the phasing of construction, and security to ensure completion of improvements as a condition for final plat/plan approval.
    13. “Fee in lieu of construction (FILC)” means the fee payable in connection with new commercial development in lieu of the construction of affordable housing, as specified in Section 17.69.040.
    14. “Final approval” means the approval, with or without conditions, by the applicable land use authority authorizing the construction of any development specified by this chapter.
    15. “Final plat” means a map of a subdivision which has been surveyed by a licensed professional land surveyor and acknowledged by the owner, and which accurately depicts streets, alleys, easements, blocks, lots, survey monuments, public/private improvements, and other attributes of a subdivision.
    16. “Final site plan” means a map of a development which has been surveyed by a licensed professional land surveyor and acknowledged by the owner, and which accurately depicts streets, alleys, easements, blocks, lots, survey monuments, building envelopes, public/private improvements, and other attributes of a commercial development.
    17. “Finished floor area” means the total in square feet of all heated interior spaces of a commercial development, inclusive of common areas, stairways, elevators, and service areas.
    18. “Habitable room” means a heated room in a dwelling that is intended for human occupation. Habitable rooms do not include bathrooms, closets, storage rooms, utility spaces, or the like.
    19. “Household” means a person living alone, or two or more persons, whether related by blood or marriage or not, who reside together in a single dwelling unit.
    20. “HUD” means the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.
    21. “Land use restriction agreement (LURA)” means a contract between the City of Moab and an affordable housing developer or subdivider which is recorded as an encumbrance upon the real property to be developed, and which provides for continued enforcement of the affordability provisions of this chapter for a duration of not less than fifty years. A LURA shall run with the land and be binding upon the parties and their successors in title, as provided by its terms.
    22. “Lot” means a tract of land defined in an approved plat which may be conveyed to a buyer by deed.
    23. “Market rate” means a housing unit offered for sale or lease which is not subject to the affordability controls of this chapter.
    24. “Monitoring agency” means the City of Moab, or its designee, charged with monitoring and/or enforcement of the affordability provisions which accompany any affordable housing developed pursuant to this chapter, including any LURA provisions.
    25. “Overnight accommodations” means short-term rentals for a period of less than thirty days provided to visitors, tourists, or similar persons who do not have a long-term residence in Moab or Grand County.
    26. “Public dedication” means streets, sidewalks, parks, open space, trails, or other areas of land or improvements to be dedicated to public use under this chapter.
    27. “Preliminary plan” means a map of a rental development proposed under this chapter which has been surveyed by a licensed professional land surveyor and acknowledged or authorized by the owner, and which accurately depicts streets, alleys, easements, blocks, lots, survey monuments, building envelopes, public/private improvements, utilities, and other attributes of a proposed development. The preliminary plan shall include such other submittals as to planned improvements as are required by this chapter.
    28. “Preliminary plat” means a map of a subdivision development which has been surveyed by a licensed professional land surveyor and acknowledged or authorized by the owner, and which accurately depicts streets, alleys, easements, blocks, lots, survey monuments, building envelopes, public/private improvements, utilities, and other attributes of a proposed subdivision.
    29. “Preliminary approval” means an approval, with or without conditions, given by the land use authority that provides the necessary authority for an applicant to proceed with the preparation of the final plat or the final plan.
    30. “Project area” means a defined tract of land, including all subsequent development phases, that is proposed for a development application.
    31. “Setback” means the minimum distance from a specified boundary that a structure or other feature must be located.
    32. “Subdivider” means any person creating a subdivision and offering lots or condominium units for sale to the public.
    33. “Subdivision” means a described tract of land that has been surveyed by a licensed professional land surveyor and acknowledged or authorized by the owner, that describes two or more lots which may be conveyed to buyers, and that accurately depicts streets, alleys, easements, blocks, lots, survey monuments, and other attributes of a proposed subdivision development.
    34. “Site plan” means a described tract of land which has been surveyed by a licensed professional land surveyor and acknowledged or authorized by the owner, and which accurately depicts streets, alleys, easements, blocks, lots, survey monuments, building envelopes, public/private improvements, utilities, and other attributes of a proposed development.
    35. “Townhouse” means multihousehold housing units utilized as overnight accommodations in which units share at least one common wall.
    36. “Unit” means a residential dwelling containing, at minimum, a permanently installed kitchen (including a sink, stove, refrigerator, counters, and cabinets), bathroom (sink, toilet, and a shower or bathtub), bedroom (or sleeping area), living room (or area), parking, and storage space. All habitable rooms shall be separate from the bathroom(s). A residential unit may contain more than one bedroom, depending upon the needs of the development and the housing market. Each housing unit shall have nonexclusive access to common elements within the particular development. (Ord. 19-13 § 21 (part), 2019; Ord. 18-20 (part), 2018)

17.69.030 Workforce housing required – Alternatives – Exemptions.
A. Applicants seeking land use approval of new overnight accommodations or conversions of other development into overnight accommodations shall do one of the following:
    1. Construct or provide an appropriate number of affordable housing units in conjunction with the development of the overnight accommodations (the construction requirement); or
    2. Pay the fee in lieu of construction (FILC).
B. The remodeling, repair, or reconstruction of any overnight accommodations lawfully existing at the time of the enactment of this chapter shall be exempt from the provision of this chapter; provided, that such activity does not result in a new addition or expansion (measured in square feet) relative to the existing use. Remodeling, repair, or reconstruction of overnight accommodations that expand the finished floor area of the building or structure shall be subject to this chapter to the extent of the expanded area. (Ord. 18-20 (part), 2018)

17.69.040 Fee in lieu of construction.
A. A developer/subdivider proposing new overnight accommodations that do not satisfy the construction requirement must pay to the City a fee in lieu of construction (FILC) equal to the total finished floor area (measured in square feet) of the overnight accommodation type multiplied by the following sums:
+--------------+---------------------------+
| Hotel/Motel: | $15.57 per square foot;   |
+--------------+---------------------------+
| Condominium: | $5.18 per square foot; or |
+--------------+---------------------------+
| Townhome:    | $8.77 per square foot.    |
+--------------+---------------------------+
B. The FILC is due and payable prior to the issuance of a building permit.
C. The City shall use the FILC, either individually or in combination with other funds, for affordable housing purposes. FILC funds shall be held and accounted for in a separate fund which shall be used solely for the acquisition, construction, maintenance, management, or development of affordable housing. (Ord. 18-20 (part), 2018)

17.69.050 Construction requirement.
A. Except as is otherwise provided in this section, a developer/subdivider may construct new affordable housing units within the project area of the overnight accommodation, or on other suitable property within the City.
    1. Construction requirement review procedures may be consolidated with procedures generally applicable to the review of the underlying overnight accommodations application (e.g., site plan review), as necessary.
B. The construction requirement is determined by dividing the finished floor area (or total units) of the type of overnight accommodation by the floor area factor (or unit factor) and multiplying the result by the AH unit mitigation number for the type of housing to be constructed. Where the mitigation number results in a decimal of 0.5 or higher, the number of required units to be constructed shall be rounded to the next highest whole number.
+--------------+----------------------+--------------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------+
| Development  |   Income Category    | AH Unit Mitigation |   Floor Area    | FILC Mitigation | Per _____ |
|     Type     |                      |                    |    Factor or    |                 |           |
|              |                      |                    |   Unit Factor   |                 |           |
+--------------+----------------------+--------------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------+
| Hotel/Motel  | Extremely Low-Income | 5.43               | 60,000 sq.      | $15.57          | Sq. Ft.   |
|              |                      |                    | ft.             |                 |           |
+--------------+----------------------+--------------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------+
| "            | Very Low-Income      | 6.36               | 60,000 sq.      | $15.57          | Sq. Ft.   |
|              |                      |                    | ft.             |                 |           |
+--------------+----------------------+--------------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------+
| "            | Low-Income           | 10.87              | 60,000 sq.      | $15.57          | Sq. Ft.   |
|              |                      |                    | ft.             |                 |           |
+--------------+----------------------+--------------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------+
| "            | Moderate             | 229.16             | 60,000 sq.      | $15.57          | Sq. Ft.   |
|              |                      |                    | ft.             |                 |           |
+--------------+----------------------+--------------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------+
| Condominiums | Extremely Low-Income | 4.07               | 100 condo units | $5.18           | Sq. Ft.   |
+--------------+----------------------+--------------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------+
| "            | Very Low-Income      | 4.76               | 100 condo units | $5.18           | Sq. Ft.   |
+--------------+----------------------+--------------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------+
| "            | Low-Income           | 8.14               | 100 condo units | $5.18           | Sq. Ft.   |
+--------------+----------------------+--------------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------+
| "            | Moderate             | 171.61             | 100 condo units | $5.18           | Sq. Ft.   |
+--------------+----------------------+--------------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------+
| Townhomes    | Extremely Low-Income | 8.41               | 100 townhomes   | $8.77           | Sq. Ft.   |
+--------------+----------------------+--------------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------+
| "            | Very Low-Income      | 9.85               | 100 townhomes   | $8.77           | Sq. Ft.   |
+--------------+----------------------+--------------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------+
| "            | Low-Income           | 16.85              | 100 townhomes   | $8.77           | Sq. Ft.   |
+--------------+----------------------+--------------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------+
| "            | Moderate             | 355.07             | 100 townhomes   | $8.77           | Sq. Ft.   |
+--------------+----------------------+--------------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------+
| Example: a 35,000 square foot hotel results in the following: 35,000/60,000                              |
| = 0.583 x 10.87 low income units = 6.340 = Construction Requirement of 6                                 |
| units of low income housing.                                                                             |
+--------------+----------------------+--------------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------+
C. All affordable housing units constructed under the construction requirement shall meet applicable building codes and use requirements for the zoning district in which they are to be located.
D. The mix of income types for affordable housing units to be developed under the construction requirement will be determined by the City in consultation with the developer on a case-by-case basis based on the needs of the development and feasibility of the site. Affordable housing units must be developed proportionately to the development of overnight accommodations, as further specified in the development improvements agreement between the City and the developer/subdivider and/or the LURA.
E. The area of affordable housing units built pursuant to the construction requirement shall be an average of not less than one thousand square feet per unit. Developers shall provide a mix of one bedroom and larger units based on the expected needs of the project, as further specified in the development improvements agreement and/or the LURA.
F. In cases of the development of new townhomes or condominiums that will be offered or used as overnight accommodations, the developer/subdivider shall satisfy the requirements of this chapter utilizing the construction requirement unless the City determines that construction would be infeasible or impractical, given the: (1) size or scope of the project; (2) site limitations, or (3) existence of other compelling factors.
G. If, given the finished floor area of the project, the construction requirement would result in less than one unit of affordable housing being built, the developer/subdivider shall utilize and pay the FILC that would be applicable to the project.
H. First preference for affordable units built under the construction requirement shall be given to eligible employees of the developer/subdivider who are or will be employed on the developed premises. All tenants of affordable units developed under the construction requirement shall occupy units pursuant to a written lease providing for a tenancy with a duration of not less than a month to month period. (Ord. 18-20 (part), 2018)

17.69.060 Dedication.
A. As an alternative to the construction requirement or payment of the FILC, a developer/subdivider may, subject to City Council approval, elect to dedicate to the City real property with a current fair market value which is equal to or greater than the FILC which would otherwise be payable in conjunction with the overnight accommodation development. The following must be shown to satisfy a dedication:
    1. The property must be within the City limits or be subject to annexation within a reasonable period of time;
    2. The property must have legal access to a public street;
    3. Domestic water, sewer, and other public utilities must be available in reasonable proximity to the property;
    4. The value of the property must be confirmed by a current appraisal from a properly licensed and qualified appraiser;
    5. The property must be conveyed to the City (or its designee) via warranty deed, free of all liens or encumbrances; and
    6. The property must have a zoning designation that permits housing uses.
B. The City Council, in its discretion, may review the proposed conveyance to determine if the property meets the above criteria and is otherwise suitable for dedication as affordable housing. If approved, the dedication will be confirmed in a written development agreement with the developer. The Council may properly reject a proposed dedication if it determines that the property has one or more attributes or conditions which would render development infeasible or impractical.
    1. By way of example only, and not of limitation, a property may be deemed infeasible or impractical for development due to: (a) extreme topography; (b) unsuitable soil or geotechnical conditions; (c) excessive cost for roads, utilities, or other infrastructure; (d) lack of proximity to schools, stores, or other necessary services; (e) unsatisfactory environmental conditions; (f) inadequate size; or (g) other legal, financial, or physical conditions negatively affecting prospects for development.
C. Dedicated property shall be developed, either individually or in conjunction with other parcels, for affordable housing. (Ord. 18-20 (part), 2018)

17.69.070 Independent feasibility analysis.
A. If, on the basis of individual development costs, employment load, or other similar data, an applicant believes that the FILC or construction requirement would be excessive, as applied to its development application, the applicant may submit to the City data, calculations, and evidence in support of an alternative to the FILC or the construction requirement. All such materials shall be accompanied by supporting cost or other data (e.g., land contracts, construction contracts, or the like) and be accompanied by a written attestation by the applicant signed under penalty of perjury. Any independent feasibility analysis offered under this section shall be performed in substantial conformity with the methodology employed by the City pursuant to Phase I and Phase II, Assured Housing Nexus Fee Analysis for the City of Moab, March 2018 and May 2018, respectively, by BAE Urban Economics, or such successor studies as may be adopted by the City.
B. The City Manager shall review materials submitted by the applicant or evidence submitted by City staff (if any) and may: approve the independent analysis; reject the independent analysis and order the applicant to pay the FILC; or order that the applicant pay an alternative sum supported by the evidence.
    1. The applicant shall be provided copies of any staff comments or materials submitted to the City Manager and be given a reasonable period of time in which to respond to any submittals prior to issuance of a decision.
    2. The City Manager shall provide his/her decision in writing and explain the basis for the conclusion reached. In reaching a decision the City Manager has discretion to weigh the strength and credibility of the evidence offered in the matter. (Ord. 18-20 (part), 2018)

17.69.080 Standards for construction requirement units.
A. All affordable housing units constructed pursuant to the construction requirement shall conform to the minimum requirements of the zoning district in which they are to be located. All such units shall have a permanently installed kitchen (including a sink, stove, refrigerator, counters, and cabinets), bathroom (sink, toilet, and a shower or bathtub), bedroom (or sleeping area), living room (or area), parking, and storage space. All habitable rooms shall be separate from the bathroom(s). Each housing unit shall have nonexclusive access to common elements within the particular development. All units, and rooms within those units, shall comply with applicable building code minimum requirements, including the International Residential Code, as adopted by the State of Utah. Building height shall be measured from the average finished grade of the building to the midpoint of the highest plane of the roof.
B. Vehicle parking shall be provided at a rate of not less than one off-street space per single bedroom or studio unit. Units having two or more bedrooms shall have parking of not less than one and one-half spaces per bedroom. Where the number of required parking spaces for a development is a decimal of 0.5 or higher, the required number of spaces shall be rounded upward.
C. Affordable units shall include associated open space for residents consistent with the size and scope of the project. Open space, such as landscaping, recreation areas, entryways, commons spaces, bicycle racks, and setback areas, shall comprise not less than five percent of the project area.
D. All units shall be constructed with adequate access to public streets, sidewalks, and trails. All units shall be served by municipal culinary water and sewer service, and have adequate storm water management. (Ord. 18-20 (part), 2018)

17.69.090 Eligibility – General policy.
Affordable housing units developed pursuant to this chapter shall be leased to persons who meet the eligibility requirements of this chapter. The developer/subdivider shall provide proof of its compliance with all eligibility and affordability controls to the City or its designated monitoring agency annually and/or upon written request. Prospective tenants shall provide verification of their eligibility at the time they enter into any lease agreement, and periodically thereafter.
A. To be eligible to occupy affordable housing under this chapter the following criteria must be met:
    1. The persons comprising the household must have a combined household income which does not exceed one hundred percent of the Grand County, Utah, area median income (AMI), as published by HUD from time to time.
    2. At least one person in the household must be either: (a) employed full time in Moab or Grand County; (b) disabled; or (c) over sixty years of age and retired from the workforce.
    3. All persons occupying affordable housing must utilize the housing as their sole place of residence. Subleasing or assignment of rental agreements, or overnight accommodation uses of units developed under this chapter, are not permitted.
B. Rent Calculation. The developer/subdivider offering affordable housing units for lease shall set the monthly rental rate at an amount (assuming a three-bedroom unit) and less reasonable utility costs that does not exceed thirty percent of the area median income (AMI) for a Grand County household of four persons, as adjusted from time to time, divided by twelve months (the allowed rental rate). The allowed rental rate calculation shall assume a reasonable allowance for annual utility costs that may be incurred by the tenant. Units with greater than or less than three bedrooms shall be rented at a rate which is adjusted proportionately. As an illustration, the allowed rental rate per month for an affordable unit based on Grand County AMI of fifty-five thousand dollars would be as follows:
+-------------------------------------------------+------------------------+
| 3 bedroom: AMI $55,000 – $1,200 (annual utility | = $1,345.00 per month; |
| allowance) x 30% ÷ 12                           |                        |
+-------------------------------------------------+------------------------+
| 2 bedroom:                                      | = $896.66;             |
+-------------------------------------------------+------------------------+
| 1 bedroom:                                      | = $448.33.             |
+-------------------------------------------------+------------------------+
    1. Inflation adjustments in the allowed rental rate shall be made annually, as of January of each calendar year, and shall be based upon the year to year increase in the Consumer Price Index (CPI-U), West Region, as published by the United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. The City or the monitoring agency will publish the inflation adjustment and provide same to developers for purposes of calculating allowed rental rate increases.
    2. Nothing in this chapter shall preclude a developer from entering into a fixed rental rate lease with a tenant who is otherwise compliant with this chapter at the time of execution. (Ord. 18-20 (part), 2018)

17.69.100 Land use restriction agreement.
A. At the time of final approval of the development application the City and the developer/subdivider shall execute and record in the land records a land use restriction agreement (LURA) implementing and providing for enforcement of the affordability controls specified in this chapter. The LURA shall be a deed restriction running with the land, and binding upon the original grantor, and all successors and assigns in title. The LURA shall provide, at a minimum, the following:
    1. The affordable housing units shall be leased to, and occupied by, eligible persons;
    2. The affordable housing units shall be leased at rent levels affordable to eligible persons for a period of not less than fifty years from the date of the initial certificate of occupancy;
    3. Subleasing of affordable units or the offering or use of affordable units as overnight accommodations is prohibited;
    4. The number of affordable units shall not be reduced and shall remain at the originally approved affordability level for a period of not less than fifty years; and
    5. Provisions for enforcement and monitoring of the affordability controls, including (as applicable) specific performance, damages, and an award of attorney fees and costs in the event of a violation.
B. Maintenance. The LURA shall contain provisions providing that the owner shall maintain all units in a safe, sanitary, and functional condition in accordance with the provisions of the International Property Maintenance Code, as adopted by the City, or its equivalent.
C. Recording Deed Restrictions. The LURA shall be recorded in the land records prior to the recording of the final plat or final site plan for the underlying development.
D. Monitoring. The developer/subdivider shall submit an annual report to the City or its monitoring agency identifying the affordable units, the monthly rent for each unit, vacancy information for each year for the prior year, eligibility information for tenants of each affordable unit, and other information as required by the LURA. The annual report shall contain information sufficient to determine whether tenants are eligible for affordable housing as provided by this chapter.
E. Extension of the LURA. The duration of the LURA may be extended for additional successive ten-year terms if the City Council certifies in writing at or before the expiration that there is a continuing need for affordable housing, and that it is reasonable that the affordability controls continue. In that case the the City may execute any necessary documents to give effect to this provision. (Ord. 18-20 (part), 2018)

17.69.110 Impact fee waiver.
The City Council may waive all or a part of the impact fees otherwise payable in connection with affordable housing units developed under this chapter. Any waiver shall be vested in the discretion of the City Council, based on the merits of the application in attaining the affordability goals of this chapter. (Ord. 18-20 (part), 2018)

17.69.120 Enforcement.
A developer, subdivider, or successor in title who fails to comply with the development improvements agreement, the LURA, or any other agreements, development approvals, or provisions of this chapter may be issued a notice of violation and informed of the default under the applicable agreement or approval. Each such person shall be given a reasonable period of time, not to exceed thirty days, in which to cure any default or breach.
A. Upon declaration of default the City may exercise any remedies for violation available under City ordinances or Utah statutes, including, without limitation: (1) proceeding against the financial assurance; (2) withholding building permits, certificates of occupancy, or certificates of zoning compliance; (3) obtaining an injunction to halt or abate zoning violations or breach of the agreement; (4) recording an affidavit of a lapse of plat/plan, in whole or in part; (5) commencing an action for damages – including, but not limited to, damages for costs incurred in completing, repairing, or replacing required improvements or abating any violations; and/or (6) any other remedies available at law or equity, including the remedy of specific performance. The City may combine remedies in its discretion and pursue some or all at different times, as may fit the applicable breach. In any action for injunctive relief the City need only prove a default or violation under this chapter, and such relief shall be granted without the necessity of bond.
B. The recording of an affidavit of lapse of plat/plan by the City shall result in the lapse of all prior land use approvals and the voiding of the subdivision of lots or the site plan within the real property specified in the affidavit.
C. With respect to any default under the LURA or any other affordability controls of this chapter, in addition to the remedies specified above, the City may obtain restitution or disgorgement of any proceeds realized by any person found to be in violation. In the alternative, the City may levy liquidated damages in the amount of five thousand dollars per violation. (Ord. 18-20 (part), 2018)

17.69.130 Appeals.
Persons wishing to appeal any decision or interpretation made under this chapter may appeal to the appeal authority, pursuant to the procedures provided by Sections 17.72.120 through 17.72.170. (Ord. 18-20 (part), 2018)

17.69.140 Periodic review.
City staff is directed to review market conditions, the availability of affordable housing, and provisions of this chapter no later than two calendar years from the date of enactment and, if appropriate, recommend amendments or changes to this chapter. (Ord. 18-20 (part), 2018)

17.69.150 Severability.
This chapter shall be interpreted and construed in a manner that conforms to applicable law. If any provision shall be found to be unlawful or unenforceable, it shall be stricken or reformed in a manner that conforms with applicable law, without invalidating the remainder of this chapter. (Ord. 18-20 (part), 2018)

17.69.160 Legislative history.
The following documents informed and formed the basis for adoption of this chapter:
Phase I, Assured Housing Feasibility Analysis for the City of Moab and Grand County, March 2018, BAE Urban Economics;
Phase II, Assured Housing Nexus Fee Analysis for the City of Moab and Grand County, May 2018, by BAE Urban Economics;
Moab Area Affordable Housing Plan, updated Spring 2016;
City of Moab General Plan, July 11, 2017. (Ord. 18-20 (part), 2018)

Chapter 17.70 ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT (ADU)1

Sections:
17.70.010    Purpose.
17.70.020    General standards.
17.70.030    Criteria for approval.
17.70.040    Enforcement--Revocation of permit.

17.70.010 Purpose.
Accessory dwelling units are encouraged as dwellings for persons to increase affordable housing opportunities in the R-2, R-3, R-4, and RA-1 residential zones. They shall be allowed in the R-1 zone on lots sufficient in size to allow further subdivision. (Ord. 18-20 (part), 2018; Ord. 18-01 (part), 2018; Ord. 12-05 (part), 2012. Formerly 17.69.010)

17.70.020 General standards.
The following provisions are intended to facilitate accessory dwellings while minimizing land use conflicts and environmental degradation:
A. Accessory dwellings shall not occupy more than twenty-five percent of any rear or side yard.
B. The front yard setback for an accessory dwelling shall be at least equal to the plane of the front wall of the principal structure and/or adhere to the required setbacks of the underlying zone.
    1. Exception. Where pre-existing structures meet the development standards of this chapter, the original structure may be designated as the accessory dwelling.
C. Any request for accessory living quarters within residential zones shall be reviewed for compliance with the standards in this chapter and approved by city staff. A letter of compliance shall be issued to the applicant by the Zoning Administrator prior to issuance of a building permit.
D. An accessory dwelling shall not be constructed prior to the principal structure.
E. An accessory dwelling may be constructed above a garage and consist of the same floor area; provided, that it shall not protrude beyond any ground floor wall and shall not consist of more than one story above the ground floor. The overall structure shall not exceed twenty feet in height. (Ord. 18-20 (part), 2018; Ord. 18-01 (part), 2018; Ord. 12-05 (part), 2012. Formerly 17.69.020)

17.70.030 Criteria for approval.
The following criteria must be established prior to building permit issuance:
A. Size. The maximum size for accessory living quarters shall be no more than one thousand square feet with no more than three bedrooms.
B. Parking. One on-site parking space shall be provided in addition to the underlying parking requirement. The parking space may be provided in tandem if the existing driveway length exceeds thirty-five feet as measured from the property line.
C. Accessory Dwellings Per Lot. No more than one accessory dwelling may be located on a lot.
D. Property to Remain Undivided. Properties with accessory dwelling permits shall remain recorded as one lot.
E. Subdivision of Property. The accessory dwelling shall not be sold separately unless the accessory dwelling occupies an area of adequate size to meet the lot area and all other requirements of the zone.
F. Deed Restriction. A deed restriction must be filed with the county recorder which states:“A permit for an accessory dwelling was issued to ________, the current owner of this property on ________. The owner shall strictly adhere to the prohibition of the use of the accessory dwelling as nightly or short-term rental.”
G. Nightly Rentals. Accessory dwellings are intended for long-term rental of six consecutive months or more, to the same individual, and may not be used for nightly rentals. (Ord. 18-20 (part), 2018; Ord. 18-01 (part), 2018; Ord. 12-05 (part), 2012. Formerly 17.69.030)

17.70.040 Enforcement--Revocation of permit.
The Zoning Administrator may revoke the accessory dwelling permit for noncompliance with the criteria of this chapter. The permittee may appeal the determination to the appeal authority, which will evaluate the Zoning Administrator’s determination of noncompliance and decide if the permit revocation should occur. (Ord. 18-20 (part), 2018; Ord. 18-01 (part), 2018; Ord. 12-05 (part), 2012. Formerly 17.69.040)
1The ADU shall be permitted as an accessory dwelling unit added to, created within, or detached from the original dwelling. The ADU shall be oriented in a way that maintains, to the extent practical, the privacy of residents in adjoining dwellings.
Editor’s note: Ord. No. 10-13, adopted September 14, 2010, repealed Chapter 17.70, 17.70.010--17.70.090, which pertained to bed and breakfast facilities and derived from Ord. No. 90-06; Ord. No. 95-01; Ord. No. 99-12; Ord. No. 00-02, 2000 and Ord. No. 06-13, 2006. Ord. No. 18-20, adopted November 13, 2018, renumbered Chapter 17.69 as Chapter 17.70.

Chapter 17.71 GUEST APARTMENTS

Sections:
17.71.010    Guest apartment defined.
17.71.020    Existing guest apartments in R-3 and R-4 zones.
17.71.030    Guest apartments and short-term boarding houses not a permitted use.
17.71.040    Enforcement.

17.71.010 Guest apartment defined.
“Guest apartment” means a structure whose original purpose was that of a multiple-household dwelling unit of two or more household units such as a two-household dwelling, triplex, four-plex or other apartment-type complex and currently rented on a short-term basis (less than thirty days). (Ord. 19-13 § 21 (part), 2019; Ord. 91-08 (part), 1991)

17.71.020 Existing guest apartments in R-3 and R-4 zones.
This chapter shall not apply to multiple-household dwellings of apartment houses that have converted to guest apartments in the R-3 and R-4 zones and have a current business license prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 19-13 § 21 (part), 2019; Ord. 91-08 (part), 1991)

17.71.030 Guest apartments and short-term boarding houses not a permitted use.
No license shall be issued for guest apartments, and the future conversion of apartments to guest apartments shall not be a permitted use in any residential zone. Short-term boarding and rooming houses shall not be a permitted use in residential zones. (Ord. 91-08 (part), 1991)

17.71.040 Enforcement.
All violations of this chapter are classified as Class B Misdemeanors, punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day of violation or noncompliance shall constitute a separate offense and may be prosecuted accordingly. (Ord. 91-08 (part), 1991)

Chapter 17.72 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT

Sections:
17.72.010    Building permit required-Application.
17.72.020    Plans required.
17.72.030    Permit compliance.
17.72.040    License compliance.
17.72.050    Permit required-Fee.
17.72.060    Application-Construction and use compliance.
17.72.070    Certificate of zoning compliance required.
17.72.080    Zoning Administrator-Appointment.
17.72.090    Zoning Administrator--Powers and duties.
17.72.100    Matrix of advisory, land use authority, and appeal bodies.
17.72.110    Reserved.
17.72.120    Hearing officer to serve as appeal authority.
17.72.130    Jurisdiction.
17.72.140    Notice of appeal and appeal fee.
17.72.150    Conduct of hearings.
17.72.160    Stay of decision.
17.72.170    Exhaustion of administrative remedies--District court review.
17.72.180    Variance.
17.72.190    Standards.
17.72.200    Building permits.
17.72.210    Notice to council of variance or building permit application.
17.72.220    Zone boundary adjustment.
17.72.230    Appeal of geologic hazard decisions--Panel of experts.
17.72.240    District Court review of appeal authority decision.
17.72.250    Planning Commission-Powers and duties.
17.72.260    Powers and duties of governing body.

17.72.010 Building permit required-Application.
No person, firm or corporation shall commence to construct, alter or move a building or structure, or make a change in use of any land within the territory shown on the zone map which has been adopted as a part of this title without first submitting an application and obtaining a permit therefor from the Zoning Administrator or other authorized officer. A permit shall also be required for the moving and/or improvement of moved-in homes, demountable homes, manufactured homes and similar movable structures. (Ord. 19-13 § 16, 2019; Ord. 5-80, 1980; prior code § 27-25-1)

17.72.020 Plans required.
All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by plans which have been drawn to scale showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the size and location of existing buildings and as required, the location and layout of off-street parking and a planting plan showing how the premises will be landscaped. A careful record of such application shall be kept in the office of the Zoning Administrator for a period of five years from the date of receipt thereof. (Prior code § 27-25-2)

17.72.030 Permit compliance.
From the time of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, permits shall not be granted for the construction or alteration of any building or structure or for the moving of a building or structure onto a lot or for the change in use of any land, building or structure, if such construction, alteration, moving or change in use would be a violation of any of the provisions of this title, nor shall any sewer or water service line or electric utilities be installed to serve the premises if such use would be in violation of this title. (Prior code § 27-25-3)

17.72.040 License compliance.
No license shall be issued by an official or employee vested with the duty and authority to issue licenses which would not be in conformance with the provisions of this title. Any license so issued shall be null and void. (Prior code § 27-25-4)

17.72.050 Permit required-Fee.
No building or structure shall be constructed, reconstructed, altered or moved to the extent of one hundred dollars or more in replaceable value nor shall the use of any land be changed, except after the issuance of a permit for the same by the Zoning Administrator or other authorized officer. (Prior code § 27-25-5)

17.72.060 Application-Construction and use compliance.
Building permits or certificates of zoning compliance issued on the basis of plans and specifications approved by the Zoning Administrator authorizes only the use, arrangement and construction set forth in such approved plans and application, and no other use, arrangement or construction. Use, arrangement or construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed to be a violation of this title. (Prior code § 27-25-6)

17.72.070 Certificate of zoning compliance required.
A. It is unlawful to use or occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or to change the occupancy of any building or premises until a certificate of zoning compliance is issued by the Zoning Administrator, stating that the proposed use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of this title. No nonconforming structure or use shall be changed or extended until a certificate of zoning compliance has been issued by the Zoning Administrator. The certificate of zoning compliance shall state specifically wherein the nonconforming use differs with the provisions of this title.
B. The Zoning Administrator may permit the occupancy of a building prior to the completion of all required work, provided a cash-only bond is posted with the City Recorder in an amount equal to the cost of completing such required work plus fifty percent and all administrative costs as determined by the governing body.
    1. The construction costs for the completion of the remaining improvements shall be less than ten thousand dollars and shall not include ADA accessibility requirements, potable water and sanitary sewer, or health and safety requirements found in the building code or other ordinances adopted by the City.
    2. Types of improvements that may be bonded under this section include but are not limited to: building trim, landscaping, curb, gutter and sidewalk, or replacement of concrete that was damaged during construction.
    3. The estimated cost of the remaining improvements and a schedule for completion shall be established in an improvements agreement that must be approved by City Council.
    4. The agreement must contain at a minimum:
        a. A description of the work to be completed.
        b. Reasons for the incompletion of items.
        c. Estimates of the construction costs and the additional costs listed above.
        d. Contain a reference to the building permit number.
        e. An expected date of completion.
        f. Actions to be taken or penalties for failure to complete the improvements on time.
    5. If necessary items remain unfinished at the end of the agreed time period, the City Manager may grant an extension. The extension shall not exceed a reasonable period of time to allow the contractor/developer to complete those remaining items listed in the improvements agreement.
    6. The City Manager shall have the authority to release the bond if the improvements are satisfactorily completed. All public improvements shall be warranted by the developer/contractor for a period of one year from the date of final inspection by city staff. If the improvements are not completed to the satisfaction of the City or incomplete at the time of expiration of the agreement, the City Manager shall cause the work to be completed and use the bond to satisfy the incurred costs.
The Zoning Administrator shall maintain a record of all certificates of zoning compliance for a period of five years and a copy shall be furnished upon request to any applicant. (Ord. 13-08, 2013: prior code § 27-25-7)

17.72.080 Zoning Administrator-Appointment.
The building inspector appointed under the provisions of the building code is designated as the Zoning Administrator. The building inspector shall be charged with the administration and enforcement of this title. The governing body may also appoint other officers to assist in the administration and enforcement of this title. (Prior code § 27-25-8)

17.72.090 Zoning Administrator--Powers and duties.
A. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator to inspect or cause to be inspected all building in the course of construction or repair. He shall enforce all of the provisions of this title, entering actions in the courts when necessary; and his failure to do so shall not legalize any act in violation of such provisions.
B. Upon appeal to the hearing officer of any matters on which the hearing officer is required to pass, the Zoning Administrator shall forthwith transmit all papers, records and other pertinent data pertaining to the appeal to the hearing officer as required by the terms of this title. The Zoning Administrator shall also refer matters to the Planning Commission and governing body as set forth in this title. (Ord. 19-13 § 17, 2019; prior code § 27-25-9)

17.72.100 Matrix of advisory, land use authority, and appeal bodies.
A. The appeal authority is authorized to hear and decide the following appeals, which are designated by the term AA in the column labeled “Appeal Body.” As used in this matrix, PC means Planning Commission; CC means City Council; DC means district court; BC means the boundary commission; and NA means not applicable.
+----------------------------+----------------------+----------------------+------------------------+-----------------+
|     Application/Action     |    Advisory Body     |  Land Use Authority  |      Appeal Body       | Required Public |
|                            |                      |                      |                        |     Hearing     |
+----------------------------+----------------------+----------------------+------------------------+-----------------+
| Zone Change                | Planning Commission  | City Council         | District Court         | Yes, PC         |
|                            | (PC)                 | (CC)                 | (DC)                   |                 |
+----------------------------+----------------------+----------------------+------------------------+-----------------+
| Land Use Map Amendment     | PC                   | CC                   | DC                     | Yes, PC         |
| or Text Amendment          |                      |                      |                        |                 |
+----------------------------+----------------------+----------------------+------------------------+-----------------+
| General Plan Amendment     | CC                   | CC                   | DC                     | Yes, PC         |
+----------------------------+----------------------+----------------------+------------------------+-----------------+
| Annexation                 | PC                   | CC                   | Boundary Commission/DC | Yes, CC         |
+----------------------------+----------------------+----------------------+------------------------+-----------------+
| Pre-Annexation Agreement   | NA                   | CC                   | DC                     | No              |
+----------------------------+----------------------+----------------------+------------------------+-----------------+
| Conditional Use            | PC                   | CC                   | DC                     | No              |
+----------------------------+----------------------+----------------------+------------------------+-----------------+
| Site Plan Tier I           | NA                   | Staff                | AA                     | No              |
+----------------------------+----------------------+----------------------+------------------------+-----------------+
| Site Plan Tier II          | Staff                | PC                   | AA                     | No              |
+----------------------------+----------------------+----------------------+------------------------+-----------------+
| Master Planned Development | PC                   | CC                   | AA                     | Yes, PC         |
| Prelim. MPD                |                      |                      |                        |                 |
+----------------------------+----------------------+----------------------+------------------------+-----------------+
| Master Planned Development | PC                   | CC                   | AA                     | No              |
| Final MPD                  |                      |                      |                        |                 |
+----------------------------+----------------------+----------------------+------------------------+-----------------+
| Zoning Code Interpretation | NA                   | Zoning Administrator | AA                     | No              |
+----------------------------+----------------------+----------------------+------------------------+-----------------+
| Nonconforming Use          | NA                   | Zoning Administrator | AA                     | No              |
+----------------------------+----------------------+----------------------+------------------------+-----------------+
| Variances                  | Zoning Administrator | AA                   | DC                     | No              |
+----------------------------+----------------------+----------------------+------------------------+-----------------+
| Floodplain Ordinance       | NA                   | Zoning Administrator | AA                     | No              |
+----------------------------+----------------------+----------------------+------------------------+-----------------+
| Hillside Ordinance         | PC                   | CC                   | AA                     | No              |
+----------------------------+----------------------+----------------------+------------------------+-----------------+
| Planned Unit Development   | PC                   | CC                   | AA                     | Yes, PC         |
+----------------------------+----------------------+----------------------+------------------------+-----------------+
| Subdivision, Less          | Staff                | PC                   | AA                     | No              |
| than Five Lots             |                      |                      |                        |                 |
+----------------------------+----------------------+----------------------+------------------------+-----------------+
| Subdivision, Five          | PC                   | CC                   | AA                     | Yes, PC         |
| Lots or More               |                      |                      |                        |                 |
+----------------------------+----------------------+----------------------+------------------------+-----------------+
| Home Occupation            | NA                   | Zoning Administrator | AA                     | No              |
+----------------------------+----------------------+----------------------+------------------------+-----------------+
| Accessory Use or           | NA                   | Zoning Administrator | AA                     | No              |
| Structure                  |                      |                      |                        |                 |
+----------------------------+----------------------+----------------------+------------------------+-----------------+
| Accessory Dwelling         | NA                   | Zoning Administrator | AA                     | No              |
| Unit                       |                      |                      |                        |                 |
+----------------------------+----------------------+----------------------+------------------------+-----------------+
| Geologic Hazard            | Staff                | Same as for          | Expert Panel           | No              |
| Determination              |                      | the Underlying       | per Section            |                 |
|                            |                      | Application          | 17.72.230.             |                 |
+----------------------------+----------------------+----------------------+------------------------+-----------------+
B. In the event of any conflict between the designation of the applicable appeal authority in this section and the terms of any other provision of the Moab Municipal Code, the terms of this section shall control.
C. Where the appeal authority is not designated as the appellate body, review shall be obtained by filing an action in the district court. (Ord. 18-01 (part), 2018; Ord. 17-23 (part), 2017)
Editor’s note: Ord. No. 10-06, adopted November 9, 2010, in effect repealed the former §§ 17.72.100--17.72.240, and enacted new §§ 17.72.100--17.72.240 as set out herein. The former §§ 17.72.100--17.72.240 pertained to the Board of adjustments and derived from prior code §§ 27-25-9--27-25-21.
Editor’s note: Ord. No. 17-23, adopted July 25, 2017, repealed the former §§ 17.72.100--17.72.170 and enacted new §§ 17.72.100--17.72.170 as set out herein. The former §§ 17.72.100--17.72.170 pertained to appeals and derived from Ord. No. 10-06.

17.72.110 Reserved.
Editor’s note: See editor’s notes at Section 17.72.100.

17.72.120 Hearing officer to serve as appeal authority.
A. The appeal authority shall be comprised of a single hearing officer appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council. The person appointed to serve as the hearing officer shall be a person with: (1) knowledge of the Moab Municipal Code and zoning matters, generally; and (2) knowledge of adjudicatory hearing procedures and the due process rights of land use applicants and other hearing participants.
B. The hearing officer shall be paid for services performed pursuant to a contract and at such rates as shall be approved by the City Council. The hearing officer shall serve for a term of four years from the date of appointment. (Ord. 17-23 (part), 2017)
Editor’s note: See editor’s notes at Section 17.72.100.

17.72.130 Jurisdiction.
A. As a condition precedent to obtaining judicial review, each adversely affected party shall challenge the decision of the applicable land use authority by filing an appeal under this chapter. The appeal authority shall have jurisdiction to hear and decide only the following:
    1. Appeals of decisions interpreting this title (zoning), Title 16 (subdivisions), and Chapter 15.40 (floodplain matters) as shown in the appeal matrix in Section 17.72.100.
B. In any appeal where a party claims that the land use authority reached a decision in violation of state or federal laws, as opposed to provisions of the Moab Municipal Code, the appeal authority shall not have jurisdiction to decide the matter, and review shall be obtained before the district court. (Ord. 17-23 (part), 2017)
Editor’s note: See editor’s notes at Section 17.72.100.

17.72.140 Notice of appeal and appeal fee.
A. Any person adversely affected by a decision which is within the jurisdiction of the appeal authority may appeal under this chapter. An appeal shall be commenced by filing a written notice of appeal and paying the applicable fee, as set by the Council from time to time. The City must receive the notice of appeal and appeal fee no later than thirty calendar days from the date of the decision by the City which is the subject of the appeal.
B. An untimely appeal shall be dismissed with prejudice. (Ord. 17-23 (part), 2017)
Editor’s note: See editor’s notes at Section 17.72.100.

17.72.150 Conduct of hearings.
A. All hearing shall be conducted in a quasi-judicial manner and be recorded. The hearing officer shall conduct and control the hearing, administer oaths, and receive all evidence. Any interested party may offer evidence in the form of live testimony or by providing documentary or other forms of evidence. The Utah Rules of Evidence shall not apply; however, the hearing officer has discretion to exclude from consideration any evidence which is deemed to be immaterial, irrelevant, or unreliable.
Additionally, the hearing officer has discretion to weigh the credibility and demeanor of witnesses who provide testimony where the appeal centers on disputed issues of fact.
B. Hearings shall be scheduled with reasonable promptness, depending on the scope of the issues subject to review. The hearing officer may enter pre-hearing orders with respect to discovery, disclosure of witnesses and exhibits, or the like.
C. Any interested party may appear individually or be represented by an attorney.
D. The appealing party has the burden of proof to show that the decision or order of the City was unlawful, arbitrary, or capricious.
E. All hearings shall be open to the public and notice of same shall be provided as otherwise provided for other public meeting of city bodies.
F. The decision of the appeal authority shall be in writing, and shall contain findings of fact and conclusions of law. The appeal authority may affirm the decision, in whole or in part; reverse the decision, in whole or in part; or modify the decision as is warranted by the law and the evidence. (Ord. 17-23 (part), 2017)
Editor’s note: See editor’s notes at Section 17.72.100.

17.72.160 Stay of decision.
The filing of an appeal under this chapter does not stay the decision that is the subject of the appeal. To obtain a stay the appealing party must separately file a written request for stay with the appeal authority, which must show that the appealing party will suffer irreparable harm if the stay is not granted. The request for stay should be accompanied by the evidence, documents, or other information the appellant relies upon in support of its request for stay. (Ord. 17-23 (part), 2017)
Editor’s note: See editor’s notes at Section 17.72.100.

17.72.170 Exhaustion of administrative remedies--District court review.
A. If a matter is within the jurisdiction of the appeal authority, the interested party must exhaust all of its administrative remedies by seeking review and a decision by the appeal authority prior to seeking review by the district court. Every theory of relief predicated upon the interpretation of the Moab Municipal Code must first have been presented to the appeal authority to be preserved for review by the district court.
B. A party wishing to appeal the final decision of the appeal authority must commence an action in the district court no later than thirty calendar days from the date of the final written decision by the appeal authority. A judicial action which is not commenced within that time shall be dismissed with prejudice.
C. Review by the district court shall be based solely on the record before the appeal authority. The appeal authority shall promptly transmit the record of its proceedings, including the transcript of the recorded hearing, all exhibits and other evidence, and all orders entered in the proceeding. The cost of preparing the transcript shall be paid by the appellant prior to transmittal of the record to the district court.
D. In any district court proceeding under this chapter the appealing party has the burden of proof to show that the decision of the appeal authority was arbitrary, capricious, or illegal. (Ord. 17-23 (part), 2017)
Editor’s note: See editor’s notes at Section 17.72.100.

17.72.180 Variance.
Any person or entity desiring a waiver or modification of the requirements of the zoning ordinance as applied to a parcel of property that he/she owns, leases, or in which he/she holds some other beneficial interest may apply to the appeal authority for a variance from the terms of the zoning ordinance. (Ord. 10-06, 2010)
Editor’s note: See editor’s note at Section 17.72.100.

17.72.190 Standards.
A. The appeal authority may grant a variance only if each of the following conditions is met:
    1. Literal enforcement of the zoning ordinance would cause an unreasonable hardship for the applicant that is not necessary to carry out the general purpose of the zoning ordinance;
    2. There are special circumstances attached to the property that do not generally apply to other properties in the same district;
    3. Granting the variance is essential to the enjoyment of a substantial property right possessed by other property in the same district;
    4. The variance will not substantially affect the General Plan and will not be contrary to the public interest; and
    5. The spirit of the zoning ordinance is observed and substantial justice done.
B. In determining whether or not enforcement of the zoning ordinance would cause unreasonable hardship under subsection A of this section, the appeal authority may not find an unreasonable hardship unless the alleged hardship:
    1. Is located on or associated with the property for which the variance is sought; and
    2. Comes from circumstances peculiar to the property, not from conditions that are general to the neighborhood.
C. In determining whether or not enforcement of the zoning ordinance would cause unreasonable hardship under subsection A of this section, the appeal authority may not find an unreasonable hardship if the hardship is self-imposed or economic.
D. In determining whether or not there are special circumstances attached to the property under subsection A of this section, the appeal authority may find that special circumstances exist only if the special circumstances:
    1. Relate to the hardship complained of; and
    2. Deprive the property of privileges granted to other properties in the same district.
E. The applicant shall bear the burden of proving all of the conditions justifying a variance have been met.
F. Variances run with the land.
G. The appeal authority may not grant use variances.
H. In granting a variance, the appeal authority may impose additional requirements on the applicant that will:
    1. Mitigate any harmful affects of the variance; or
    2. Serve the purpose of the standard or requirement that is waived or modified. (Ord. 10-06, 2010)
Editor’s note: See editor’s note at Section 17.72.100.

17.72.200 Building permits.
The building official shall not issue any building permit for any building, construction or repair of any building unless such fully conforms to all zoning regulations or ordinances of this municipality in effect at the time of application. No permit shall be issued for any building or structure or part thereof on any land located between the mapped lines of any street as shown on any official street map adopted by the governing body. (Ord. 10-06, 2010)
Editor’s note: See editor’s note at Section 17.72.100.

17.72.210 Notice to council of variance or building permit application.
Before any application for a variance or building permit is heard by the appeal authority, the appeal authority shall give the Moab City Council at least fifteen days notice of any hearing to consider the application. (Ord. 10-06, 2010)
Editor’s note: See editor’s note at Section 17.72.100.

17.72.220 Zone boundary adjustment.
Where a zone boundary line divides a lot in a single ownership at the time of the passage of this chapter, the Board may permit a use authorized on either portion of such lot to extend not more than fifty feet into the other portion of the lot. (Ord. 10-06, 2010)
Editor’s note: See editor’s note at Section 17.72.100.

17.72.230 Appeal of geologic hazard decisions--Panel of experts.
A. An applicant who has appealed a decision of the land use authority administering or interpreting the municipality’s geologic hazard ordinance may request the municipality to assemble a panel of qualified experts to serve as the appeal authority for purposes of determining the technical aspects of the appeal.
B. If an applicant makes a request as described above, the municipality shall assemble the panel described below consisting of, unless otherwise agreed by the applicant and municipality:
    1. One expert designated by the municipality;
    2. One expert designated by the applicant; and
    3. One expert chosen jointly by the municipality’s designated expert and the applicant’s designated expert.
C. A member of the panel assembled by the municipality under subsection (B)(2) of this section may not be associated with the application that is the subject of the appeal.
D. The applicant shall pay:
    1. One-half of the cost of the panel; and
    2. The municipality’s published appeal fee. (Ord. 10-06, 2010)
Editor’s note: See editor’s note at Section 17.72.100.

17.72.240 District Court review of appeal authority decision.
A. Any person adversely affected by any decision of the appeal authority may petition the district court for a review of the decision.
B. In the petition, the plaintiff may only allege that decision was arbitrary, capricious, or illegal.
C. 
    1. The petition is barred unless it is filed within thirty days after the appeal authority’s decision is final.
    2. 
        a. The time under subsection (C)(1) of this section to file a petition is tolled from the date a property owner files a request for arbitration of a constitutional taking issue with the private property ombudsman under Section 63-34-13 Utah Code Annotated (1953 as amended) until thirty days after:
            i. The arbitrator issues a final award; or
            ii. the private property ombudsman issues a written statement under Section 63-34-13(4)(b) Utah Code Annotated declining to arbitrate or to appoint an arbitrator.
        b. A tolling under subsection (C)(2)(a) of this section operates only as to the specific constitutional taking issues that are the subject of the request for arbitration filed with the private property ombudsman by a property owner.
        c. A request for arbitration filed with the private property ombudsman after the time under subsection (C)(1) of this section to file a petition has expired does not affect the time to file a petition.
D. 
    1. The appeal authority shall transmit to the district court the record of its proceedings including its minutes, findings, orders and, if available, a true and correct transcript of its proceedings.
    2. If the proceeding was taped, a transcript of that tape recording is a true and correct transcript for purposes of this subsection.
E. 
    
        1. 
            a. If there is a record, the district court’s review is limited to the record provided by the appeal authority.
        b. The court may not accept or consider any evidence outside the appeal authority’s record unless that evidence was offered to the appeal authority and the court determines that it was improperly excluded by the appeal authority.
    2. If there is no record, the court may call witnesses and take evidence.
F. The court shall affirm the decision of the appeal authority if the decision is supported by substantial evidence in the record.
G. 
    1. The filing of a petition does not stay the decision of the appeal authority.
    2. 
        a. Before filing a petition under this section or a request for mediation or arbitration of a constitutional taking issue under Section 63-34-13 Utah Code Annotated (1953 edition), the aggrieved party may petition the appeal authority to stay its decision.
        b. Upon receipt of a petition to stay, the appeal authority may order its decision stayed pending district court review if the appeal authority finds it to be in the best interest of the City.
        c. After a petition is filed under this section or a request for mediation or arbitration of a constitutional taking issue is filed under Section 63-34-13 Utah Code Annotated (1953 edition), the petitioner may seek an injunction from the district court staying the appeal authority’s decision. (Ord. 10-06, 2010)
Editor’s note: See editor’s note at Section 17.72.100.

17.72.250 Planning Commission-Powers and duties.
The Planning Commission shall have the following powers and duties with respect to this title:
A. The Planning Commission shall hear and decide requests for amendments to this title. The Planning Commission may also act on its own initiative in considering and recommending amendments to this title. Before a favorable recommendation is given, however, it must be shown that:
    1. The amendment will not be contrary to the land use plan;
    2. The amendment will not militate against the fulfillment of any other provisions of the comprehensive plan;
    3. The amendment will not decrease nor adversely affect the health, safety, convenience, morals, or general welfare of the public;
    4. The amendment will more fully carry out the intent and purpose of this title;
    5. That, balancing the interest of the petitioner with the interest of the public, both interests will be served better by adopting such an amendment.
In considering a request for an amendment to the zoning ordinance or map, the Planning Commission may submit a recommendation for or against the request or it may recommend an alternate amendment.
B. To review, approve, disapprove or approve subject to modifications, requests for permits to construct large-scale developments.
C. Any other duty imposed on the Planning Commission under the terms of this title. (Prior code § 27-25-22)

17.72.260 Powers and duties of governing body.
The governing body may amend, change or modify any provision of the zoning ordinance or map, provided:
A. The proposed amendment or amendments have been submitted to the Planning Commission for its recommendations. Unless the Planning Commission submits its recommendations within sixty days from receipt of the proposed amendment, the governing body may assume an affirmative recommendation;
B. The governing body has held a public hearing on the proposed amendment at least fifteen days’ prior notice, the time and place of which has been published in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality;
C. The amendment will not be contrary to the comprehensive plan;
D. The amendment will more fully carry out the intent and purpose of the comprehensive plan and this title;
No material change in or departure from the recommendation of the Planning Commission can be made after such public hearing, unless the change or departure is submitted to the Planning Commission for their consideration and recommendations. Upon receiving the reconsidered recommendations of the Planning Commission, the governing body may overrule the Planning Commission. (Prior code § 27-25-23)

Chapter 17.74 NOISE

Sections:
17.74.010    Definitions.
17.74.020    Purpose.
17.74.030    Jurisdiction.
17.74.040    Powers and duties.
17.74.050    Scope.
17.74.060    Emergency orders.
17.74.070    General prohibition of noise.
17.74.080    Noise levels.
17.74.090    Specific noise prohibitions.
17.74.100    Exemptions.
17.74.110    Relief from restrictions.
17.74.120    Enforcement responsibility.
17.74.130    Enforcement.
17.74.140    Penalty.

17.74.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of these regulations, unless otherwise defined in other sections of these regulations, the following terms, phrases and words shall have the meaning herein given:
“Continuous sound” means any sound that exists, essentially without interruption, for a period of ten minutes or more.
“Cyclically varying noise” means any sound that varies in sound level so that the same level is obtained repetitively at relatively uniform levels of time.
“Device” means any mechanism that is intended to produce, or that actually produces noise when operated or handled.
“Dynamic braking device” means a device used primarily on trucks for the conversion of the engine from an internal combustion engine to an air compressor for the purposes of braking without the use of wheel brakes, commonly referred to as “Jacob’s Brake” or “Jake Brake.”
“Emergency” means a situation or occurrence, which in the opinion of the Chief of Police, Zoning Administrator, or Public Works Director, may present an imminent threat to the health, safety or welfare of any person, place or property.
“Emergency vehicle” means a motor vehicle used in response to a public calamity or to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to danger.
“Emergency work” means work required to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity or to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to danger.
“Impulsive noise” means a noise generating excursions of usually less than one second.
“Motor vehicle” means any vehicle that is self-propelled by mechanical power, including, but not limited to, passenger cars, trucks, truck-trailers, semi-trailers, campers, motorcycles, mini-bikes, go-carts, snowmobiles and racing vehicles.
“Muffler” means an apparatus consisting of a series of chambers or baffle plates designed to transmit gases while reducing sound.
“Noise” means any sound that is unwanted and causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on human beings.
“Noise disturbance” means any sound that annoys or disturbs a reasonable person(s) with normal sensitivities or that injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, hearing, peace or safety of another person(s).
“Plainly audible noise” means any noise for which the information content of that noise is unambiguously transferred to the listener, including, but not limited to the understanding of spoken speech, comprehension of whether a voice is raised or normal, or comprehension of musical rhythms.
“Property boundary” means an imaginary line at the ground surface, and its vertical extension that separates the real property owned by one person from that property owned by another person.
“Sound” means a temporal and spatial oscillation in pressure, or other physical quantity with interval forces that cause compression or rarefaction of the medium, and that propagates at finite speed to distant points.
“Stationary noise source” means any device, fixed or moveable, that is located or used on property other than a public right-of-way. (Ord. 94-26 (part), 1994)

17.74.020 Purpose.
These regulations establish minimum standards to:
A. Reduce the making and creation of excessive, unnecessary, or unusually loud noises within the limits of the City; and
B. Prevent excessive, unnecessary, or unusually loud noises that are prolonged, unusual, or unreasonable in their time, place, or use, that affect and are a detriment to public health, comfort, convenience, safety, or welfare of the residents of the City; and
C. Secure and promote the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and the peace and quiet of the residents of the City. (Ord. 94-26 (part), 1994)

17.74.030 Jurisdiction.
All noise control in this chapter shall be subject to the direction and control of the Chief of Police, Zoning Administrator and the Public Works Director. (Ord. 94-26 (part), 1994)

17.74.040 Powers and duties.
The Chief of Police, Zoning Administrator and the Public Works Director shall be responsible for the administration of these rules and regulations and any other powers vested in them by law and shall make inspections of any premises and issue orders as necessary to effect the purposes of these regulations, and do any and all acts permitted by law that are necessary for the successful enforcement of these regulations. (Ord. 94-26 (part), 1994)

17.74.050 Scope.
It is unlawful for any person not to comply with any rule or regulation promulgated by this chapter, unless expressly waived by these rules and regulations. (Ord. 94-26 (part), 1994)

17.74.060 Emergency orders.
Whenever the Chief of Police, Zoning Administrator, Public Works Director or their official designees finds that an emergency exists, one or all of the following actions may be required to be taken:
A. Order of Emergency Suspension. In time of a public calamity or disaster, emergency suspension of these rules and regulations may be ordered by the Chief of Police, Zoning Administrator or Public Works Director or their official designees for the duration of seventy-two hours, at which time the incident will be assessed and further suspension of these rules ended or suspended.
B. Approval of Application for Exemption for Emergency Reasons. An individual may apply for emergency exemption to these rules and regulations based on good and reasonable cause due to emergency circumstances, as defined in this chapter. (Ord. 94-26 (part), 1994)

17.74.070 General prohibition of noise.
It is unlawful for any person to produce, continue, or cause to be produced or continued, any noise disturbance within the limits of the City, as defined in this chapter. (Ord. 94-26 (part), 1994)

17.74.080 Noise levels.
The making and/or creating of excessive or unusually loud noise or sound within the City as identified in subsection (A) of this section, or identified and measured in the manner prescribed in subsection (B) of this section, or in violation of restricted hours as outlined in subsection (C) of this section is unlawful.
A. On the public right-of-way or upon public property, from the source or device as to be plainly audible at a distance of fifty feet or on private property, as to be plainly audible at the property line.
B. The noise shall be measured at a distance of at least twenty-five feet from the source of the device upon public property or within the public right-of-way or twenty-five feet from the property line if upon private property, and shall be measured on a decibel or sound level meter of standard design and quality on the “A” weighing scale. A measurement of sixty-five decibels shall be considered to be excessive and unusually loud.
C. Hours of restriction are as follows:
+--+--------------------------------------------------+
| Residential:                                        |
+--+--------------------------------------------------+
|  | 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday  |
+--+--------------------------------------------------+
|  | Not before 9:00 a.m. Sunday                      |
+--+--------------------------------------------------+
| Commercial:                                         |
+--+--------------------------------------------------+
|  | 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday. |
+--+--------------------------------------------------+
(Ord. 94-26 (part), 1994)

17.74.090 Specific noise prohibitions.
The following acts are declared to be in violation of these rules and regulations:
A. Horns and Signaling Devices. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any truck, automobile, motorcycle, emergency vehicle, or other within the City, except as a danger warning signal as provided by the Vehicle Code of the state of Utah.
B. Radios, Television Sets, Tape Players, Musical Instruments and Similar Devices. Using, operating, or permitting, the use or operation of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, television, phonograph, drum or other device for the production or reproduction of sound:
    1. In violation of Section 17.74.080 or in a way that is plainly audible beyond the property boundary of the source, or
    2. On public property, public rights-of-way, or private property at any time so as to be plainly audible fifty feet from the device. Permits to exceed the limits of this subdivision may be issued for special events on public property by the Chief of Police, recorder, or Zoning Administrator upon approval from the agency operating the public property;
C. Public Loudspeakers. The use or operation of a loudspeaker or sound amplifying equipment in a fixed or moveable position or mounted upon any sound vehicle in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, park, place or public or private property for the purposes of commercial advertising, giving instructions, directions, talks, addresses, lectures, or transmission of music to any persons or assemblages of persons in violation of Section 17.74.080, or cause a noise disturbance, unless a permit is first obtained as provided in Section 17.74.110.
D. Hawkers and Peddlers. Selling any item or service by outcry within any area of the City in such a manner as to violate Section 17.74.080. It is unlawful for any person to solicit from any motor vehicle, unless a permit is first obtained as provided in Section 17.74.110.
E. Animals. Owning, keeping, possessing, or harboring any animal or animals that, by frequent or habitual noise making, violates Section 17.74.080. The provision of this section shall apply to all private and public facilities, including any animal facilities that hold or treat animals;
F. Loading Operation. Loading, unloading, opening, or otherwise handling boxes, crates, containers, garbage containers, or other objects in such a manner as to violate Section 17.74.080.
G. Construction Work. It is unlawful for any person to perform or cause to be performed, any construction work on any construction site under his control in such a manner as to violate Section 17.74.080. The Chief of Police, Zoning Administrator or Public Works Director may authorize extended hours for construction operations or procedures which, by their nature, require continuous operation, or modify or waive the hours of work for or on projects in generally isolated areas where the extended hours do not impact upon adjoining property occupants;
H. Domestic Power Equipment. Operating or permitting the operation of any power equipment rated five horsepower or less in residential or commercial zones, including, but not limited to, power saws, lawn mowers, garden equipment, or snow removal equipment for home or building repair or ground maintenance outdoors in such a manner as to violate Section 17.74.080.
I. Fireworks or Explosives. The use of explosives, fireworks, discharge of guns or other explosive devices that are audible across a property boundary, public space, or right-of-way without first obtaining a permit as provided by Section 17.74.110. The provision shall not be construed to permit activities prohibited by other statutes, ordinances, or regulations governing such activity;
J. Liquor License Premises. 
    1. Failure to Control Noise. Permitting or providing either live or recorded amplified music without first having closed all exterior doors and windows of the licensed premises to control noise. Doors may be opened to provide ingress and egress, but shall not be blocked in the open position to provide ventilation. Doors shall be equipped with automatic closing devices to keep them in the closed position except to permit ingress and egress of patrons,
    2. Outdoor Speakers. Permitting or causing to exist any loudspeaker or sound amplification equipment on any outdoor deck, patio, or garden associated with the licensed premises other than speaker systems or sound amplification in conjunction with approved outdoor dining;
K. Racing Events. Permitting any motor racing event at any place in violation of Section 17.74.080 without first obtaining a permit as provided by Section 17.74.110.
L. Powered Model Mechanical Devices. Flying a model aircraft powered by internal combustion engines, whether tethered or remote-controlled, or the firing or the operation of model rocket vehicles or other similar noise-producing devices in such a way as to violate Section 17.74.080.
M. Dynamic Braking Device. Operating any motor vehicle with a dynamic braking device engaged, except for the avoidance of imminent danger;
N. Defect in Vehicle. Operating or permitting the operation or use of any truck, automobile, motorcycle, or other motor vehicle because of disrepair or mode of operation violates Section 17.74.080.
O. Garbage Collection. Collecting garbage, waste, refuse or recyclables materials on regularly scheduled collection in such a manner as to violate Section 17.74.080 or within three hundred feet of an area zoned residential;
P. Standing Motor Vehicles. Operating, causing, or permitting the operation of any motor vehicle or any auxiliary equipment attached thereto either in violation of Section 17.74.080, or in such a way as to cause a disturbance in a residential zone for a consecutive period of fifteen minutes or longer;
Q. Bells and Alarms. Sounding, operating, or permitting the sounding or operation of an electronically amplified signal from any burglar alarm, bell, chime, or clock, including but not limited to, bells, chimes, or clocks in schools, houses of religious worship or governmental buildings that fail to meet the standards in Section 17.74.080 for longer than five minutes in any hour;
R. Fixed Siren, Whistles and Horns. Sounding or causing the sounding of any whistle, horn or siren as a signal for commencing or suspending work or for any other purpose in violation of Section 17.74.080, except as a sound of imminent danger;
S. Recreation Vehicles and Snowmobiles. Operating a recreational vehicle or snowmobile in any way that violates Section 17.74.080.
T. Motor Vehicle Noise. No person shall operate or cause to be operated any motor vehicle unless the exhaust system is free from defects that affect sound reduction; equipped with a muffler or other noise dissipative device; and not equipped with any cut-out, by-pass or similar device. (Ord. 94-26 (part), 1994)

17.74.100 Exemptions.
The following uses and activities shall be exempt from noise level regulations:
A. Noise of safety signals, warning devices and emergency pressure relief valves;
B. Noise resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle when responding to an emergency call or in time of an emergency;
C. Noise resulting from emergency work;
D. Noise resulting from lawful fireworks and noisemakers used for celebration of an official holiday;
E. Any noise resulting from activities of a temporary nature during periods permitted by law for which a license has been approved by the Chief of Police, Zoning Administrator, Public Works Director or their official designees in accordance with Section 17.74.110.
F. Any noise resulting from the maintenance of golf courses. (Ord. 94-26 (part), 1994)

17.74.110 Relief from restrictions.
Requests for relief from the noise restrictions in these rules and regulations may be made by the Zoning Administrator as it pertains to building issues and the Chief of Police, Zoning Administrator, Public Works Director or their official designees as it pertains to special events, community functions and private events. Upon granting relief, any conditions outlined and agreed upon shall be compiled by the applicant and failure to do so will cause the relief agreement to be suspended.
A. Commercial agricultural producers holding a valid Moab city business license located in the RA-1 (residential-agricultural zone) are eligible to receive a seasonal exemption from noise restrictions contained in Sections 17.74.080(B) and (C) due to weather and crop management activities outside of their control. The seasonal exemption from restriction requires that eligible agricultural operators complete a relief from restrictions form and notify the Zoning Administrator, Police Department or designated police dispatch center by telephone, facsimile transmission, or in person on the day of operation of any agricultural equipment that would violate noise provisions contained in Section 17.74.080(B) and (C). (Ord. 94-26 (part), 1994)

17.74.120 Enforcement responsibility.
Enforcement responsibility will rest jointly with the Chief of Police, Zoning Administrator, Public Works Director or their official designees. (Ord. 94-26 (part), 1994)

17.74.130 Enforcement.
The Chief of Police, Zoning Administrator, Public Works Director or their official designees may, upon discovery or report of a violation or violations of this chapter, issue a written citation for the violation requiring an appearance in court to answer the charges, or may file a report with the City’s prosecutor’s office for review and issuance of an information and summons to court to answer the charges. (Ord. 94-26 (part), 1994)

17.74.140 Penalty.
Any person who is found guilty of violating any of the provisions of these rules and regulations, either by failing to do those acts required herein or by doing a prohibited act, is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor, pursuant to Section 26-24-22, Utah Code Annotated, 1953, as amended. If a person is found guilty of a subsequent similar violation within a period of two years, he is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor, pursuant to Section 26-24-22, Utah Code Annotated, 1953, as amended. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate violation.
The City Attorney may initiate legal action, civil or criminal, requested by the City Manager, Chief of Police, Zoning Administrator or Public Works Director to abate any condition that exists in violation of these rules and regulations. In addition to other penalties imposed by a court of competent jurisdiction, any person(s) found guilty of violating any of these rules and regulations shall be liable for all expenses incurred by the City in removing or abating any nuisance or other noise disturbance. (Ord. 94-26 (part), 1994)

Chapter 17.75 VIOLATIONS

Sections:
17.75.010    Responsibility.
17.75.020    Violation-Penalty.

17.75.010 Responsibility.
It shall be the duty of all contractors, subcontractors, builders and other persons having to do with the establishment of any use of land or the erection, altering, changing or remodeling of any building or structure to make sure that a property permit is required. Any such builder, contractor or other person doing or performing any such work without a permit having been issued is in conflict with the requirements of this title, and shall be deemed guilty of violation of this title in the same manner and to the same extent that the owner of the premises or the persons for whom the use is established, or for whom such buildings are erected or altered, and shall be subject to the penalties herein prescribed for violation. (Prior code § 27-26-2)

17.75.020 Violation-Penalty.
Any firm, corporation, person or persons violating any of the provisions of this title shall be guilty of an infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars.
Each person, persons, firm or corporation found guilty of violation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for every day during which any violation of any provision of this title is committed, continued or permitted by such person, persons, firm or corporation, and shall be punished as provided by this title. (Ord. 86-06 § 17, 1986: prior code § 27-26-3)

Chapter 17.76 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES

Sections:
17.76.010    Purpose.
17.76.020    Definitions.
17.76.030    Low power radio services facility.
17.76.040    Co-location equipment.
17.76.050    Conditional use permit required-Application approval procedure.
17.76.060    Design review criteria.
17.76.070    Facility types.
17.76.080    Height limit.
17.76.090    Facility lighting.
17.76.100    Co-Location or replacement of antenna or antennas on existing towers or structures where antennas are already present.
17.76.110    Tower site location setback-Installation requirements.
17.76.120    Area imitations for wall and roof-mounted antennas.
17.76.130    Accessory buildings.
17.76.140    Business license requirement.
17.76.150    Antenna support structures on or over public rights-of-ways.
17.76.160    Non-maintained or abandoned facilities.
17.76.170    Conditional use permit-terms and enforcement.

17.76.010 Purpose.
In order to accommodate the communication needs of residents and businesses while protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare of the community, the Council finds these regulations are necessary in order to:
A. Facilitate the provision of wireless telecommunication services to the residents and businesses of the City;
B. Minimize adverse visual effects of towers through careful design and siting standards;
C. Maximize the use of existing and approved towers and buildings to accommodate new wireless telecommunication antennas in order to reduce the number of towers needed to serve the community. (Ord. 01-04 (part), 2001)

17.76.020 Definitions.
The following definitions are specific to this chapter.
“Antenna” means a transmitting or receiving device used in telecommunications that radiates or captures radio frequency radiation or signals.
“Lattice tower” means a self-supporting trellis structure.
“Lattice tower with antennas or antenna support structures” means a self-supporting trellis structure on which antenna or antennas are attached. Regulations for antenna height and width of antenna support structures is the same as that for monopoles.
“Low power radio services facility” means an unmanned structure that consists of equipment used primarily for the transmission, reception or transfer of voice or data through radio wave or wireless transmissions. Such structures typically require the construction of transmission support structure to which antenna equipment is attached.
“Monopole” means a single self-supporting cylindrical metal or wooden pole type structure.
“Monopole with antennas and antenna support structure greater than two feet in width” means a self-supporting, single pole tower on which antennas or antenna support structures exceeding four feet in width are placed. The antennas and antenna support structures may not exceed fifteen feet in width or eight feet in height. Antennas of greater height may be approved by the City Council to facilitate co-location.
“Monopole with antennas and antenna support structure less than two feet in width” means a self-supporting monopole tower to which antennae or antenna support structures not exceeding four feet in width are placed. Antennas and antenna support structures may not exceed fifteen feet in height. Antennas of greater height may be approved by the City Council to facilitate co-location.
“Roof mounted antenna” means an antenna or antennas mounted on a roof, mechanical room or penthouse of a building.
“Wall mounted antenna” means an antenna or antennas mounted against the vertical wall of a building.
“Whip antenna” means an antenna that is cylindrical in shape. Whip antennas can be directional or omni-directional and vary in size depending upon the frequency for which they are designed.
“Guyed tower” means a structure using cables or wire as an integral or essential part of the tower support design. (Ord. 01-04 (part), 2001)

17.76.030 Low power radio services facility.
The requirements of this section apply to both commercial and private low power radio services such as “cellular”, whether digital or analog service, or “PCS” (Personal Communications System), communications and paging systems. All facilities to be constructed within the City shall comply with the following regulations and all other regulations and any pertinent regulations of the Federal Communications Commission and the Federal Aviation Administration. No person shall construct or install any facility subject to the provisions of this chapter without complying with all of the provisions in this chapter. (Ord. 01-04 (part), 2001)

17.76.040 Co-location equipment.
All commercial telecommunication towers erected, constructed or located within the City shall comply with the following requirements:
A. A proposal for a new commercial wireless telecommunication service tower shall not be approved unless the City Council finds that the telecommunications equipment for the proposed tower cannot be accommodated on existing or approved tower or building within the City or within Grand County due to one or more of the following reasons:
    1. The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the existing or approved tower or building, as documented by a qualified and licensed engineer, and the existing tower cannot be reinforced, modified or replaced to accommodate planned or equivalent equipment at a reasonable cost;
    2. The planned equipment would cause interference materially impacting the usability of other existing or planned equipment at the tower building as documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer and the interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.
    3. Existing or approved towers and buildings within the City or Grand County cannot accommodate the planned equipment at a height necessary to function reasonably as documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer.
    4. Other unforeseen reasons that make it not feasible to locate the planned telecommunications equipment upon existing or approved tower or building.
B. Any proposed commercial wireless telecommunication service tower shall be designed, structurally and electronically, and in all respects to accommodate both the applicant’s antennas and comparable antennas for at least two additional users if the tower is over sixty feet in height. (Ord. 01-04 (part), 2001)

17.76.050 Conditional use permit required-Application approval procedure.
A. A conditional use permit issued under the procedures and subject to the criteria of this chapter is required for the construction, erection or placement of all wireless telecommunications towers within the jurisdiction of the City.
B. Wireless telecommunications facilities shall only be allowed, pursuant to the terms of a conditional use permit, in areas zoned I-1, C-4 or on city, county or school district owned property located in areas found to be aesthetically appropriate and suitable by the Public Works Director and Zoning Administrator, and approved by the Planning Commission and City Council.
C. Application Materials. An applicant for a conditional use permit shall submit the completed application form with the applicable fee as determined by resolution. The following requirements shall be included with the application:
    1. A report from a qualified and licensed engineer showing that the existing towers in the City or county can not be used to site proposed antenna or antennas as required by Section 17.76.40;
    2. Proof of ownership, a valid lease or written authorization from the landowner where the proposed facility is to be located.
    3. A detailed sketch plan showing the area to be served by the telecommunication facility plus: all roads and utilities on proposed site and within three hundred feet of the property boundaries of the proposed site. The placement of the structures, antennas, and the like; the location of buildings, houses and structures on adjacent properties; and significant topographical features such as ridges, washes, outcrops and the like;
    4. Detailed plans and specifications describing the specific type of tower, antenna(s) and antenna support structures, the materials to be used, and all necessary support equipment;
    5. A copy of the applicant’s license or similar certificate of authority issued by the Federal Communications Commission;
    6. A description, plot plan and photo imaging, stealth representation, or visual characterization showing proposed structure on existing terrain as well as any buffering, screening, landscaping, coloring of structure or other similar techniques that might be used to mitigate adverse impacts of the facility;
    7. A certification by a qualified and licensed professional engineer that the proposed design meets all Federal Communications Commission Regulations, applicable Federal Aviation Administration regulations, applicable Environmental Protection Agency regulations, city building and electrical codes, and all requirements of this code; and
    8. Additional information as may be deemed necessary by the City staff, the Planning Commission, or the City Council.
D. Review Procedure. The application shall first be reviewed by the planning office for completeness and comments, and then submitted to the Planning Commission at their next regularly scheduled meeting, provided all materials are submitted no later than ten days prior to the hearing. The Planning Commission shall review the application and may recommend approval, rejection or approval subject to conditions. Following review by the Planning Commission, the application shall be forwarded to the City Council. The Council may approve, reject, or approve the application subject to conditions.
E. Notice of Decision. The planning office shall within ten days of the final action by the City Council provide the applicant a written notice of decision which shall be based upon the application materials and other materials or evidence provided on the record before the Planning Commission and the City Council. (Ord. 01-04 (part), 2001)

17.76.060 Design review criteria.
A. All applications shall be reviewed based upon the following criteria:
    1. Need for proposed telecommunication facility as outlined in Section 17.76.040.
    2. Compatibility of the proposed structure with the height and mass of existing buildings and terrain, and to how well the proposed facility blends into the overall surrounding environment;
    3. The visual and aesthetic impact of the installation upon the community, and the extent to which terrain, landscaping, vegetation, coloring or buildings screen or camouflage the proposed installation;
    4. Availability of necessary utilities and the existence of other similar telecommunications facilities on the proposed site;
    5. Compliance of the application with all applicable provisions of this Chapter and all other provisions of this code;
    6. The existence of geological or other safety hazards;
    7. Off-site impacts of the installation, including the need to construct roads or other facilities. (Ord. 01-04 (part), 2001)

17.76.070 Facility types.
A. Low power radio services facilities are characterized by the type or location of the antenna structure. There are five general types of such antenna structures: Wall mounted antennas; roof mounted antennas; monopoles with antennas and antenna support structure less than two feet in width; monopoles with antennas and antenna support structures greater than two feet in width; and lattice towers with antennas and antenna support structures. Standards for the installation of each type of antenna are as follows:
    1. Wall mounted antenna. The following, provisions apply to wall mounted antennas:
        a. Wall mounted antennas shall not extend higher than fifteen feet above the wall line of the building or extend more than four feet horizontally from the face of the building.
        b. Antennas, equipment and the supporting structures shall be painted to match the color of the building or structure or the background against which they are most commonly seen. Antennas and the supporting structures on buildings should be architecturally compatible with the building.
        c. Antennas mounted directly on existing parapet walls, penthouses, or mechanical equipment rooms and extending no higher than fifteen feet above the roofline of such structures shall be considered a wall mounted antenna.
    2. Roof mounted antenna. The following provisions apply to roof mounted antennas:
        a. Roof mounted antennas shall be allowed on the roof of existing buildings or mechanical equipment rooms but shall not extend more than fifteen feet above the roofline of the building itself unless approved by the City Council.
        b. Roof mounted antennas permitted on a roof shall be camouflaged or colored to match the building or structure to which they are attached.
    3. Monopole with antennas and antenna support structures less than two feet in width shall be colored and camouflaged to blend in with the surrounding structures or terrain. Monopoles shall not extend above ridgelines so as to be projected against the sky when such structures are viewed from State Highway 191 or from Spanish Valley Drive, unless conditionally permitted to do so by the City Council.
    4. Monopole with antennas and antenna support structure greater than two feet in width shall be colored and camouflaged to blend into the surrounding structures or terrain. Monopoles and antennas shall not extend above ridgelines so as to be projected against the sky when viewed from State Highway 191 or from Spanish Valley Drive, unless conditionally permitted to do so by the City Council.
    5. Lattice tower. Lattice towers with antennas and antenna support structures shall be colored and camouflaged to blend into the surrounding structures or terrain. Towers and antennas shall not extend above ridgelines so as to be projected against the sky when viewed from State Highway 191 or, from Spanish Valley Drive, unless conditionally permitted by the City Council.
    6. Guyed Towers are not permitted. (Ord. 01-04 (part), 2001)

17.76.080 Height limit.
The maximum height of all commercial wireless antennas and supporting towers shall not exceed the minimum that is technically necessary to serve the design purpose; provided, however:
A. The maximum height of monopoles or lattice towers shall not exceed one hundred feet;
B. The tower shall not be in excess of a height equal to the distance from the base of antenna and tower to the nearest overhead electrical power line, less five feet;
C. The City reserves the right to limit height of proposed tower and antennas as necessary to ensure compatibility with surrounding structures or terrain. (Ord. 01-04 (part), 2001)

17.76.090 Facility lighting.
A. All monopole and lattice towers, antenna or antenna support structures where lighting is not required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) or Federal Communications Commission (FCC), lighting is prohibited.
B. Obstruction lighting required by the FAA or FCC shall not exceed the minimum requirements of those agencies.
C. Medium intensity flashing white obstruction lights shall be used during daylight hours and steady-burning red obstruction lights shall be used at night, unless otherwise required by the FAA or FCC.
D. All other lighting used on the property not regulated by the FAA or FCC shall conform to existing city codes governing such lighting. (Ord. 01-04 (part), 2001)

17.76.100 Co-Location or replacement of antenna or antennas on existing towers or structures where antennas are already present.
A. Where an existing telecommunication structure or facility has been permitted under this ordinance the replacement of co-location of new antenna or antennas may be approved by the planning office, subject to:
    1. Meeting all requirements of this ordinance as to height, width and placement of antennas or antenna support structures;
    2. Antenna or antennas shall be designed to blend into the surrounding environment through the use of color and camouflaging, except where color is dictated by the FAA or FCC, or size of antenna is determined after planning office review to be non-intrusive.
    3. A structural analysis report showing that the proposed antenna or antennas will not interfere with public safety communications or with other existing telecommunication services;
    4. Issuance of necessary licenses.
B. Where an existing telecommunication structure or facility has not been permitted under this chapter but is a legally recognized, non-conforming structure or facility, replacement or co-location of antenna or antennas may be approved by the planning office subject to the following criteria:
    1. The replaced or co-located antenna or antennas shall meet all the width, height, and placement criteria of this chapter;
    2. Antenna or antennas shall be designed to blend into the surrounding environment through the use of color and camouflaging, except where color is dictated by FAA or FCC, or size of antenna is determined by the planning office after review to be non-intrusive.
    3. A report from a qualified and licensed engineer showing that the existing structure can without structural modification or additions support the proposed antenna or antennas;
    4. A structural analysis report showing that the proposed antenna or antennas will not interfere with public safety communications or with the services of other existing telecommunication services;
    5. Necessary utilities and other similar support services are available on site.
    6. Issuance of necessary licenses. (Ord. 01-04 (part), 2001)

17.76.110 Tower site location setback-Installation requirements.
A. Monopoles or lattice towers with antennas and antenna support structure shall be allowed only in the rear yard area of any building or structure and shall not be located in any required landscaped area, buffer area or required parking area.
B. No monopole or lattice tower shall be located closer than two hundred feet of any residence or residential zone. The City Council may reduce the required setback from a residential zone if practical difficulties are demonstrated by the applicant or upon detailed demonstration by the applicant that the proposed facility can be effectively screened from the view of nearby residences, provided that no pole may be permitted closer than one and one half lines the height of the pole to any property line.
C. No communication facility shall encroach upon or block vehicular or pedestrian access at any time.
D. Climbing pegs or access ladders shall be removed from the lower twenty feet regardless of location.
E. Antennas shall be mounted with such standards that the structure can easily withstand wind force up to eighty miles per hour.
F. No monopole or lattice tower shall be constructed within two hundred feet of State Highway 191 right of way. (Ord. 01-04 (part), 2001)

17.76.120 Area imitations for wall and roof-mounted antennas.
A combination of both roof and wall mounted antennas are allowed on a building. The total area for all wall and roof mounted antennas and supporting structures combined shall not excel forty square feet for each exterior wall of the building or a total of 160 square feet per building per carrier. A maximum of four walls shall be occupied by cellular antennas. The total area is the sum of the area of each individual antenna face and the visible portion of the supporting structure as viewed when looking directly at the face of the building. Up to three carriers may utilize each building side. In no event will wall-mount antennas be allowed on the facade of buildings facing, or parallel to, public streets or highways. (Ord. 01-04 (part), 2001)

17.76.130 Accessory buildings.
A. Accessory buildings constructed or moved on to support antenna structures must comply with the required setback, height and landscaping requirements of the zoning district in which they are located.
B. Monopoles shall be fenced with a six foot vinyl coated chain-link fence or other appropriate screening fence as approved or required by the Planning Commission.
C. All power lines on the lot leading to the accessory building(s) and antenna structure shall be buried. (Ord. 01-04 (part), 2001)

17.76.140 Business license requirement.
Each separate monopole or lattice tower, and each separate antenna assembly on a given pole or tower shall be considered as a separate use, and an annual business license and payment of the applicable fee shall be required for each facility. (Ord. 01-04 (part), 2001)

17.76.150 Antenna support structures on or over public rights-of-ways.
Antennas and mounting structures are not permitted to encroach on or over public sidewalks or on or over any public right-of-way. (Ord. 01-04 (part), 2001)

17.76.160 Non-maintained or abandoned facilities.
A. They shall require each low power radio services antenna to be immediately removed from the building or premise, at the permittee’s expense, when such an antenna has been:
    1. Abandoned or has not been put to use for a period of not less than ninety days;
    2. Damaged and left un-repaired for a period of not less than thirty days.
    3. Subject to a business license expiration or conditional use permit revocation.
    4. Determined by the qt to constitute a nuisance or an imminent safety hazard to neighboring properties or the general public.
B. Notice shall be delivered in writing to the permittee, the owner of the structure or property, or the person having control of the site. A reasonable extension of time may be granted upon proof to the City Council of good cause. (Ord. 01-04 (part), 2001)

17.76.170 Conditional use permit-terms and enforcement.
A. Failure to comply with any of the requirements of this section, the terms of the conditional use permit, any false, misleading, and/or materially erroneous statement contained in any application, or any violation of applicable ordinance of this City, or any state or federal law or regulation, constitutes grounds to revoke the business license and conditional use permit of the facility.
B. The City shall provide written notice and an opportunity to cure any violation prior to revocation. Any permittee objecting to revocation may request a hearing before the City Council prior to final action, which request must be submitted in writing no later than ten days from the notice of violation.
C. No person shall construct, alter, operate, or improve any facility subject to this chapter following revocation of permits required herein. Persons violating the provisions of this chapter are subject to a civil action to enjoin or abate the violation. In any such action proof of a violation shall be deemed sufficient to obtain injunctive relief. In any civil action the violator shall be subject to civil penalties of not less than one thousand dollars per violation, together with liability for the City’s reasonable attorney fees and court costs.
    1. Alternately, any violation of this chapter may be punishable as a Class C misdemeanor, as defined by Utah law.
D. The grant or approval of a business license or conditional use permit shall not confer any vested rights where such license or permit is issued, either wholly or in part, as a result of any erroneous, false or fraudulent statement in application materials, or the permit is issued in violation of any provision of this chapter or this code. The City Council may cancel or revoke a conditional use permit or business license issued erroneously or in violation of law, upon reasonable notice to the applicant. (Ord. 01-04 (part), 2001)

Chapter 17.78 ZONING VIOLATIONS--PENALTIES

Sections:
17.78.010    Violation--Written notice.
17.78.020    Notices and citations--Delivery.
17.78.030    Violation--Penalty.

17.78.010 Violation--Written notice.
Any person violating any provision of the Moab City Code shall be given written notice specifying the violation and demanding that the violation be rectified within twenty-one days from the date of said notice. (Ord. 93-15 § 1, 1993)

17.78.020 Notices and citations--Delivery.
All notices and citations required herein shall be deemed sufficient if delivered or mailed by regular mail, postage prepaid, and in the case of all absentee owners, addressed to such owner at his last known address as disclosed by the records of the county assessor. (Ord. 93-15 § 2, 1993)

17.78.030 Violation--Penalty.
Any person violating any of the provisions of the Moab City Code shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed the then maximum fine for a Class B misdemeanor as prescribed by Utah State Law or imprisonment in the Grand County Jail for not more than six months or both fine and imprisonment and a minimum fine as established by resolution. (Ord. 06-11 (part), 2006: Ord. 93-15 § 3, 1993)

Chapter 17.79 CONDOMINIUM DEVELOPMENTS

Sections:
17.79.010    Definition, approval required.
17.79.020    New condominium developments.
17.79.030    Condominium conversions.
17.79.040    Required compliance with existing codes.
17.79.050    Notice requirement for tenants in buildings to be converted.
17.79.060    Plat and declaration approval.
17.79.070    Additions and amendments.
17.79.080    Appeals.

17.79.010 Definition, approval required.
As used in this chapter, the term “condominium” shall be defined to be a real property development in which individual units in a multi-unit residential, commercial, or business complex are conveyed to a buyer, together with an undivided interest in common areas. No person shall sell or offer for sale any property purporting to be a condominium unless all approvals required by this chapter and the Moab Municipal Code have been obtained. (Ord. 06-10 (part), 2006)

17.79.020 New condominium developments.
New condominium developments shall be subject to all zoning and building code requirements generally applicable to new residential, commercial, or business development under the City code. An application for condominium development shall be processed under the applicable development review procedure except that a condominium shall not be subject to subdivision review procedures unless the development includes: a) common areas dedicated to public use; or b) condominium units that are not wholly contained within existing or proposed buildings. (Ord. 06-10 (part), 2006)

17.79.030 Condominium conversions.
Existing structures shall not be converted to condominium ownership without first receiving review and recommendation of the City planning staff. The Planning Commission shall review all staff recommendations and approve, deny, or approve subject to conditions all condominium conversion applications. (Ord. 06-10 (part), 2006)

17.79.040 Required compliance with existing codes.
All structures subject to condominium conversion shall be brought into compliance with all building and zoning requirements prior to condominium plat approval, except that the Planning Commission shall have discretionary authority to grant special exceptions to compliance with zoning code requirements where the applicant demonstrates that: a) site constraints prevent full compliance; and b) public health and safety is not jeopardized; and c) and appropriate mitigation measures are provided by the applicant. (Ord. 06-10 (part), 2006)

17.79.050 Notice requirement for tenants in buildings to be converted.
Before proceeding with the conversion of any apartment or other long-term rental unit in a project, the owner shall notify all existing tenants in such project, in writing, of the owners’ intent to convert, and the proposed date thereof. Such notice shall provide, at a minimum, a sixty day review and relocation period, wherein no conversion may be approved by the City until such period has expired. Any tenant may waive any required notice period; provided that such waiver be executed in writing after the date of the notice; provided that all existing tenants waive the required notice period, an owner may proceed with a conversion before the expiration of the sixty-day period. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent an owner from preparing materials and submitting an application for conversion, as required by the City. Nothing in this chapter obligates an owner to proceed with a conversion after notice has been given. All condominium conversion applications shall provide a written report outlining the status of each existing unit as vacant or occupied and copies of all required notices. (Ord. 06-10 (part), 2006)

17.79.060 Plat and declaration approval.
All condominium developments shall include a condominium plat and condominium declaration complying with the provisions of the Utah Condominium Ownership Act. The proposed plat and declaration shall be submitted with the application for staff review prior to any applicable decision by the body having land use authority. The final plat for all condominium conversions shall include a signature block for the Planning Commission, City Planner, City Engineer, and City Attorney which must be executed prior to recording. Except where the applicant posts a performance guarantee under Section 16.20.060 (subdivisions) or Section 17.66.180(C) (planned unit developments), the condominium plat and declaration shall not be recorded until all approvals required under by city code have been obtained and all required improvements have been completed. (Ord. 06-10 (part), 2006)

17.79.070 Additions and amendments.
No additional units may be developed in an existing condominium project without prior city approval. Such additions shall require condominium plat amendments and shall be processed under the applicable development review procedure. (Ord. 06-10 (part), 2006)

17.79.080 Appeals.
Any person adversely affected by a decision with respect to a condominium development may appeal pursuant to the procedures specified for the type of application. In the case of condominium conversions reviewed under this chapter, the appeal body shall be the appeal authority. Appeals of condominium conversions shall be filed with the City Recorder no later than thirty days from the Planning Commission decision. (Ord. 06-10 (part), 2006)
Editor’s note: Ord. No. 10-06, adopted November 9, 2010, amended certain sections of the code by changing “board of adjustments” to “appeal authority.” This section was not included in the list of sections in the ordinance, but the name change has been made at the direction of the City.

Chapter 17.80 SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS FOR LARGE-SCALE DEVELOPMENTS OVER THIRTY THOUSAND SQUARE FEET

Sections:
17.80.010    Purpose and intent.
17.80.020    Definitions.
17.80.030    Applicability.
17.80.040    Aesthetic character.
17.80.050    Site design.
17.80.060    Signage.
17.80.070    Landscaping.
17.80.080    Submittal requirements.
17.80.090    Adaptive reuse/renewal.
17.80.100    Abandoned building or vacancy supplementary regulations.
17.80.110    Financial assurances.
17.80.120    Development improvements agreement required.
17.80.130    Reserved.
17.80.140    Reserved.

17.80.010 Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of these regulations are:
A. To break up the apparent mass and scale of large structures in order to ensure that such development is compatible with and does not detract from Moab’s unique natural character, scale, and sense of place;
B. To help integrate large-scale development with its visual surroundings when viewed from adjacent public rights-of-way and neighboring properties;
C. To promote and facilitate a safe and comfortable pedestrian scale environment;
D. To mitigate on-site and off-site impacts of large structures on public infrastructure;
E. To encourage a mixture of uses and sizes of structures;
F. To reduce the visual impact of large areas of parking and outdoor lighting; and
G. To reduce future negative impacts of empty or abandoned large retail structures on the appearance and retail economic health of the community. (Ord. 17-18 (part), 2017: Ord. 08-10 (part), 2008)

17.80.020 Definitions.
A. In the event that the definition of a term presented in this chapter conflicts with the definition of the same or similar term presented elsewhere in this code or in a model code that has been adopted by the City (e.g., International Building Code), the definition contained in this chapter shall prevail.
B. “Affected entity” means a county, local district, special service district, interlocal cooperation entity, public utility, private property owner, school district, property owner’s association, federal government agency, or state agency.
C. “Arcade” means an area contiguous to a street or building that is open and unobstructed, and that is accessible to the public at all times. Arcades may include building columns, landscaping, statuary, or fountains. Arcades do not include off-street loading/unloading areas, driveways or parking areas.
D. “Architectural or structural bay” means a design feature or collection of features that breaks up the flat expanse of a wall through the use of indentations, property ribs or offsets.
E. “Berm” means an earthen mound designed to provide visual interest on a site, screen undesirable views, reduce noise or provide a buffer from adjoining uses.
F. “Buffer” means an area provided to reduce the conflict between two different land uses. Buffers are intended to mitigate undesired views, noise and glare--effectively providing greater privacy to neighboring land uses. Typical buffers consist of materials that serve this purpose and include, but are not limited to, plant materials, walls, fences and/or significant land area to separate the uses.
G. “Breezeway” means a roofed passageway, which is either open on the sides or enclosed by walls, which serves a means of access between two adjacent buildings.
H. “Commercial development” means the construction or expansion of business uses involving the sale of goods or services to the public. As used in this chapter, commercial development includes hotels, motels, or similar lodging businesses providing short-term accommodations to the public.
I. “Cornice” means a decorative projection at the top of a wall or building.
J. “Dormer” means a window set vertically in a gable projecting from a sloping roof.
K. “Extraordinary impact” means an impact created by a proposed development that will result in the need for improvements to public facilities such as water, sewer, storm water drainage, and/or streets. Examples of extraordinary impacts include but are not limited to:
    1. Installation of new water, sewer and/or storm water improvements necessary to meet the demands of the proposed development;
    2. Upsizing of existing water, sewer, and/or storm drain pipelines to meet the demands of the proposed development increase capacity;
    3. Installation of street and/or traffic signal improvements to maintain a level of service (LOS) of C or higher on all public streets that will be affected by the proposed development.
L. “Facade” means the portion of any exterior elevation on the building extending from grade to the top of the parapet, wall or eaves and extending the entire length of the building.
M. “Floor area, gross (GFA)” means the sum of the gross horizontal areas of all enclosed floors of a building, including basements, mezzanines, corridors, breezeways, and lobbies from the exterior face of the exterior walls, or from the centerline of a common wall separating two buildings, but excluding any space with a floor to ceiling height of less than six feet six inches. The GFA also includes permanent outdoor retail display areas including, but not limited to, garden centers and seasonal displays of merchandise.
N. “Floor area, net (NFA)” means the total of all floor areas of a building, excluding: stairwells and elevator shafts; equipment rooms; interior vehicular parking or loading; and all floors below the first or ground floor, except where these below ground floor areas are used or intended to be used for human habitation or service to the public.
O. “Gable” means a triangular wall section at the end of a pitched roof, bounded by the two roof slopes.
P. “Ghost signage” means the visible remains or impressions left when a sign is removed from a building or sign standard.
Q. “Hardscape” means the inanimate elements of landscaping including patios, paths, plazas, decks, fountains, rock and stone.
R. “Hip roof” means a roof without gables.
S. “Large-scale development” means new retail or commercial development exceeding thirty thousand square feet of GFA, and/or the remodeling or expansion of existing structures where the result of the remodeling and/or expansion exceeds thirty thousand square feet of GFA. Where development is to be constructed in phases, the GFA of all phases is to be utilized in determining whether this chapter applies, rather than the area of the structures in any single phase.
T. “Pad building” means a building placed in or around a large-scale development parking area and providing complementary goods and services to those provided by the large-scale development.
U. “Parapet” means the portion of a wall that extends above the roofline.
V. “Portico” means a porch or walkway with a roof supported by columns, often leading to the entrance to a building.
W. “Public or private right-of-way” means any road intended to provide public access to any lot/development, but excluding any service road or internal driving aisles (i.e., within parking lots).
X. “Public space” means an area where the public can gather and/or rest, and not part of the commercial space of a development.
Y. “Retail development” means businesses where goods or services are sold to the public primarily for personal consumption, rather than for resale. Retail uses include shops, restaurants, warehouse sales, and associated service businesses or offices doing business with the general public. As used in this chapter, the term “retail” does not include hotels, motels, or similar short-term lodging businesses.
Z. “Screen” means a wall constructed of opaque materials and whose height will be effective in obstructing unwanted views.
AA. “Structural best management practice (BMP)” means any of several commonly accepted and used storm water improvements designed to prevent storm water discharges exceeding historic pre-development levels, and to prevent the discharge of pollutants into surface and ground water.
BB. “Wing wall” means a projection of a wall extending out beyond the body of the building. (Ord. 17-18 (part), 2017: Ord. 08-10 (part), 2008)

17.80.030 Applicability.
A. Application. In addition to compliance with all other requirements of this code, new construction of large-scale commercial development or large-scale retail development exceeding thirty thousand square feet of GFA of any single structure or building must comply with the standards established by this chapter. Remodeling and/or expansion of existing structures where the result of the remodeling and/or expansion exceeds thirty thousand square feet of GFA of any single structure or building must comply with the standards established by this chapter. For purposes of this chapter buildings or structures connected by a breezeway are considered a single structure.
B. Conflicts. Where the requirements of any part of this chapter conflict with any other provision of the code, this chapter shall prevail. (Ord. 17-18 (part), 2017: Ord. 08-10 (part), 2008)

17.80.040 Aesthetic character.
A. Facades and Exterior Walls. If a building facade exceeds sixty feet in length, it shall be broken down into smaller elements by jogging the wall in or out a minimum of four feet for at least ten feet in length, or by adding an element such as a porch, recessed entry, bay, window, projecting trellis, or similar substantial architectural feature at intervals so that no continuous wall plane is more than sixty feet in length.
B. Smaller Retail Uses. The standards presented in this section are directed toward those situations where additional, smaller stores, with separate, exterior customer entrances are located in the principal buildings or on the development site.
    1. Where principal buildings contain additional, separate uses, which occupy less than thirty thousand square feet of gross floor area, with separate, exterior customer entrances:
        a. The street level facade of such stores shall be transparent between the height of three feet and eight feet above the walkway grade for no less than sixty percent of the horizontal length of the building facade of such additional stores; and
        b. Windows shall be recessed and should include visually prominent sills, shutters, or other such forms of framing.
C. Detail Features. The elements in the following standard should be integral parts of the building fabric, and not superficially applied trim or graphics, or paint:
    1. Building facades shall include a repeating pattern that shall include no less than three of the elements listed below. At least one of these elements shall repeat horizontally. All elements shall repeat at intervals of no more than thirty feet, either horizontally or vertically:
        a. Color or hue change;
        b. Texture change;
        c. Material module change; or
        d. Expression of architectural or structural bay through a change in plane no less than twelve inches in width, such as an offset, reveal, or projecting rib.
D. Roof Lines. Variations in roof lines should be used to add interest to, and reduce the massive scale of, large buildings. The following standards shall apply:
    1. Roof lines shall be varied with a change in height of not less than three feet for every one hundred linear feet in the building length. Parapets, mansard roofs, gable roofs, hip roofs, or dormers shall be used to conceal flat roofs and roof top equipment from public view. The Planning Commission may approve alternating lengths and designs which may be addressed during the site plan approval process.
E. Materials and Colors. Exterior building materials and colors comprise a significant part of the visual impact of a building. Therefore, they should be aesthetically pleasing and compatible with materials and colors of the surrounding landscape.
    1. Predominant exterior building materials shall be high quality materials and include:
        a. Stucco;
        b. Unpainted or natural colored brick;
        c. Wood;
        d. Stone;
        e. Tinted and textured masonry units; or
        f. Other materials approved by the Planning Commission.
    2. Facade colors shall be low reflectance, subtle, neutral, or earth tone colors. The use of high intensity colors, metallic colors, black or fluorescent colors is prohibited.
    3. Exterior building materials on facades adjacent to public roads shall not include the following:
        a. Smooth-faced concrete or masonry block;
        b. Tilt-up concrete panels; or
        c. Pre-fabricated steel panels.
F. Entryways. Entryway design elements and variations should give orientation and aesthetically pleasing character to the building. The following standards identify entryway design features:
    1. Each principal building on a site shall have clearly defined and visible customer entrances featuring no less than three of the following:
        a. Canopies or porticos;
        b. Overhangs;
        c. Recesses/projections;
        d. Arcades;
        e. Raised corniced parapets over the door;
        f. Peaked roof forms;
        g. Arches;
        h. Outdoor patios;
        i. Display windows;
        j. Architectural details such as tile work and moldings which are integrated into the building structure and design; or
        k. Integral planters or wing walls that incorporate landscaped areas and/or places for sitting.
G. Public Spaces. No less than five percent of the floor area shall be dedicated to interior or exterior public spaces. (Ord. 17-18 (part), 2017: Ord. 08-10 (part), 2008)

17.80.050 Site design.
Large-scale development shall be required to conform to all applicable provisions of this chapter, including:
A. Building Size. New development shall not exceed two hundred thousand gross square feet as a single occupant or combination of occupants in a single structure. Remodels and/or expansions of existing buildings shall not result in development exceeding two hundred thousand square feet as a single occupant or combination of occupants in a single structure.
B. Building Height. New development and remodels and/or expansions of existing buildings shall not exceed forty feet in height.
C. Parking. These regulations are intended to:
    1. Reduce the “heat island effect” of the parking surface;
    2. Encourage natural on-site processing of storm water through landscape features designed to slow and filter polluted runoff;
    3. Encourage ground water recharge and/or reuse;
    4. Reduce the overall scale of paved surfaces;
    5. Minimize the utilitarian visual impact; and
    6. Enhance pedestrian safety.
    7. Lot Orientation. Parking areas shall provide safe, convenient, and efficient access for all types of vehicles, public transit, all alternative forms of travel, and pedestrians. They should be distributed around larger buildings in order to shorten distances to other buildings and public sidewalks and to reduce the overall scale of the paved surface, and provide shared parking between businesses. Bike racks shall be located in well-lighted areas and placed in locations that are visible from store entrances and parking areas.
    8. Parking areas shall be planned as an accessory to the buildings they serve to achieve a high quality design and appearance. The parking area’s utilitarian appearance should be minimized by utilizing effective landscaping, street furniture and other public amenities.
    9. Parking lots should be designed to avoid causing erosion damage to grading and surrounding landscaping. Whenever possible, permeable paving systems shall be evaluated and utilized especially for overflow and employee parking areas. To reduce impervious surfaces, one-way drive aisles shall be incorporated into the design to the greatest extent possible.
    10. Parking lots shall incorporate methods for storm water management utilizing low impact development (LID) techniques including, but not limited to:
        a. End-of-island bioretention cell(s) with underdrain(s) and landscaping;
        b. Bioretention cells or biofiltration swales located around the parking perimeter;
        c. Breached curb drainage inlets (or curb cuts) in the end-of-island bioretention cells and bioretention strips to collect runoff; or
        d. Bioretention cells installed between lines of parking stalls to increase the total treatment surface area of these systems.
    11. Parking and Vehicular Circulation. Parking facilities shall be recognized as transitional spaces where users change modes of travel, from car, bus, or bicycle to pedestrian. The design of those spaces shall therefore safely and attractively serve all modes, and provide safe walkways for pedestrians.
    12. Surface Parking. No single parking area shall exceed one hundred fifty feet in length unless divided into two or more sub-areas by a building, internal landscaped street, or landscaped pedestrian way.
    13. Parking lots shall be configured and designed to reduce the overall mass of paved surfaces. No more than seventy percent of the required or proposed off-street parking area for the entire property shall be located between the front (street adjacent) facade of the principal building(s) and the primary abutting street unless the principal building(s) and/or parking lots are screened from view by secondary development (such as smaller scale retail or commercial buildings), additional tree plantings, other landscaping, berms or screening.
    14. No overnight camping shall be permitted in parking facilities authorized pursuant to Chapter 8.20 and Section 10.04.230. The property owner shall post and enforce policies to ensure compliance with this provision.
D. Paving and Circulation Requirements. 
    1. All parking stalls and maneuvering areas shall be paved and permanently maintained with asphalt, concrete, or pavers surfacing except in employee or overflow parking areas where the use of gravel or other pervious surface material may be approved by the Planning Commission. The utilization of pavers or other approved pervious materials to provide for additional parking during times of high volume traffic is encouraged.
    2. All areas within the parking area not used for parking stalls or maneuvering areas shall be landscaped.
    3. Parking areas shall be designed to enable a car entering the parking area to move from one location to any other location within the parking area or premises without entering a street.
E. Parking Sub-Areas. Unbroken rows of parking spaces shall not exceed sixteen spaces unless divided into two or more sub-areas by a building, internal landscaped street, significant planted dividers or islands or a landscaped pedestrian way. All islands shall be landscaped.
[IMAGE: <17.80.050F.jpg>]
F. Number of Parking Spaces. The number of parking spaces provided shall be as required by Section 17.09.220. The Planning Commission shall have the authority to approve an increase to the required number of parking spaces as allowed in subsection (G) of this section.
G. Parking Bonuses. The City shall use the following standards when evaluating the landscape design and granting parking bonuses:
    1. Additional shade coverage exceeding the fifty percent requirement by fifteen percent may allow up to ten percent parking area increases.
    2. The use of solar energy panels for lighting and/or shade structures shall allow additional parking bonuses of ten percent based on a fifteen percent solar panel coverage of the parking area.
    3. Other valid options for bonuses as proposed by the applicant and approved by the City may be used in lieu of the increases in shade or solar panels if the intent of the regulations is met or exceeded. Such options shall include solar panels located on the roofs of structures and green roofs used to absorb water runoff from principal uses.
H. Storm Water Systems. Storm water system design shall emphasize water quality treatment and ground water recharge. The site storm water system shall capture all site runoff, provide water quality treatment through the use of appropriate structural BMPs, and discharge the storm water to the public storm water system at a rate that does not exceed the pre-developed rate for the project site for the ten-year and one-hundred-year storm events. In the event that the property cannot drain to the public storm water system, storm water may be discharged onto or across adjacent properties; provided, that easements permitting such use are executed with the respective landowners. Required additional storm water conveyance systems shall be subject to approval by the City and shall be constructed at the applicant’s cost.
[IMAGE: <17.80.050I.jpg>]
I. Rear and Side Facades. Side and rear facades shall adhere to the requirements outlined in Section 17.80.040(A). Architectural and landscaping features should mitigate to the maximum extent practicable the impacts of blank walls, loading areas, storage areas, HVAC units, garbage receptacles and other accessory features.
    1. The minimum setback for any building facade shall be twenty-five feet. Where the facade faces adjacent residential zones an earthen berm shall be installed, no less than six feet in height, containing at a minimum a double row of evergreen or deciduous trees planted at intervals of twenty feet trunk to trunk. Additional landscaping may be required by the Planning Commission to effectively buffer adjacent land use as deemed appropriate.
J. Outdoor Storage, Trash Collection, and Loading Areas. Loading areas and outdoor storage areas exert visual and noise impacts on surrounding neighborhoods. These areas, when visible from adjoining properties and/or public streets, shall be screened from view of adjacent public or private rights-of-way or neighboring properties. Appropriate locations for loading and outdoor storage areas include areas between buildings, where more than one building is located on a site and such buildings are not more than forty feet apart, or on those sides of buildings that do not have customer entrances.
    1. Areas for outdoor storage, truck parking, trash collection or compaction, utility meters, HVAC equipment or other such equipment, similar uses, and similar service functions shall be screened from view from adjacent public or private rights-of-way or neighboring properties. Materials, colors, and designs of screening walls, fences and covers shall conform to those used as predominant materials, colors and designs of the building. Areas for outdoor storage, trash collection or compaction, loading, or other such uses shall not be located within thirty feet of any public street, public sidewalk, or internal pedestrian way.
    2. Delivery and loading operations shall conform to Chapter 17.74, Noise.
    3. Delivery and loading areas shall be substantially set back from a residential use or residentially zoned property that is adjacent to the site. A landscape buffer, or other approved buffering, of at least thirty feet in width shall be provided adjacent to the delivery and loading area where it adjoins residential uses or zones. The landscape buffer shall include evergreen shrubs and/or trees plus deciduous canopy trees at regular intervals to provide noise, light, and visual screening.
    4. If the delivery and loading spaces are located within an enclosed building or underground, no such setback and buffer area shall be required.
    5. Outdoor storage of chemicals, fertilizers and other materials that pose a potential source of ground water pollution shall be stored in a contained area that prevents leakage into the storm water system or into the ground water. Environmental Protection Agency regulations or other regulations shall be followed.
K. Pedestrian/Bicycle Accessibility. This subsection sets forth standards for public sidewalks and internal pedestrian circulation systems that can provide user-friendly pedestrian access as well as pedestrian safety, shelter, and convenience within the center grounds.
    1. Sidewalks at least six feet in width shall be provided along all sides of the project site that abut a public or private right-of-way. The Planning Commission may waive this requirement as part of the development plan if a suitable alternative is proposed.
    2. Continuous internal pedestrian walkways, no less than five feet in width, shall be provided from the public sidewalk or right-of-way to the principal customer entrances of all principal buildings on the site. At a minimum, walkways shall connect focal points of activity such as, but not limited to, parking areas, street crossings, building and store entry points, and shall feature landscaping as per requirements outlined in this chapter.
    [IMAGE: <17.80.050L1.jpg>]
    3. Walkways shall be provided through parking lots. A paved walkway or sidewalk must be provided for safe walking areas through parking lots greater than one hundred fifty feet in length (measured either parallel or perpendicular to the street front). Walkways shall be provided every third parking aisle, or at a distance of not less than one hundred fifty feet between paths (whichever is the least restrictive). Such access routes through parking areas shall be separated from vehicular parking and travel lanes by use of contrasting paving materials which may be raised above the vehicular pavement. Speed tables shall not be used to satisfy this requirement.
    4. Sidewalks, no less than five feet in width, shall be provided along the full length of the building along any facade featuring a customer entrance, and along any facade abutting public parking areas. Such sidewalks shall be located at least six feet from the facade of the building to provide planting beds for foundation landscaping.
    5. All internal pedestrian walkways shall be distinguished from driving surfaces through the use of durable, low maintenance surface materials such as pavers, bricks, or scored and tinted concrete to enhance pedestrian safety and comfort, as well as the attractiveness of the walkways.
    [IMAGE: <17.80.050L2.jpg>]
    Bike racks shall be located in well-lighted areas and placed in locations that are visible from store entrances and/or parking areas
    6. Public bicycle and pedestrian paths, trails, and lanes a minimum of ten feet in width shall be provided across the site as necessary to implement the Grand County nonmotorized master trails plan as approved by the City Council and in effect at the time of application. All such easement widths shall be contingent upon the type of trail proposed and may vary. Such trails shall provide connections to existing and/or future trails.
    7. Bicycle lanes or paths shall be provided from an adjacent street to bicycle parking areas near a primary entrance of structures.
    8. The applicant shall provide street stub outs, trails, and sidewalks as necessary to promote efficient circulation and connectivity with adjacent developed parcels or undeveloped parcels that are likely to develop. (Ord. 17-18 (part), 2017: Ord. 12-07 (part), 2012: Ord. 08-10 (part), 2008)

17.80.060 Signage.
Large-scale developments as defined by this chapter shall be required to follow the provisions of Chapter 15.44 (Sign Code). In addition, the following provisions shall apply:
A. Sign Color. Sign colors shall be low reflectance, subtle, neutral, or earth tone colors. Use of high-contrast colors in all wall and monument signs is prohibited.
B. Sign Types. Corporate or retail signage shall be limited to internally illuminated and channeled wall signs and monument signs. Applicants are encouraged to utilize light fixtures which have the International Dark Sky Association seal of approval, or an equivalent. Maximum sign square footage, height and all other requirements shall be governed by Chapter 15.44.
C. All freestanding signs shall be monument style: i.e., mounted on a base (above grade) of wood, brick or stone, which is detached from any building and built with continuous background surface from the ground up. (Ord. 17-18 (part), 2017: Ord. 12-07 (part), 2012: Ord. 08-10 (part), 2008)

17.80.070 Landscaping.
A. All planter beds and tree planters shall be bordered by a concrete curb not less than six inches in height adjacent to the parking surface except where areas of landscape are used for storm water detention. If used in this manner, all asphalt abutting landscaping shall terminate with a concrete ribbon curb one and one-half feet in width and ten inches in thickness.
B. All plants and irrigation systems shall be installed according to the landscape installation guidelines shown on the approved landscape plan. The owner shall guarantee the quality of work, health and condition of plants, and installation of materials including, but not limited to, plant types, size, spacing, and irrigation systems. Prior to final acceptance of the project and issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the City shall inspect and certify that the installation is in compliance with the approved plans and specifications. All corrections, adjustments, and/or replacement of landscape elements and execution of a landscape maintenance agreement shall be done prior to final approval by the City. In the event corrections cannot be made or installation cannot be completed prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the City shall require a cash deposit equal in value to the amount of one and one-half the cost of the landscaping project. A cash deposit is returned only when the City gives final approval of the project.
C. Landscaping shall be provided and maintained in good condition by the property owner. Failure to maintain shall constitute a misdemeanor and be punishable as established in Chapters 17.75 and 17.78 and Section 12.24.160.
D. Any changes to an approved landscape plan shall be reviewed and approved by the planning director prior to the alteration taking place.
E. Landscaping Materials and Spaces. Required landscaping shall be limited to the following materials and spaces:
    1. Living ground cover;
    2. Permeable, continuous nonliving ground cover;
    3. Living plant life other than ground cover;
    4. Retained native vegetation;
    5. Natural or manufactured features, including but not limited to boulders and planters;
    6. Pedestrian ways; and
    7. Public spaces.
F. Landscaping Materials and Design Mix. Separate sections of landscaping shall be composed of the required materials in any combination as follows:
    1. Living plant life other than ground cover or natural vegetation shall have a minimum coverage of five percent;
    2. Living ground cover shall have a maximum coverage of eighty percent;
    3. Permeable nonliving ground cover shall have a maximum coverage of twenty percent;
    4. Natural or manufactured features shall have a maximum coverage of fifteen percent;
    5. Pedestrian ways or public spaces shall have a maximum coverage of fifty percent.
    6. Plant materials shall be sized and spaced to achieve immediate effect and shall not be less than a five-gallon container for specimen shrubs, a fifteen-gallon container for trees, and a one-gallon container for mass planting, unless otherwise approved by the land use authority.
G. Plant Materials and Landscape Design Standards. 
    1. Plants selected for landscape areas shall consist of plants that are well suited to the microclimate and soil conditions at the project site. Plants with similar water needs shall be grouped together as much as possible.
    2. Turf areas shall be limited to areas with suitable shade and shall not be allowed in spaces narrower than ten feet wide. Turf shall not be used in more than ten percent of total landscape area, and should be located in places where people will use it.
    3. For projects located at the interface between urban areas and natural open space nonirrigated, highly drought tolerant plants shall be selected that will blend with the native vegetation and are fire resistant or retardant. Plants with low level fuel volume or high moisture content shall be emphasized. Plants which tend to accumulate excessive amounts of dead wood or debris shall be avoided.
    4. Areas with a slope greater than thirty-three percent shall be landscaped with deep rooting, water conserving plants for erosion control and soil stabilization.
    5. Parking strips and other landscaped areas less than eight feet wide shall be landscaped with water conserving plants.
H. Irrigation Systems. 
    1. A detailed irrigation plan shall be drawn to the same scale as the landscape plan and shall contain the following information:
        a. Layout of irrigation system and summary legend outlining the type and size of all components of the system, including manufacture name and model number with approved equals; and
        b. Flow rate in gallons per minute and design operating pressure in pounds per square inch for each valve and precipitation rate in inches per hour for each valve with sprinklers.
I. Building Foundation Landscaping. A minimum of fifty percent of a facade length containing a primary customer entrance shall have a foundation landscaped area extending at least six feet out from the building. All other facades that can be viewed from existing public rights-of-way shall have foundation landscaping extending a minimum of eighty percent of the facade length. The City may waive this requirement where necessary because of geotechnical conditions.
J. Parking Lot Landscaping. 
    1. Large parking areas should be enhanced with additional landscaping. Creative site design, to include preservation of existing stands of trees and clustered landscaped areas, is encouraged over symmetrical rows of small landscaped islands.
    2. To the greatest extent possible, landscape islands shall be designed so that plant material is not located on the first one foot of the edge of the island, where it is most likely to be trampled by individuals exiting and entering parked vehicles. Such edge shall be mulched or paved with porous paving materials such as pavers.
        a. Landscaping. Parking lot landscaping is an important element in reducing reflective heating, controlling water runoff and improving the aesthetics of a site. Increasing the landscape requirements may also help in the adaptive reuse of large-scale retail buildings. Landscaping shall be installed and maintained as established elsewhere in this section.
        b. Parking lot dividers, islands, planters and planting areas shall be a minimum of six feet wide at the widest point, and six feet long except that all new or retrofitted tree planters shall be a minimum of nine feet by seven feet, measured to the outside perimeter of the planter, and shall have no less than forty-eight square feet of permeable soil planting area.
        c. Landscaping shall be used to define parking areas, primary vehicular drives and pedestrian areas in an aesthetically and environmentally pleasing manner.
        d. Landscaped areas shall be distributed throughout the entire parking area as evenly as is appropriate in the design of the park facility.
    3. Where trees already exist, the parking lot shall be designed to make the best use of this existing growth and shade wherever it is reasonably possible.
    4. Landscaping shall include shrubs, trees, vines, ground covers, hedges, flowers, bark, chips, decorating cinders, gravel, and similar material which will improve the appearance of parking areas.
        a. Tree Requirements. Off-street open parking areas shall provide fifty percent or more of shade coverage at the time of maturity of the trees. To achieve this coverage the applicant shall:
            i. Design, where possible, north/south oriented parking areas to provide maximum shade;
            ii. Plant at least one medium or large-scale tree for every three parking stalls;
            iii. Utilize a diversity of tree species that have the ability to survive the climate zone.
        b. The minimum size tree planted shall be no less than a one-and-one-half-inch tree measured at four feet from the base of the tree and sized to specifications according to the American Standard for Nursery Stock (ANSI Z60.1) Low water use and “native” plant materials shall be used to the greatest extent possible. Problematic trees having shallow or invasive roots or having brittle or weak branching structure are prohibited. All trees shall be planted and maintained according to the landscaping plan detail sheet and in such a manner to maximize the growth, health and longevity of the plantings.
        c. Trees shall be maintained in accordance with Chapter 12.24, Tree Stewardship. Violations shall be punishable as established in Sections 12.24.150 and 12.24.160.
        d. The interior of all vehicular use areas shall be landscaped so as to define parking aisles and limit unbroken rows of parking and provide for pedestrian accessibility and safety. Ends of parking rows and corner areas shall be curbed and landscaped.
K. Internal Pedestrian Walkway Landscaping. All internal pedestrian walkways, as required by this chapter, shall feature adjoining landscaped areas that include trees, shrubs, benches, flower beds, ground covers, or other such materials for no less than fifty percent of their length.
L. Parking Lot Trees Required. All proposed parking areas shall have shade trees planted at spacing no greater than forty feet trunk to trunk around the entire perimeter, with exception of those areas where the placement of trees would constitute a clear visual safety hazard. All landscaped islands in the interior of parking lots shall have, at a minimum, one large shade tree every forty feet. Each separate landscaped island or area shall contain a minimum of one hundred sixty-five square feet, shall have a minimum dimension of eight feet in any direction and shall include at least one tree. Trees shall be required within the interior planting islands of any vehicular use area exceeding four thousand five hundred square feet.
M. Adjacent Buffer Required. A landscaped buffer of at least fifteen feet in width shall be required along the entire edge of any parking lot or the edge of a building facade without a primary or pedestrian oriented entrance when adjacent to a public right-of-way. The landscaped buffer shall incorporate canopy shade trees planted at a minimum of thirty feet on-center for the buffer area.
N. Screening. 
    1. Seventy-five percent of the lot frontage adjacent to any arterial street, exclusive of vehicular and pedestrian entrances, shall provide screening of parking areas by means of on-site buildings, landscaping, decorative walls and retaining walls, or other approved methods which may include primary structures. Additional screening of on-site parking shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission.
    2. Fifty percent of the lot frontage adjacent to all other streets and adjacent properties shall provide screening of on-site parking by means of on-site buildings, decorative walls, decorative retaining walls, landscaping, or other buildings and shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission.
    3. Lot frontage adjacent to residential uses or residential zoning districts shall provide screening of on-site parking by means of walls, landscaping, or buildings.
O. Installation and Maintenance. All landscape materials required by this section shall be installed in accordance with standard practices of horticultural professionals and in good and workmanlike manner and shall be maintained by the property owner in good condition. (Ord. 17-18 (part), 2017: Ord. 12-07 (part), 2012: Ord. 08-10 (part), 2008)

17.80.080 Submittal requirements.
A. In addition to those submittal documents specified in Chapter 17.67 (Site Plan Review), the applicant shall submit the following:
B. Engineering Plans and Studies. All drawings and reports listed in this section shall be stamped by an engineer licensed in Utah. The applicant shall submit the following without exception:
    1. Traffic Impact Study. A report that presents pre- and post-development traffic estimates and level of service values for all streets and intersections that will be impacted by the proposed development.
    2. Water System Study. A report that presents the proposed development’s fire flow and peak use requirements, and analyzes existing system capacity.
    3. Storm Drainage Study. A report that presents pre- and post-development runoff flow estimates for the site, detention volume requirements, proposed BMPs, and all other information necessary to allow for review of the proposed drainage plan.
    4. Construction Drawings and Specifications. A package that at a minimum shall show site utilities, site grading, surface improvements, internal traffic circulation, easements, and required traffic signage.
    5. Affected Entities. A listing by name, address, and telephone number of all affected entities, as defined in this chapter, with respect to the project site.
C. Architectural Plans and Presentations. All drawings and reports listed in this section shall be prepared by an architect or landscape architect as appropriate licensed in Utah. The requirements for a site plan as listed in Chapter 17.67 shall be followed when preparing an application for review. Applicant shall also submit the following:
    1. Conceptual Drawings. The package shall, at a minimum, include the following:
        a. Site plan views showing building locations, parking areas with space totals, pedestrian and vehicular circulation routes, public trails and pathways, landscaped areas, and screening;
        b. Elevation views of all proposed buildings showing scaled architectural details, massing, height, screening of roof top units from all adjacent properties, especially those lands with higher elevations, and other design features; and
        c. Illustrative drawings, examples, or mock-ups showing the materials, colors and typical views from adjacent public streets of all proposed buildings.
        d. Outdoor Lighting. 
            i. Lighting shall meet the requirements of Section 17.67.040(D) and be full cutoff downward directed fixtures and no light shall be emitted beyond the project site. The applicant must provide an exterior lighting plan that quantifies light coverage upon the project site and provides information on how outdoor lighting will be accomplished to minimize impacts on adjacent properties or roadways.
            ii. To minimize any indirect overflow of light on adjacent properties, the height of any proposed parking lot light standard shall not be taller than light standards in surrounding neighborhood residential zones and should stair step down to a lower height when close to neighboring residential uses or residentially zoned areas. In no case shall the height of the light standards exceed twenty-five feet. Spotlights of any kind that are mounted on building walls are not permitted.
    2. Signage Plan. A plan showing the location, size, height, materials, lighting methods, colors and incorporated logos of all proposed corporate and retail signage within the development. A sign permit is required under a separate application as set forth in Chapter 15.44 and Section 17.09.470.
    3. Landscape Plan. A detailed plan showing all proposed landscape treatments including planting locations and species for all planted areas; surfacing for hardscaped areas; fences, wall and/or other screening devices; and proposed irrigation systems.
D. Adaptive Reuse and Renewal Plan. Applicants for large-scale retail developments shall submit the following:
    1. A building design plan that allows for and facilitates reuse of the building in the event the building is abandoned or vacated.
    2. A building renewal plan that provides for maximum opportunity for rehabilitation or redevelopment of the structure in the event of abandonment, vacating of property, or relocation by the original occupants. The plan shall include a maintenance plan for normal repairs and upkeep of the main building, accessory buildings, “pad” buildings, parking lots and hard surfaces, landscaping, and signage, including the elimination of “ghost” signage. (Ord. 17-18 (part), 2017: Ord. 12-07 (part), 2012: Ord. 08-10 (part), 2008)

17.80.090 Adaptive reuse/renewal.
Large-scale retail developments as defined in this chapter shall be constructed in a manner that includes specific elements for adaptation for multi-tenant reuse. Such elements may include, but are not limited to, compartmentalized construction, including plumbing, electrical service, and HVAC.
A. Building design shall plan for:
    1. The interior subdivision of the structure into separate tenancies;
    2. Facades that readily adapt to multiple entrances and adapt to entrances on all but one side of the building;
    3. Parking lot designs that are shared by establishments or are linked by safe and functional pedestrian connections;
    4. Landscaping designs that complement the multiple entrance design; and
    5. Other elements of design which facilitate the multi-tenant reuse of the building and site. (Ord. 17-18 (part), 2017: Ord. 08-10 (part), 2008)

17.80.100 Abandoned building or vacancy supplementary regulations.
A. The City may determine that a large-scale retail development, or any part thereof, has been abandoned or vacated. For purposes of this chapter, an “abandoned” or “vacated” building shall be determined by meeting any of the following criteria:
    1. A declaration by the owner of the establishment of the intent to go out of business at that location;
    2. The cessation of business by the establishment at that location for a period of not less than twelve consecutive months.
B. The following requirements apply to any owner of property subject to this chapter on which an abandoned establishment exists:
    1. Within ninety days of the City’s determination of abandonment or vacancy, the owner of such property shall submit to the City an updated reuse plan that addresses maintenance, active remarketing, and/or reuse of the facility. The plan shall comply with existing city zoning code in effect at the time of abandonment. The plan shall be subject to approval by the City Council.
    2. If the owner fails or refuses to maintain the property during the period of time when the establishment is abandoned or vacated the City, as allowed by the International Property Maintenance Code and the International Building Code, may elect to perform, or contract for the performance of, maintenance functions. The owner shall be liable to reimburse the City for all such reasonable maintenance costs. (Ord. 17-18 (part), 2017: Ord. 08-10 (part), 2008)

17.80.110 Financial assurances.
The applicant shall deliver a development improvements agreement (DIA) and other financial assurances and dedications as provided by Chapter 17.67, or as otherwise required by the development approvals. (Ord. 17-18 (part), 2017: Ord. 08-10 (part), 2008)

17.80.120 Development improvements agreement required.
In addition to all other provisions applicable to DIAs under Chapter 17.67, a DIA issued under this chapter may address:
A. Improvements guarantees for all required public improvements and for adaptive reuse and renewal;
B. All required dedications of utilities or right-of-way, utility easements, exactions, and impact fees;
C. Provisions regarding compliance with abandoned building and maintenance requirements; and
D. Any other terms and conditions as dictated by the attributes of the project, the code, or this chapter. (Ord. 17-18 (part), 2017: Ord. 08-10 (part), 2008)

17.80.130 Reserved.
Editor’s note: Ord. No. 17-18, adopted July 11, 2017, repealed § 17.80.130, which pertained to review procedures and derived from Ord. No. 08-10, 2008; and Ord. No. 10-06, 2010.

17.80.140 Reserved.
Editor’s note: Ord. No. 17-18, adopted July 11, 2017, repealed § 17.80.140, which pertained to appeal procedures and derived from Ord. No. 08-10, 2008; and Ord. No. 10-06, 2010.

Chapter 17.90 HISTORIC PRESERVATION

Sections:
17.90.010    Purpose.
17.90.020    Board established.
17.90.030    City registry established.
17.90.040    Designation of historic structures, sites and districts.
17.90.050    Procedures for designating historic structures, sites and districts for preservation.
17.90.060    Criteria for designation.
17.90.070    Historic districts.
17.90.080    Review of alterations.
17.90.090    Revocation of designation.

17.90.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to enhance our community’s local resources and to promote the public interest in historic preservation through:
A. The protection and preservation of the City’s architectural, historic and cultural heritage, as embodied in designated historic structures, sites and districts, by appropriate regulations and incentives;
B. The establishment of a city register listing designated structures, sites, signs, and districts; and,
C. The provision of educational opportunities to increase public appreciation of Moab’s unique heritage. (Ord. 08-11 (part), 2008)

17.90.020 Board established.
The City Council creates an historic preservation board, referred to in this section as the “board,” which shall have principal responsibility for matters of historic preservation.
A. Membership. The Board shall consist of seven members, which shall be made up from representatives from Grand County historical preservation commission, Moab cultural center, Planning Commission, and the chamber of commerce, as well as three at large positions. There shall be no requirement that the three at large positions be property owners within the City of Moab, but the three at large members shall be residents of the Grand County. Persons who have an interest and knowledge of local history and culture are especially encouraged to apply.
B. Appointments and Terms of Office. Members of the Board shall be appointed by the City Council and shall serve three-year staggered terms from the date of their appointment.
    1. Members may continue to serve until their successors have been appointed. Appointments to fill the vacancies on the Board shall be made by the City Council. All members of the Board shall serve without compensation except for such amounts determined appropriate, in advance, by the City Council to offset expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. Members of the Board may be removed by the City Council without cause being stated.
    2. Until such time that the members of the Board are appointed, City Council shall act as the Board.
C. Quorum and Voting. A quorum for the Board shall consist of four members. A quorum is necessary for the Board to conduct business, including holding a public hearing. A roll call vote shall be taken upon the request of any member. A tie vote shall be deemed a denial of the motion or recommended action.
D. Officers. The Board shall, by majority vote, elect one of its members to serve as chairperson to preside over the Board’s meetings and one member to serve as the vice-chairperson. The members so designated shall serve in these capacities for terms of one year.
E. Meetings. The Board shall establish a regular meeting schedule. Minutes shall be kept of all board proceedings. The Board shall conduct its business in accordance with the Public Meetings Acts, Public Records Act and other laws applicable to local public bodies.
F. Powers and Duties. The Board shall after solicitation of public comment and at a properly noticed public meeting:
    1. Recommend eligibility criteria for the designation of historic resources and for review of proposals to alter designated resources.
    2. Review and determine qualifications of properties nominated for designation as either an historic structure, site or district and recommend to City Council approval or denial of a designation.
    3. Upon a property owners request, review and make recommendations to the owner(s) on proposed alterations to a designated historic structure, site or district.
    4. Advise and assist owners of historic properties on physical and financial aspects of preservation, renovation, rehabilitation and reuse, including nomination to the City register, the State Register and the National Register of Historic Places.
    5. Develop and assist in public education programs including, but not limited to, walking tours, brochures, and a marker program for historic properties, lectures, exhibits, and conferences.
    6. Conduct surveys of historic sites, properties, and areas for the purpose of defining those of historic significance, and prioritizing the importance of identified historic areas.
    7. The Board may create a list of structures of historical or archaeological merit, which have not been designated.
    8. Advise the City Council on matters related to preserving the historic character and substance of the City and recommend easements, covenants, licenses and other methods which would implement the completion of purposes of this code.
    9. Actively pursue financial assistance for preservation-related programs.
    10. The Board shall propose to the City Council bylaws, as the Board deems necessary.
    11. Recommend to City Council the establishment of construction and design standards for new construction within designated historic districts, and the renovation or alteration of historic structures. (Ord. 08-11 (part), 2008)

17.90.030 City registry established.
The City Council establishes the City register of historic sites. Structures or districts may be listed on the register only if the site, structure or district has been designated by the City Council following recommendation by the Board. All properties listed on the National or State Register are eligible for the City register but are not designated until approval, pursuant to this section, is obtained. (Ord. 08-11 (part), 2008)

17.90.040 Designation of historic structures, sites and districts.
Pursuant of the procedures set forth in this section, the City Council may, by resolution:
A. Designate as historic an individual structure, site or other feature or an integrated group of structures and features on a single lot or site having a special historical or architectural value.
B. Designate as an historic district an area containing a number of structures or sites having a special historical or architectural value.
C. Each such designation shall include a description of the characteristics of the structure, site or historic district which justify its designation and a description of the particular features that should be preserved, and shall include a legal description of the location and boundaries of the historic structure, site or district.
D. No individual structure or site will be designated without the consent of all owners of record and the provisions of this section.
E. The purpose and effect of designation is:
    1. To assist local groups interested in preservation of physical structures, sites or districts, and to recognize locally significant structures, sites or districts;
    2. To provide a mechanism to educate the public on local history, development of the community, architectural styles, and housing and business development;
    3. To enable the owners of the property in the City to take advantage of historic preservation programs and opportunities; and
    4. To make all properties listed on the City registry eligible for such incentive programs as may be developed. (Ord. 08-11 (part), 2008)

17.90.050 Procedures for designating historic structures, sites and districts for preservation.
A nomination for designation listing in the City register may be made by the Board or by any citizen by filing an application with the Zoning Administrator. The applicant shall pay all public notice expenses, recording fees and any other fees established by resolution of the City Council. The initial application fee is established at seventy-five dollars.
A. Board Review. 
    1. Once it has been determined that the application for historical designation is complete, and the requirement for public hearing has been met, the planning department shall forward the request to the Board of historic preservation to be placed on the agenda for the next regularly scheduled meeting. The hearing on the requested designation will occur not more than ninety days from the date of determination that the application is complete.
    2. The Board shall review the application for conformance with the established criteria for designation and with the purposes of this section.
    3. Within ten 10) days after the conclusion of the public hearing, but in no event more than thirty days after the meeting, unless mutually agreed by the Board, the applicant and the owner or owners other than the applicant, the Board shall recommend either approval, modification and approval or disapproval of the application. The Board may recommend approval conditional upon the execution of certain easements, covenants, or licenses.
    4. The Board shall forward to the City Council in writing any recommendations as to easements, covenants, or licenses that must be met by the property owner to receive and/or maintain the designation.
B. City Council Review. 
    1. The City Council shall hold a public hearing on the designation application no more than thirty days after receipt of the Board’s recommendation.
    2. The City Council shall review the application for conformance with the established criteria for designation and with the purpose of this section.
C. Owner Notification. When a structure, site or historic district has been designated as provided herein, the Zoning Administrator shall promptly notify the record owners of the property, according to the county assessor’s records or other available information, and record the designation with the county clerk and recorder.
D. Limitation on Resubmission and Reconsideration of Proposed Designation. Whenever the City Council disapproves a proposed designation, no person shall submit an application that is the same or substantially the same for at least one year from the effective date of the final action on the denied application. (Ord. 08-11 (part), 2008)

17.90.060 Criteria for designation.
The Board and City Council will consider the following criteria in reviewing nominations of properties for designation:
A. Structures. Structures must be at least fifty years old and meet one or more of the following criteria for architectural, cultural or geographic and environmental significance. A structure can be exempted from the age standard if the Council finds it to be exceptionally important in other criteria.
B. Architectural, Cultural or Geographic/ Environmental Criteria. Historic structures or sites shall meet one or more of the following criteria in order to be considered for designation.
    1. Architectural:
        a. Exemplifies specific elements of an architectural style or period;
        b. Is an example of the work of an architect or builder who is recognized for expertise nationally, state-wide, regionally or locally;
        c. Demonstrates superior craftsmanship or high artistic value;
        d. Represents an innovation in construction, materials or design;
        e. Represents a built environment of a group of people in an era of history;
        f. Exhibits a pattern or grouping of elements representing at least one of the above criteria;
        g. Is a significant historic remodel.
    2. Cultural:
        a. Is a site of an historic event that had an effect upon society;
        b. Exemplifies cultural, political, economic or ethnic heritage of the City; or
        c. Is associated with a notable person or the work of a notable person.
    3. Geographic/Environmental:
        a. Enhances the sense of identity of the City; or
        b. Is an established and familiar natural setting or visual feature of the City.
C. Prehistoric and Historic Archaeological Structures or Sites. Prehistoric and historic archaeological structures or sites shall meet one or more of the following:
    1. Architectural:
        a. Exhibits distinctive characteristics of a type, period or manner of construction; or
        b. Is a unique example of structure.
    2. Cultural:
        a. Has the potential to make an important contribution to the knowledge of the area’s history or prehistory;
        b. Is associated with an important event in the area’s development;
        c. Is associated with a notable person(s) or the work of a notable person(s);
        d. Is a typical example or is associated with a particular ethnic or other community group; or
        e. Is a unique example of an event in local history.
    3. Geographic/Environmental.
        a. Is geographically or regionally important.
D. General Criteria. Each property will also be evaluated based on physical integrity using the following criteria (a property need not meet all the following criteria):
    1. Shows character, interest or value as part of the development, heritage or cultural characteristics of the community, region, state or nation;
    2. Retains original design features, materials and/or character;
    3. Is in the original location or same historic context if it has been moved;
    4. Has been accurately reconstructed or restored. (Ord. 08-11 (part), 2008)

17.90.070 Historic districts.
A. For the purposes of this section, a district is a geographically definable area including a concentration, linkage or continuity of sites, buildings, structures and/or objects. A district is related by a pattern of either physical elements or social activities.
B. Significance is determined by applying criteria to the pattern(s) and unifying element(s).
C. Nominations will not be approved unless the application contains written approval from owners of at least seventy percent of the properties within the district boundaries.
D. Properties that do not contribute to the significance of the historic district may be included within the boundaries as long as the noncontributing elements do not noticeably detract from the district’s sense of time, place and historical development. Noncontributing elements will be evaluated for their magnitude of impact by considering their size, scale, design, location, and/or information potential.
E. District boundaries will be defined by visual changes, historical documentation of different associations or patterns of development, or evidence of changes in site type or site density as established through testing or survey.
F. When districts are designated, applicable design guidelines and other appropriate restrictions may be included as part of the designation.
G. In addition to meeting at least one of the criteria outlined in subsection 17.90.070(H) below, the designated contributing sites and structures within the district must be at least fifty years old. The district could be exempt from the age standard if the resources are found to be exceptionally important in other significant criteria.
H. Historic districts shall meet one or more of the following:
    1. Architectural:
        a. Exemplifies specific elements of an architectural style or period;
        b. Is an example of the work of an architect or builder who is recognized for expertise nationally, state-wide, regionally or locally;
        c. Demonstrates superior craftsmanship or high artistic value;
        d. Represents an innovation in construction, materials or design;
        e. Represents a built environment of a group of people in an era of history;
        f. Exhibits a pattern or grouping of elements representing at least one of the above criteria; or
        g. Is a significant historic remodel.
    2. Cultural:
        a. Is the site of an historic event that had an effect on society;
        b. Exemplifies cultural, political, economic or social heritage of the community; or
        c. Is associated with a notable person(s) or the work of a notable person(s).
    3. Geographic/environmental:
        a. Enhances sense of identity of the community; or
        b. Is an established and familiar natural setting or visual feature of the community.
    4. Archaeology/subsurface:
        a. Has the potential to make an important contribution to the area’s history or prehistory;
        b. Is associated with an important event in the area’s development;
        c. Is associated with a notable person(s) or the work of a notable person(s);
        d. Has distinctive characteristics of a type, period or manner of construction;
        e. Is of geographical importance. (Ord. 08-11 (part), 2008)

17.90.080 Review of alterations.
The owner is requested to consult with the Board before making any alteration. The Board shall determine if the alteration is compatible with the designation and by resolution, make a recommendation to the Council. Property owners making alterations or constructing new buildings on their property that are adjacent to registered building, landmarks, or districts are requested to consult with the Board prior to beginning construction. For this section, the term “alteration” shall mean any proposed modification to a designated historic site, structure or district, that could have an affect on the character of the historic resources relative to the criteria by which it was designated. Examples of alterations for structures may include additions, any exterior modifications, including signage to be affixed to the facade, and any interior modifications that may affect the characteristics for which the structure was designated. The Board shall make its review as per the time line in Section 17.90.050(A), Board Review, of this chapter.
A. Criteria to Review Alterations. In reviewing a proposed alteration, the Board shall consider the project in terms such as design, finish, material, scale, mass and height. When the subject site is in an historic district, the Board must also find that the proposed development is visually compatible with the development on adjacent properties, as well as any guidelines adopted as part of the given historic district designation. For this section, the term “compatible” shall mean consistent with, harmonious with and/or enhances the mixture of complementary architectural styles either of the architecture of an individual structure or the character of the surrounding structures. The Board will use the following criteria to determine compatibility of a proposed alteration:
    1. The effect upon the general historical and architectural character of the structure and property;
    2. The architectural style, arrangement, texture and material used on the existing and proposed structures and their relation and compatibility with other structures;
    3. The size of the structure, its setbacks, its site, location and the appropriateness thereof, when compared to existing structure and the site;
    4. The compatibility of accessory structures and fences with the main structure on the site, and with other structures;
    5. The effects of the proposed work in creating, changing, destroying, or otherwise impacting the exterior architectural features of the structure upon which such work is done;
    6. The condition of existing improvements and whether they are a hazard to public health and safety; or
    7. The effects of the proposed work upon the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of the property.
B. Existing non-conforming single household residential uses in buildings located in the C-3 zone that have been granted historic designation as per this chapter may expand contingent upon the applicant receiving approval from both the historic preservation board as well as the Planning Commission and the City Council. Additional criteria that shall be used to determine appropriateness of the alteration(s) include:
    1. The expansion shall not be greater than twenty-five percent of the total net floor area of the structure.
    2. Proof that the structure was used and has continued to be used as a residence prior to the adoption of the original zoning code on December 31, 1958.
    3. The addition shall be completed in a manner that will enhance and accent the historic character of the home with minimal alterations to the facade.
    4. The requirements of the latest adopted revision of the building code shall be met. (Ord. 19-13 § 18, 2019; Ord. 08-11 (part), 2008)

17.90.090 Revocation of designation.
If a building or special feature on a designated site has been altered in such a way so as to negate the features necessary to retain designation, the owner may apply to the Board for a revocation of the designation or the Board shall recommend revocation of the designation to the City Council in the absence of the owner’s application to do so. (Ord. 08-11 (part), 2008)

Tables
 Statutory References
 State Code Citation Table
 Cross-Reference Table
 Ordinance List and Disposition Table

Statutory References
for Utah Cities and Towns
The statutory references listed below refer the code user to state statutes applicable to Utah cities and towns. They are current through the 2015 First Special Session.

General Provisions
Creation of municipal corporations. Art. XI, § 5 of the Utah Constitution
Incorporation. U.C.A. § 10-2-101 et seq.
Classification. U.C.A. § 10-2-301 et seq.
Annexation. U.C.A. § 10-2-401 et seq.
Consolidation of municipalities. U.C.A. § 10-2-601 et seq.
City powers generally. U.C.A. § 10-8-1 et seq.
Town powers generally. U.C.A. § 10-8-94
Ordinances and resolutions. U.C.A. § 10-3-701 et seq.
Actions for violation of ordinances. U.C.A. § 10-7-65 et seq.
Punishment for ordinance violations. U.C.A. §§ 10-3-703, 10-8-84
Civil municipal ordinance violation administrative procedures. U.C.A. § 10-3-703.7
Jails and workhouses. U.C.A. § 10-8-58 et seq.
Election Code. U.C.A. Title 20A

Administration and Personnel
Election of governing body. U.C.A. § 10-3-201 et seq.
Officer eligibility and residency requirements. U.C.A. § 10-3-301
Vacancies in offices. U.C.A. § 10-3-302
Meetings of governing body. U.C.A. § 10-3-502 et seq.
Ordinances and resolutions. U.C.A. § 10-3-701 et seq.
Municipal administration. U.C.A. § 10-3-801 et seq.
Appointed officials and their duties. U.C.A. § 10-3-902 et seq.
Municipal Officers and Employees Ethics Act. U.C.A. § 10-3-1301 et seq.
Fire department. U.C.A. § 10-8-55
Civil service commission. U.C.A. § 10-3-1001 et seq.
Personnel rules and benefits. U.C.A. § 10-3-1103 et seq.

Revenue and Finance
Uniform Fiscal Procedures Act for Utah Cities. U.C.A. § 10-6-101 et seq.
Uniform Fiscal Procedures Act for Utah Towns. U.C.A. § 10-5-101 et seq.
Appropriations. U.C.A. § 10-8-2
Adoption of Utah Procurement Code authorized. U.C.A. § 10-7-86
Local Sales and Use Tax Act. U.C.A. § 59-12-201 et seq.
Actions to recover special taxes. U.C.A. § 10-7-32
Local Government Bonding Act. U.C.A. § 11-14-101 et seq.
Local taxation of utilities limitation. U.C.A. § 11-26-1 et seq.
Utah Refunding Bond Act. U.C.A. § 11-27-1 et seq.
Warrants and bonds. U.C.A. §§ 10-8-6 and 10-8-7
Specific city powers. U.C.A. § 10-8-1 et seq.

Business Taxes, Licenses and Regulations
Business licensing and regulation by cities. U.C.A. §§ 10-1-203, 10-8-4, 10-8-42 et seq., 10-8-66
Alcoholic Beverage Control Act. U.C.A. Title 32B
Pawnbrokers and secondhand dealers. U.C.A. § 11-6-1 et seq.

Animals
Generally. U.C.A. §§ 10-8-59, 10-8-65, 10-8-77
Dogs. U.C.A. § 10-8-65 and Title 18
Animal Welfare Act. U.C.A. § 11-46-101 et seq.

Health and Safety
Cooperation with county health department. U.C.A. § 10-7-3
Abatement of weeds and garbage. U.C.A. § 10-11-1 et seq.
County and Municipal Fireworks Act. U.C.A. § 11-3-1 et seq.
Combustibles and explosives. U.C.A. § 10-8-56
Miscellaneous health and safety powers. U.C.A. § 10-8-44 et seq.
Hospitals. U.C.A. § 10-8-90 et seq.

Public Peace, Morals and Welfare
Utah Criminal Code. U.C.A. Title 76
City powers generally. U.C.A. § 10-8-41 et seq.

Vehicles and Traffic
State traffic code. U.C.A. Title 41
Regulatory powers of local authorities. U.C.A. § 41-6a-208
City traffic regulations. U.C.A. § 10-8-30
Pedestrian Mall Law of Utah. U.C.A. § 10-15-1 et seq.

Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places
Contracts for public improvements. U.C.A. § 11-39-101 et seq.
Playgrounds. U.C.A. § 11-2-1 et seq.
Local Government Bonding Act. U.C.A. § 11-14-101 et seq.
Cemeteries. U.C.A. § 10-8-62
Utah Residential Rehabilitation Act. U.C.A. § 11-25-1 et seq.
Numbering houses and lots. U.C.A. § 10-8-31

Public Services
Water, lighting and sewers. U.C.A. §§ 10-7-4 et seq.; 10-8-14 et seq.
Sale of power plants. U.C.A. § 10-7-15 et seq.
Contracts for public improvements. U.C.A. § 11-39-101 et seq.
Sewage systems. U.C.A. §§ 10-8-38, 11-8-1 et seq.
Waterworks. U.C.A. § 10-8-15 et seq.
Cemeteries. U.C.A. § 10-8-62
Public transportation. U.C.A. § 10-8-86
Utah Public Transit District Act. U.C.A. § 17B-2a-801 et seq.
Prohibition on sale of waterworks or rights. Art. XI, § 6 of the Utah Constitution

Buildings and Construction
Building Inspector and Factory Built Housing Licensing Act. U.C.A. § 58-56-1 et seq.
Other building regulations. U.C.A. § 10-8-52 et seq.
Numbering houses and lots. U.C.A. § 10-8-31
Plumbing. U.C.A. § 10-8-46

Subdivisions
Plats and subdivisions. U.C.A. § 10-9a-601 et seq.

Zoning
Zoning power of cities and towns. U.C.A. § 10-9a-501 et seq.
Appeal authority. U.C.A. § 10-9a-701 et seq.

State Code Citation Table
This table lists Utah Code Annotated and Utah Constitution sections that are cited in the Moab Municipal Code. Thus, Section 10-6-12 of the Utah Code Annotated is cited in Section 1.01.010.
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
|               State Citation                | Code Section |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Title 2, U.C.A.                             | 3.17.020     |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Title 3, U.C.A.                             | 3.17.030     |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Title 7, U.C.A.                             | 16.04.010    |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Title 10, Chapter 1, U.C.A.                 | 3.17.060     |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 10-1-305(2)(b), U.C.A.                    | 3.17.030     |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 10-1-307(4), U.C.A.                       | 3.17.050     |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 10-1-402, U.C.A.                          | 3.18.010     |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 10-1-405, U.C.A.                          | 3.18.040     |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 10-1-408, U.C.A.                          | 3.18.050     |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 10-1-409, U.C.A.                          | 3.18.020     |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 10-2-401, U.C.A. et seq.                  | 1.32.030     |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 10-2-401.5, U.C.A.                        | 1.32.030     |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 10-2-418, U.C.A.                          | 1.32.030     |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 10-3-916, U.C.A.                          | 2.12.020     |
|                                             | 2.16.020     |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 10-3-1106, U.C.A.                         | 2.62.020     |
|                                             | 2.62.050     |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 10-3-1301, U.C.A. et seq.                 | 2.01.020     |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 10-3b-301, U.C.A.                         | 2.04.015     |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 10-3b-303, U.C.A.                         | 2.10.010     |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 10-6-12, U.C.A.                           | 1.01.010     |
|                                             | 1.01.030     |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 10-6-157, U.C.A.                          | 2.14.010     |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 10-9-30, U.C.A.                           | 16.28.060    |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 10-9a-207, U.C.A.                         | 16.08.010    |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 10-9a-511(3), U.C.A.                      | 17.12.110    |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 10-9a-608, U.C.A.                         | 16.08.050    |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 10-9a-802, U.C.A.                         | 17.65.140    |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 10-9a-803, U.C.A.                         | 17.65.140    |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Title 10, Chapter 11, U.C.A.                | 8.08.010     |
|                                             | 15.36.140    |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 10-11-14, U.C.A.                          | 8.08.150     |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Title 11, Chapter 3, U.C.A.                 | 8.12.010     |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 11-13-201, U.C.A.                         | 2.28.110     |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 11-36-201, U.C.A.                         | 13.25.010    |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 11-36-201, U.C.A. et seq.                 | 13.25.090    |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 11-56-102, U.C.A.                         | 5.64.080     |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 13-24-2, U.C.A.                           | 2.64.120     |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 17C-1-102, U.C.A. et seq.                 | 2.04.090     |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 26-24-22, U.C.A.                          | 17.74.140    |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Title 31, Chapter 41, U.C.A.                | 10.04.010    |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Title 32B, U.C.A.                           | 5.20.100     |
|                                             | 5.20.115     |
|                                             | 5.20.150     |
|                                             | 5.20.350     |
|                                             | Ch. 5.20     |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 32B-1-202, U.C.A.                         | 5.20.200     |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 34A-5-101, U.C.A.                         | 9.40.010     |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Title 41, Chapter 1, U.C.A.                 | 10.04.010    |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 41-1-49.8, U.C.A.                         | 10.12.020    |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Title 41, Chapter 2, U.C.A.                 | 10.04.010    |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Title 41, Chapter 6, U.C.A.                 | 10.04.010    |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Title 41, Chapter 7, U.C.A.                 | 10.04.010    |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Title 41, Chapter 8, U.C.A.                 | 10.04.010    |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Title 41, Chapter 21, U.C.A.                | 10.04.010    |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Title 41, Chapter 22, U.C.A.                | 10.04.010    |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Title 41, Chapter 24, U.C.A.                | 10.04.010    |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Title 54, U.C.A.                            | 3.12.040     |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 57-21-1, U.C.A. et seq.                   | 9.36.010     |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 57-37a-5, U.C.A.                          | 1.08.040     |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 59-1-104, U.C.A.                          | 3.17.030     |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Title 59, Chapter 12, U.C.A.                | 3.12.020     |
|                                             | 3.12.050     |
|                                             | 3.12.060     |
|                                             | 3.17.010     |
|                                             | 3.17.020     |
|                                             | 3.17.030     |
|                                             | 3.17.060     |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 59-12-102, U.C.A.                         | 3.13.010     |
|                                             | 3.15.010     |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 59-12-103, U.C.A.                         | 3.13.030     |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 59-12-103(1), U.C.A.                      | 3.13.020     |
|                                             | 3.15.020     |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 59-12-104, U.C.A.                         | 3.13.030     |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 59-12-106, U.C.A.                         | 3.12.070     |
|                                             | 3.13.040     |
|                                             | 3.14.050     |
|                                             | 3.15.040     |
|                                             | 3.17.070     |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Title 59, Chapter 13, U.C.A.                | 3.17.030     |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 61-2-2, U.C.A.                            | 9.36.050     |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 62A-5B-102, U.C.A.                        | 6.04.010     |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 62A-5b-102, U.C.A. – § 62A-5b-106, U.C.A. | 6.04.320     |
|                                             | 6.04.330     |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 63-2-201(3)(b), U.C.A.                    | 2.64.030     |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 63-2-206, U.C.A.                          | 2.64.050     |
|                                             | 2.64.200     |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 63-2-301, U.C.A.                          | 2.64.180     |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 63-2-304(1), U.C.A.                       | 2.64.050     |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 63-2-304(2), U.C.A.                       | 2.64.050     |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 63-2-304(34), U.C.A.                      | 2.64.090     |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 63-2-308, U.C.A.                          | 2.64.120     |
|                                             | 2.64.160     |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 63-2-404(8), U.C.A.                       | 2.64.050     |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 63-2-801, U.C.A.                          | 2.64.050     |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 63-34-13, U.C.A.                          | 17.72.240    |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 63-34-13(4)(b), U.C.A.                    | 17.72.240    |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 63-46b-3, U.C.A.                          | 2.64.090     |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 63G-2-103, U.C.A.                         | 2.01.030     |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 76-1-101, U.C.A. et seq.                  | 1.08.040     |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 76-3-204, U.C.A.                          | 8.04.130     |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 76-3-301, U.C.A.                          | 8.04.130     |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 78-24-8, U.C.A.                           | 2.64.120     |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+
| § 78-38-3, U.C.A.                           | 12.24.150    |
+---------------------------------------------+--------------+

Cross-Reference Table
This table provides users with the current disposition of sections from the prior code. Thus, prior code Section 1-1 currently appears in this code as Section 1.04.010.
+--------------------+-------------------+
|     prior code     |      Herein       |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 1-1                | 1.04.010          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 1-2                | 1.04.020          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 1-3                | 1.04.030          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 1-4                | 1.04.040          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 1-5                | 1.04.060          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 1-6                | 1.04.070          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 1-7                | 1.08.010          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 1-8                | 1.08.020          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 1-9                | 1.12.010          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 1-10               | 1.12.020          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 1-11               | 9.04.110          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 1-12               | 1.24.010          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 1-13               | 1.28.010          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 1-14               | 1.20.010          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 1-15               | 1.04.050          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 1-16               | 1.16.010          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 2-1                | Not codified      |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 2-2                | Repealed by 18-04 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 2-3                | 2.48.010          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 2-4                | Repealed by 18-04 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 2-5                | 2.44.010          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 2-6                | Repealed by 18-04 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 2-7                | 2.04.010          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 2-8                | 2.04.020          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 2-10               | 2.04.040          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 2-11               | 2.04.050          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 2-12               | 2.04.060          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 2-13               | 2.04.070          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 2-14               | 2.04.080          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 2-15               | Not codified      |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 2-16               | 2.08.010          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 2-17               | 2.08.020          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 2-18               | 2.08.030          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 2-19               | Not codified      |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 2-20               | Not codified      |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 2-21               | Not codified      |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 2-22               | Not codified      |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 2-23               | Not codified      |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 2-24               | Not codified      |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 2-25               | Not codified      |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 2-27               | 2.12.010          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 2-28               | Not codified      |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 2-29               | Not codified      |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 2-30               | 2.12.020          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 2-31               | 2.12.030          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 2-32               | 2.12.040          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 2-33               | 2.16.010          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 2-34               | 2.16.020          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 2-35               | 2.16.030          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 2-36               | 2.16.040          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 2-37               | 2.16.050          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 2-38               | 2.16.060          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 2-39               | Repealed by 85-08 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 2-40               | Repealed by 85-08 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 2-43               | 2.24.010          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 2-44               | 2.24.020          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 2-45               | 2.24.030          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 2-46               | 2.24.040          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 2-47               | 2.24.050          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 2-48               | 2.24.060          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 2-49               | 2.24.070          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 2-60               | 2.52.010          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 2-61               | 2.52.020          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 2-62               | 2.52.030          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 2-64               | 2.52.050          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 2-65               | 2.52.060          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 2-66               | 5.60.010          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 2-67               | 5.60.020          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 2-68               | 5.60.030          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 4-1--4-43          | Repealed by 07-12 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 5-1--5-5           | Repealed by 04-02 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 6-1--6-8           | Repealed by 03-05 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 7-1                | Repealed by 04-02 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 7-2                | Repealed by 8-80  |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 8-1                | 3.04.010          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 8-2                | 3.04.020          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 8-3                | 3.04.030          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 8-4                | 3.04.040          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 8-5                | 3.04.050          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 8-6                | 3.04.060          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 8-7                | 3.08.010          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 8-8                | Repealed by 85-08 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 8-9                | 3.04.070          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 8-10               | Repealed by 85-08 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| "                  | Repealed by 85-08 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 8-11               | Repealed by 85-08 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 8-12               | Repealed by 85-08 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 8-13               | 3.04.080          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 9-1                | 9.04.080          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 9-2--9-8           | Repealed by 85-08 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 9-12--9-24         | Repealed by 94-17 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 10-1--10-9         | Repealed by 85-08 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 11-1--11-16        | Repealed by 04-06 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 12-1               | 8.16.010          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 12-2               | 8.16.020          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 12-3               | 8.16.030          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 12-4               | 8.16.040          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 12-5               | 8.16.050          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 12-6               | 8.16.060          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 12-7--12-41        | Repealed by 85-08 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 13-1--13-23        | Repealed by 03-05 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 13-24              | Repealed by 97-21 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 13-25              | Repealed by 97-21 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 13-26              | Repealed by 03-05 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 13-27              | Repealed by 03-05 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 13-28--13-31       | Repealed by 85-08 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 13-32--13-42       | Repealed by 03-05 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 14-1               | 10.04.010         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 14-2--14-8         | Repealed by 85-08 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 14-9               | 10.04.030         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 14-10              | 10.04.040         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 14-11              | 10.04.050         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 14-12              | 10.04.060         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 14-13              | 10.04.070         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 14-14              | 10.04.080         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 14-15 (Schedule 1) | 10.04.090         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 14-15 (Schedule 2) | 10.04.110         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 14-15 (Schedule 3) | 10.04.120         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 14-15 (Schedule 4) | 10.04.130         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 14-15 (Schedule 5) | 10.04.140         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 14-16              | 10.04.250         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 14-17              | Not codified      |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 14-18              | Not codified      |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 14-19              | 10.08.010         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 14-20              | 10.08.020         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 14-21              | 10.08.030         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 14-22              | 10.08.040         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 14-23              | 10.08.050         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 14-24              | 10.08.060         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 14-25              | 10.08.070         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 14-26              | 10.08.080         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 14-27              | 10.08.090         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 14-28              | 10.08.100         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 15-1--15-45        | Repealed by 94-17 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 16-1               | 8.08.020          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 16-2               | 8.08.030          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 16-3               | 8.08.040          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 16-4--16-6         | Repealed by 85-08 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 16-7               | 8.08.050          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 16-8               | 8.08.060          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 16-9               | Repealed by 85-08 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 16-10              | Repealed by 85-08 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 16-10(a)           | 8.08.010          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 16-10(b)           | 8.08.070          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 16-10(c)           | 8.08.080          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 16-10(d)           | 8.08.090          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 16-10(e)           | 8.08.100          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 16-10(f)           | 8.08.110          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 16-10(g)           | 8.08.120          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 16-10(h)           | 8.08.130          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 16-10(i)           | 8.08.140          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 16-10(j)           | 8.08.150          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 17-1               | 9.16.030          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 17-2               | 9.32.010          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 17-3               | 9.08.010          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 17-4               | 9.12.010          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 17-5               | 9.32.030          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 17-6               | 9.24.010          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 17-7               | 9.24.020          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 17-8               | 9.16.010          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 17-9               | 9.12.020          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 17-10              | 9.16.020          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 17-11              | 9.12.030          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 17-12              | 9.16.040          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 17-14              | 9.12.040          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 17-15              | 9.12.050          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 17-16              | 9.12.060          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 17-17              | 9.12.070          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 17-18              | 9.12.080          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 17-19              | 9.12.090          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 17-20              | 9.16.050          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 17-21              | 9.16.060          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 17-22              | 9.12.120          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 17-22.1            | 9.12.130          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 17-23              | 9.12.140          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 17-24              | 9.12.150          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 17-25              | 9.12.160          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 17-26              | 9.12.170          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 17-27              | 9.12.180          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 17-28              | 9.12.190          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 17-29              | 9.12.200          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 17-30              | 9.08.020          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 17-31              | Repealed by 85-08 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 17-32              | Repealed by 85-08 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 17-33              | 9.20.010          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 17-34              | 9.04.070          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 17-35              | 9.20.020          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 17-36              | 9.20.030          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 17-37              | 9.12.100          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 17-38              | 9.12.110          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 17-39              | 9.32.020          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 17-40              | 9.16.070          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 17-41              | 9.08.030          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 17-42              | 9.24.030          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 17-43              | 9.32.040          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 17-44              | 9.20.040          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 17-45              | 9.28.020          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 17-46              | Repealed by 85-08 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 17-47              | Repealed by 85-08 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 17-48              | 12.20.040         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 17-49              | Not codified      |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 17-50              | 8.08.160          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 18-1               | 5.32.010          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 18-2               | 5.32.020          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 18-4               | 5.32.040          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 18-6               | 5.32.060          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 19-1--19-4         | Repealed by 04-02 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 20-1               | 2.56.010          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 20-1-7             | 9.04.020          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 20-1-8             | 9.04.030          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 20-1-9             | 9.04.040          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 20-1-10            | 9.04.050          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 20-1-11            | 9.04.060          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 20-2               | 2.56.020          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 20-2-1             | 9.04.090          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 20-3               | 2.56.030          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 20-3-1             | 9.04.100          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 20-3-2             | 9.04.140          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 20-4               | 2.56.040          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 20-4-1             | 9.04.120          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 20-4-2             | 9.04.130          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 20-6               | 9.04.010          |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 21-2               | Repealed by 85-08 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 21-3               | 12.04.010         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 21-4               | 12.04.020         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| "                  | 12.04.030         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 21-5               | 12.04.040         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 21-6               | 12.04.050         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 21-7               | 12.08.050         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 21-8               | 12.04.060         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 21-9               | 12.04.070         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 21-10              | 12.04.080         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 21-11              | 12.04.090         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 21-12              | 12.04.100         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 21-13              | 12.16.010         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 21-13A             | 12.16.020         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 21-14              | 12.16.030         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 21-15              | 12.04.110         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 21-16              | 12.16.040         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 21-17              | 12.16.050         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 21-18              | 12.04.120         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 21-19              | 12.16.060         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 21-20              | 12.04.130         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 21-21              | 12.04.140         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 21-22              | 12.04.150         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 21-23              | Repealed by 85-08 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 21-24              | 12.08.010         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 21-25              | 12.08.020         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 21-26              | 12.08.030         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 21-27              | 12.08.040         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 21-28              | 12.12.010         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 21-29              | 12.12.020         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 21-30              | 12.12.030         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 22-1               | Repealed by 85-08 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 22-1-1             | 16.04.010         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 22-2               | Repealed by 85-08 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 22-2-1             | 16.08.010         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 22-2-2             | 16.08.020         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 22-2-3             | 16.08.030         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 22-2-4             | 16.08.040         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 22-3               | Repealed by 85-08 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 22-3-1             | 16.12.010         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 22-3-1(1)          | 16.12.020         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 22-3-1(2)          | 16.12.030         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 22-3-1(3)          | 16.12.040         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 22-3-2             | 16.12.050         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 22-4               | Repealed by 85-08 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 22-4-1             | 16.16.010         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 22-4-1(1)          | 16.16.020         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 22-4-1(2)          | 16.16.030         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 22-5               | Repealed by 85-08 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 22-5-1(1)          | 16.20.020         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 22-5-1(2)          | 16.20.030         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 22-5-1(3)          | 16.20.040         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 22-5-1(4)          | 16.20.050         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 22-5-2             | 16.20.060         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 22-6               | Repealed by 85-08 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 22-6-1             | 16.24.010         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 22-6-2             | 16.24.020         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 22-7               | Repealed by 85-08 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 22-7-1             | 16.28.010         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 22-7-2             | 16.28.020         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 22-7-3             | 16.28.030         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 22-7-4             | 16.28.050         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 22-7-5             | 16.28.060         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 22-7-6             | 16.28.040         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 22-8               | Repealed by 85-08 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 22-9--22-33        | Repealed by 85-08 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 22-55-1            | 16.20.010         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 23-1--23-15        | Repealed by 03-05 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 24-1               | 15.36.010         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 24-2               | 15.36.020         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 24-3(A)            | 15.36.030         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 24-3(B)            | 15.36.040         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 24-3(B)(1)         | 15.36.050         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 24-3(B)(2)         | 15.36.060         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 24-3(B)(2)(b)      | 15.36.080         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 24-3(B)(2)(c)      | 15.36.090         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 24-3(B)(3)(a)(1)   | 15.36.100         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 24-3(B)(3)(a)(2)   | 15.36.110         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 24-3(B)(3)(a)(3)   | 15.36.120         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 24-3(B)(3)(b)      | 15.36.140         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 24-3(B)(3)(c)      | 15.36.150         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 24-3(B)(3)(d)      | 15.36.160         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 24-3(B)(3)(e)      | 15.36.170         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 24-5(A)            | 15.36.220         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 24-5(B)            | 15.36.230         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 24-5(B)(1)         | 15.36.240         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 24-5(B)(2)         | 15.36.250         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 24-6               | 15.36.260         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 24-6(A)            | 15.36.270         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 24-6(B)            | 15.36.280         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 24-7               | 15.36.290         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 24-8               | 15.36.300         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 24-9               | 15.36.310         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 24-9(A)            | 15.36.320         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 24-9(B)            | 15.36.330         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 24-9(C)            | 15.36.340         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 26-1               | 13.04.010         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 26-2               | 13.04.020         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 26-29              | 13.04.030         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 26-30              | 13.04.040         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 26-31              | 13.04.050         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 26-32              | 13.04.060         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 26-33              | 13.04.070         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 26-34              | 13.04.080         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 26-35              | 13.04.090         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 26-36--26-43       | Repealed by 19-14 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 26-44              | 13.12.010         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 26-45              | 13.12.020         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 26-46              | 13.12.030         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 26-47              | 13.12.040         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 26-48              | 13.12.050         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 26-49              | 13.12.060         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 26-50              | 13.12.070         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 26-51              | 13.12.080         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 26-52              | 13.12.090         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 26-53              | 13.12.100         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 26-54              | 13.12.110         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 26-55              | 13.16.010         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 26-56              | 13.16.020         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 26-57              | 13.16.030         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 26-58              | 13.16.040         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 26-59              | 13.16.050         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 26-60              | 13.16.060         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 26-62              | Repealed by 98-15 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 26-63              | Repealed by 98-15 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 26-64              | 13.24.030         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 26-65              | 13.24.040         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 26-66              | 13.24.050         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 26-67              | 13.24.060         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-1-1             | 17.03.010         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-1-2             | 17.03.020         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-1-3             | 17.03.030         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-1-4             | 17.03.040         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-2-1             | 17.06.010         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-2-2             | 17.06.020         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-3-1             | 17.09.010         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-3-2             | 17.09.020         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-3-3             | 17.09.030         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-3-4             | 17.09.040         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-3-5             | 17.09.050         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-3-7             | 17.09.070         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-3-8             | 17.09.080         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-3-9             | 17.09.090         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-3-10            | 17.09.100         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-3-11            | 17.09.110         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-3-12            | 17.09.120         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-3-13            | 17.09.130         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-3-14            | 17.09.140         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-3-15            | 17.09.150         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-3-16            | 17.09.160         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-3-17            | 17.09.170         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-3-18            | 17.09.180         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-3-19            | 17.09.190         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-3-20            | 17.09.200         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-3-21            | 17.09.210         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-3-21(A)         | 17.09.220         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-3-21(B)         | 17.09.230         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-3-21(C)         | 17.09.240         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-3-21(D)         | 17.09.250         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-3-21(E)         | 17.09.260         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-3-21(F)         | 17.09.270         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-3-21(G)         | 17.09.280         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-3-21(H)         | 17.09.290         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-3-21(I)         | 17.09.300         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-3-21(J)         | 17.09.310         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-3-21(K)         | 17.09.320         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-3-21(L)         | 17.09.330         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-3-21(M)         | 17.09.340         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-3-23            | 17.09.360         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-3-24            | 17.09.370         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-3-24(A)         | 17.09.380         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-3-24(B)         | 17.09.390         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-3-24(C)         | 17.09.400         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-3-24(D)         | 17.09.410         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-3-24(E)         | 17.09.420         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-3-25            | 17.09.430         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-3-25(A)         | 17.09.440         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-3-25(B)         | 17.09.450         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-3-25(C)         | 17.09.460         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-3-25(D)         | 17.09.470         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-3-26            | 17.09.480         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-3-27            | 17.09.490         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-3-27(A)         | 17.09.500         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-3-27(B)         | 17.09.510         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-3-28(A)         | Repealed by 01-05 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-3-28(B)         | Repealed by 01-05 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-3-28(E)         | 17.09.035         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-3-28(F)         | Repealed by 08-05 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-3-28(G)         | Repealed by 08-05 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-3-28(H)         | Repealed by 08-05 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-3-28(K)         | Repealed by 01-05 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-4-4             | 17.12.120         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-4-5             | Repealed by 08-03 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-4-6             | Not codified      |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-4-7             | 17.12.170         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-5-1             | 17.15.020         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-5-2             | 17.15.030         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-5-3             | 17.15.040         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-6-1             | 17.15.050         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-7-1             | 17.18.010         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-7-2             | 17.18.020         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-7-3             | 17.18.030         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-7-4             | 17.18.040         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-7-5             | 17.18.050         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-7-6             | 17.18.060         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-7-7             | 17.18.070         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-9-1             | 17.24.010         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-9-2             | 17.24.020         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-9-3             | 17.24.030         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-9-4             | 17.24.040         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-9-5             | 17.24.050         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-11-1            | 17.30.010         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-11-2            | 17.30.020         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-11-3            | 17.30.030         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-11-4            | 17.30.040         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-11-5            | 17.30.050         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-12-1            | 17.33.010         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-12-2            | 17.33.030         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-12-3            | 17.33.040         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-12-4            | 17.33.050         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-13-1            | 17.36.010         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-13-2            | 17.36.020         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-13-3            | 17.36.030         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-13-4            | 17.36.040         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-13-5            | 17.36.050         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-13-6            | 17.36.060         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-13-7            | 17.36.070         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-13-8            | 17.36.080         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-14-1--27-14-6   | Repealed by 08-06 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-15-1            | 17.42.010         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-15-2            | 17.42.020         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-15-3            | 17.42.030         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-15-4            | 17.42.050         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-15-5            | 17.42.060         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-15-6            | 17.42.070         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-16-1            | 17.45.010         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-16-2            | 17.45.020         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-16-3            | 17.45.030         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-16-4            | 17.45.040         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-16-5            | 17.45.050         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-16-6            | 17.45.060         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-16-7            | 17.45.070         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-17-1            | 17.48.010         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-17-2            | 17.48.020         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-17-3            | 17.48.030         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-17-4            | 17.48.040         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-17-5            | 17.48.050         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-17-6            | 17.48.060         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-17-7            | 17.48.070         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-18-1            | 17.51.010         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-18-2            | 17.51.020         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-18-3(A)         | 17.51.030         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-18-3(B)         | 17.51.040         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-18-3(C)         | 17.51.050         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-18-3(D)         | 17.51.060         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-18-4            | 17.51.070         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-19-1            | 17.54.010         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-19-2            | 17.54.020         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-19-3            | 17.54.030         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-19-4            | 17.54.040         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-19-5            | 17.54.050         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-19-6            | 17.54.060         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-19-7            | 17.54.070         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-19-8            | 17.54.080         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-21-1--27-21-10  | Repealed by 94-20 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-22-1            | Repealed by 94-20 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-22-2            | Repealed by 94-20 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-23-1            | 17.66.010         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-23-2            | 17.66.070         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-23-3(A)         | 17.66.080         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-23-3(B)         | 17.66.090         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-23-3(C)         | 17.66.040         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-23-3(D)         | 17.66.050         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-23-3(E)         | 17.66.100         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-23-4            | 17.66.110         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-23-5            | 17.66.120         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-23-6            | Repealed by 06-01 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-23-7            | 17.66.140         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-23-8            | 17.66.150         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-23-9            | 17.66.160         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-23-10           | 17.66.170         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-23-12           | 17.66.180         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-23-13           | 17.66.190         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-23-14           | 17.66.200         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-23-15           | 17.66.210         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-23-16           | 17.66.220         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-24-1            | Repealed by 94-20 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-24-2            | Repealed by 94-20 |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-25-1            | 17.72.010         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-25-2            | 17.72.020         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-25-3            | 17.72.030         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-25-4            | 17.72.040         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-25-5            | 17.72.050         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-25-6            | 17.72.060         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-25-7            | 17.72.070         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-25-8            | 17.72.080         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-25-9            | 17.72.090         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-25-22           | 17.72.250         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-25-23           | 17.72.260         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-26-1            | Not codified      |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-26-2            | 17.75.010         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 27-26-3            | 17.75.020         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 29-1-1             | 12.20.010         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 29-1-2             | 12.20.020         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 29-1-3             | 12.20.030         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 243(B)(2)(a)       | 15.36.070         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 243(B)(3)(a)(4)    | 15.36.130         |
+--------------------+-------------------+
| 273-27(C)          | 17.09.520         |
+--------------------+-------------------+

Ordinance List and Disposition Table
This table lists all ordinances. If an ordinance is codified, its location in the code is cited by chapter number at the end of the ordinance description. Ordinances are codified if they are general, permanent, and/or include penalty provisions for noncompliance. “Not codified” indicates that the ordinance could have been codified but was not for some reason (e.g., superseded by a later ordinance, codified in a separate publication). “Special” means the ordinance was special in nature or for a specific period of time (e.g., budget, annexation, tax levy).
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Ordinance Number |                                Description                                |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9-75             | Amends first paragraph of prior code § 14-1, traffic code                 |
|                  | (Repealed by 85-08)                                                       |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 10-75            | Rezone (Special)                                                          |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 11-75            | Amends prior code § 19-1, plumbing code (Repealed by 04-02)               |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 12-75            | Rezone (Special)                                                          |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1-76             | Amends prior code § 5-1, building code (Repealed by 6-79)                 |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 2-76             | Rezone (Special)                                                          |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 3-76             | Rezone (Special)                                                          |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 4-76             | Amends prior code § 4-19, dogs at large (Repealed by 85-08)               |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 5-76             | Amends prior code §§ 13-28 and 13-30, transient merchants                 |
|                  | (Repealed by 85-08)                                                       |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1-77             | Rezone (Special)                                                          |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 2-77             | Rezone (Special)                                                          |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 3-77             | Amends prior code §§ 26-40, 26-62 and 26-63, water and sewer              |
|                  | rates (Repealed by 19-14)                                                 |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 4-77             | Amends prior code § 26-59, installation of water service pipes            |
|                  | (13.16)                                                                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 5-77             | Street vacation (Special)                                                 |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| —                | Amends prior code § 5-1 and repeals prior code § 5-3, building            |
|                  | code (Repealed by 04-02)                                                  |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 6-77             | Office of city manager (Repealed by 85-08)                                |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 7-77             | Rezone (Special)                                                          |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 8-77             | Rezone (Special)                                                          |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9-77             | Amends prior code §§ 5-1 and 5-3, building code (Repealed                 |
|                  | by 04-02)                                                                 |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 10-77            | Amends prior code § 7-2, electrical code (Repealed by 8-80)               |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 11-77            | Amends prior code § 19-2, plumbing code (Repealed by 8-80)                |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 12-77            | Street vacation (Special)                                                 |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 13-77            | Adds prior code §§ 13-32 through 13-42, private detectives                |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 14-77            | Amends prior code §§ 22-28 and 22-29, subdivisions (Repealed              |
|                  | by 85-08)                                                                 |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 15-77            | Amends prior code §§ 26-39, 26-40, 26-41 and 26-55, water                 |
|                  | and sewers (13.16)                                                        |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 16-77            | Street name change (Special)                                              |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 17-77            | Amends subsections A and B of § 7, CATV franchise (Special)               |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 18-77            | Adds subsection H to prior code § 27-4-2, zoning                          |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 19-77            | Amends prior code § 5-3, building code                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 20-77            | Adds prior code § 24-6, numbering of mobile home lots                     |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 21-77            | Amends prior code §§ 4-15 and 4-32, dogs (Repealed by 85-08)              |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 22-77            | Adds prior code Ch. 5A, energy conservation in new construction           |
|                  | (Repealed by 04-02)                                                       |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1-78             | Special Improvement District No. 4 (Special)                              |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 2-78             | Rezone (Special)                                                          |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 3-78             | Rezone (Special)                                                          |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 4-78             | Rezone (Special)                                                          |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 5-78             | Office of city administrator/recorder (Repealed by 85-08)                 |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 6-78             | Rezone (Special)                                                          |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 7-78             | Rezone (Special)                                                          |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1-79             | Amends subsections A and B of § 7 of Ord. 17-77, CATV franchise           |
|                  | (Special)                                                                 |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 2-79             | Accepts legality of certain lot (Special)                                 |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 3-79             | Amends definition of owner in prior code § 4-9, dogs (Repealed            |
|                  | by 85-08)                                                                 |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 4-79             | Adopts 1978 Utah Traffic Code (10.04)                                     |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 5-79             | Adds prior code § 17-22.1, marijuana (9.12)                               |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 6-79             | Adopts 1979 Uniform Building Code; repeals Ord. 1-76 (Repealed            |
|                  | by 04-02)                                                                 |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 7-79             | Adopts 1979 Uniform Mechanical Code (Repealed by 04-02)                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 8-79             | Adopts 1979 Uniform Fire Code (Repealed by 04-02)                         |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9-79             | Adds prior code §§ 4-50 through 4-56, cats (Repealed by 85-08)            |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 10-79            | Adds definition to prior code § 27-2-2 and adds prior code                |
|                  | § 27-4-7, zoning (17.06, 17.12)                                           |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1-80             | Flood damage prevention                                                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 2-80             | Vacates utility easement (Special)                                        |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 3-80             | Designates infractions and misdemeanors (Repealed by 85-04)               |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 4-80             | Funds for municipal swimming pool (Special)                               |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 5-80             | Amends prior code § 27-25-1, zoning (17.72)                               |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 6-80             | Amends prior code § 27-3-28, zoning (Repealed by 85-04)                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 7-80             | Rezone (Special)                                                          |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 8-80             | Repeals and replaces prior code §§ 5-3, 7-2 and 19-2, permit              |
|                  | fees (Repealed by 3-81)                                                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9-80             | Amends prior code § 17-6, curfew (9.24)                                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 10-80            | Amends prior code § 5-1, building code (Repealed by 04-02)                |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 11-80            | Amends prior code §§ 3-3, 3-9, and 3-17, alcoholic beverages              |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 12-80            | Adds prior code § 17-50, violation to maintain a nuisance                 |
|                  | (8.08)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 13-80            | Transfer of funds (Special)                                               |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1-81             | Amends prior code § 26-63-1, sewer rate schedule                          |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 2-81             | Elections (Repealed by 86-01)                                             |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 3-81             | Amends prior code § 5-3; repeals Ord. 3-81, building code                 |
|                  | (Repealed by 04-02)                                                       |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 4-81             | Amends prior code Ch. 4, animal control (Repealed by 07-12)               |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 5-81             | Transient merchants, itinerant merchants and itinerant vendors            |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 6-81             | Transfer of funds (Special)                                               |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 7-81             | Adds prior code §§ 17-2-1 through 17-2-10, fireworks (Repealed            |
|                  | by 85-05)                                                                 |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 8-81             | Adds prior code §§ 20-1-7 through 20-1-11 and 20-2-1, 20-3-1,             |
|                  | 20-3-2 and 20-4-1, police officer, fireman and governmental               |
|                  | operation (9.04)                                                          |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9-81             | Adds prior code Ch. 28, amusements                                        |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 10-81            | Adds prior code Ch. 29, offenses related to parks and recreational        |
|                  | areas (12.20)                                                             |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 11-81            | Subdivision vacation (Special)                                            |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 12-81            | Conveyance of property (Special)                                          |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 13-81            | Amends prior code Ch. 22, subdivisions (16.04, 16.08, 16.12,              |
|                  | 16.16, 16.20, 16.24, 16.28)                                               |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 14-81            | Adds prior code § 27-2-39(A) and amends prior code § 27-3-27,             |
|                  | zoning (17.06, 17.09)                                                     |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 15-81            | Street vacation (Special)                                                 |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 16-81            | Accepts donation of building (Special)                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 82-01            | Transfer of funds (Special)                                               |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 82-02            | Rezone (Special)                                                          |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 82-03            | Street vacation (Special)                                                 |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 82-04            | Street vacation (Special)                                                 |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 83-01            | Rezone (Special)                                                          |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 83-02            | Adds prior code § 4-15(4), animals                                        |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 83-03            | Repeals and replaces prior code § 14-1, driving under the                 |
|                  | influence (10.04)                                                         |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 84-01            | Repeals Ords. 6-77 and 5-78 (Repealer)                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 84-02            | Salaries for mayor and recorder                                           |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 84-03            | Amends prior code §§ 2-8-50 and 2-8-56 of Art. VIII, purchasing           |
|                  | agent (Repealed by 16-13)                                                 |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 84-04            | Amends prior code §§ 3-9 and 3-14, alcoholic beverages                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 84-05            | Vacation of property (Special)                                            |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 84-06            | Treasurer's salary                                                        |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 84-07            | Disabled parking zones (10.12)                                            |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 84-08            | Amends Schedule 2 of prior code § 14-15, parking (10.04)                  |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 84-09            | Rezone (Special)                                                          |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 84-10            | Uniform local sales and use tax                                           |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 84-11            | Amends prior code § 4-23, conveyance of livestock                         |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 84-12            | Rezone (Special)                                                          |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 85-01            | Amends prior code §§ 27-7-2(F) and 27-19-2(C), zoning (17.18,             |
|                  | 17.54)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 85-02            | Repeals Ord. 6-80 (Repealer)                                              |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 85-03            | Amends prior code § 20-4-2, failure to appear (9.04)                      |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 85-04            | General penalty; repeals Ord. 3-80 (1.08)                                 |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 85-05            | Fireworks; repeals Ord. 7-81 (8.12)                                       |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 85-06            | Salaries                                                                  |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 85-07            | Personnel policies (Not codified)                                         |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 85-08            | Repeals prior code §§ 2-39, 2-40, 4-1—4-36, 8-8, 8-10—8-12,               |
|                  | 9-2—9-8, 10-1—10-9, 12-7—12-19, 12-20—12-41, 13-28—13-31,                 |
|                  | 14-1—14-8, 16-4—16-6, paragraphs 2 and 3 of 16-8, 16-9, 17-31,            |
|                  | 17-32, 17-46, 17-47, 21-2, 21-23, 22-1—22-33 and 23-11(E),                |
|                  | and Ords. 9-75, 4-76, 5-76, 6-77, 14-77, 5-78, 3-79 and 9-79,             |
|                  | makes various changes prior to codification (8.08)                        |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 85-09            | Alcoholic beverages                                                       |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 86-01            | Repeals Ord. 2-81 (Repealer)                                              |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 86-02            | Street vacation (Special)                                                 |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 86-03            | Sales and use tax                                                         |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 86-04            | Salaries for city officials                                               |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 86-05            | Street numbers required on homes and businesses (12.28)                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 86-06            | Amends §§ 1.08.010, 1.08.030, 5.12.170, 5.20.550, 6.04.400,               |
|                  | 6.04.470, 6.04.620, 9.04.130, 9.04.140, 9.12.130, 9.16.010,               |
|                  | 10.04.250, 10.08.100, 12.20.040, 15.40.310, 16.28.060, 17.75.020,         |
|                  | penalties for infractions and misdemeanors (1.08, 9.04, 9.12,             |
|                  | 9.16, 10.04, 10.08, 12.20, 16.28, 17.75)                                  |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 87-01            | Backflow prevention devices (13.10)                                       |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 87-02            | Adopts Moab Municipal Code (1.01, 13.10)                                  |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 87-03            | Amends § 5.20.210, beer license applications                              |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 87-04            | Amends prior code § 13-24, Ord. 3-77 §§ 26-40, 26-62, 26-63,              |
|                  | 26-66, Ord. 3-81 § 5-3(2), (14), fees, taxes and schedules                |
|                  | (13.24)                                                                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 87-05            | Street vacation (Special)                                                 |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 87-07            | Adds Ch. 17.35, mobile home/recreational vehicle parks zone               |
|                  | (17.35)                                                                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 88-01            | Sidewalks, curbs and gutters required at time of construction             |
|                  | (12.08)                                                                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 88-02            | Installation of water treatment devices (13.10)                           |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 88-04            | Salaries for city officials                                               |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 88-05            | Amends Ch. 17.03, zoning (17.30)                                          |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 88-06            | Redevelopment agency created (2.04)                                       |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 89-01            | Rezone (Special)                                                          |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 89-02            | Flood damage prevention                                                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 89-03            | Amends § 3.2 of Ord. 89-02, flood damage prevention                       |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 89-04            | Amends § 6.04.600, police officer authorized as animal control            |
|                  | officer                                                                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 89-05            | Adds § 6.04.295, restraint of female dogs or cats in heat                 |
|                  | (Repealed by 07-12)                                                       |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 89-06            | Amends § 5.08.150, business license fees (Repealed by 03-05)              |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 89-10            | Amends § 1.08.030, violations of city code (1.08)                         |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 90-02            | Street vacation (Special)                                                 |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 90-03            | Amends Ords. 89-02 and 89-03, floodplain management                       |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 90-04            | Sales and use tax (3.12)                                                  |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 90-05            | Cable television franchise (Special)                                      |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 90-06            | Adds Ch. 17.70, bed and breakfast facilities                              |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 90-07            | Repeals and replaces Ch. 5.12, transient merchants                        |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 90-10            | Cable television rates (Special)                                          |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 91-01            | Conditional use licenses (Repealed by 03-05)                              |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 91-02            | Amends § 5.20.170, Class II retail licenses                               |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 91-04            | Adds Ch. 5.64, moved-on commercial structures (Repealed by                |
|                  | 05-03)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 91-05            | Salaries for city officials                                               |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 91-06            | Amends § 5.08.110, retail sales fee (Repealed by 97-21)                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 91-07            | Amends § 12.04.150, riding or playing games on sidewalk in                |
|                  | commercial zone (12.04)                                                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 91-08            | Adds Ch. 17.71, guest apartments (17.71)                                  |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 91-09            | Amends § 5.12.010, transient merchants                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 91-12            | Adopts Uniform Code for Abatement of Dangerous Buildings                  |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 91-13            | Adds § 17.12.180, height restrictions of buildings (17.12)                |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 91-15            | Repeals and replaces § 12.24.020, appointment of shade tree               |
|                  | commission                                                                |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 92-01            | Salaries of councilpersons (Special)                                      |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 92-02            | Sign code (15.44)                                                         |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 92-04            | Adds § 16.08.050, vacating or changing a subdivision plat                 |
|                  | (16.08)                                                                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 92-06            | Procedure for charges requiring state enforcement (1.08)                  |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 92-07            | Salaries of councilmembers (Special)                                      |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 92-09            | Records access and management program (Repealed by 93-18)                 |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 92-10            | Amends Ords. 89-02, 89-03 and 90-03, floodplain management                |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 92-11            | Disposal of debris in surface water drainage system (8.08)                |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 92-12            | Amends § 17.09.620, flood protection                                      |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 92-13            | Amends flood control zone boundaries (Special)                            |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 92-14            | Adopts Uniform Building Code, 1991 Edition, Ch. 70                        |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 92-15            | Amends §§ 17.30.010—17.30.050, C-5 neighborhood commercial                |
|                  | zone (17.30)                                                              |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 92-16            | Amends § 17.09.090, storage of commercial vehicles in residential         |
|                  | zone (17.09)                                                              |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 92-19            | Adds § 17.09.660, site plan required (Repealed by 17-18)                  |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 92-20            | Salaries for city officials                                               |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 92-21            | Amends Ord. 87-04, commercial water rates                                 |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 92-22            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 92-23            | Amends Ch. 12.24, tree stewardship                                        |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 92-24            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 92-25            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 92-26            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 92-27            | Employee appeals board (2.62)                                             |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 92-28            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 93-01            | Amends § 17.12.100, zoning                                                |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 93-02            | Amends § 10.04.230, vehicle code                                          |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 93-03            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 93-04            | Amends §§ 17.09.210, 17.09.220 and 17.09.230, zoning (17.09)              |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 93-05            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 93-06            | Amends § 17.24.040(A), zoning (17.24)                                     |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 93-07            | Amends § 17.30.040(C), zoning (17.30)                                     |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 93-08            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 93-09            | City manager (2.04, 2.08, 2.10)                                           |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 93-10            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 93-11            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 93-12            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 93-13            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 93-14            | Adds § 17.09.670, zoning (17.09)                                          |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 93-15            | Zoning violations and penalties (17.78)                                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 93-16            | Amends Ch. 17.21, zoning (17.21)                                          |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 93-17            | Amends Ch. 17.27, zoning (17.27)                                          |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 93-18            | Records, access and management program (2.64)                             |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 93-19            | Amends official zone map (Not codified)                                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 93-20            | Salaries (Not codified)                                                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 93-21            | Budgetary fiscal policy (3.28)                                            |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 93-22            | Amends § 17.45.060, zoning (17.45)                                        |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 93-23            | Amends § 5.08.110(E), retail merchants (Repealed by 97-21)                |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 93-24            | Amends §§ 17.09.210, 17.09.220 and 17.09.230, zoning (17.09)              |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 93-25            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 93-26            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 94-01            | Amends §§ 17.09.330 and 17.09.400, zoning (17.09)                         |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 94-02            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 94-03            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 94-04            | Amends §§ 17.66.050 and 17.66.060, zoning (17.66)                         |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 94-05            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 94-06            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 94-07            | Adds § 13.08.044; amends §§ 13.08.050 and 13.24.010, public               |
|                  | services (Repealed by 19-14)                                              |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 94-08            | Adds Ch. 5.14; amends § 5.12.010, business licenses and regulations       |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 94-09            | Certain salaries (Not codified)                                           |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 94-10            | Annexation (Special)                                                      |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 94-11            | Amends §§ 5.04.030(B), 5.08.010(A) and 5.08.110, business                 |
|                  | licenses and regulations (Repealed by 03-05)                              |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 94-12            | Amends §§ 17.18.020(R), 17.24.020(28), 17.33.020(F), 17.36.020(K)         |
|                  | and 17.54.020(O) and (P), zoning (17.18, 17.24, 17.33, 17.36,             |
|                  | 17.54)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 94-13            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 94-14            | Amends Arts. I, II and III of Ch. 5.20, alcoholic beverages               |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 94-15            | Adds Ch. 17.37, zoning                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 94-16            | Amends § 4(2) of Ord. 93-09, city manager (2.10)                          |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 94-17            | Adds Chs. 15.25, 15.26 and 15.27; amends §§ 15.04.010, 15.04.015,         |
|                  | 15.04.040, 15.08.010, 15.12.010, 15.16.010, 15.20.010, 15.20.020          |
|                  | and 15.24.010; repeals Chs. 15.28 and 15.32, buildings and                |
|                  | construction (15.25, 15.26, 15.27)                                        |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 94-18            | Amends §§ 15.36.190, 15.36.200, 15.36.210, 15.36.230 and 15.36.250,       |
|                  | mobile homes (15.36)                                                      |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 94-19            | Amends Ch. 17.57, zoning                                                  |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 94-20            | Repeals Chs. 17.60, 17.63 and 17.69 (Repealer)                            |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 94-21            | Adds Ch. 17.20, zoning (17.20)                                            |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 94-22            | Amends §§ 17.27.020 and 17.51.020, zoning (17.27, 17.51)                  |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 94-23            | Amends § 15.36.020, mobile homes (15.36)                                  |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 94-24            | Amends §§ 15.36.010, mobile homes and 17.06.020, zoning (15.36            |
|                  | (15.36, 17.06)                                                            |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 94-25            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 94-26            | Noise (17.74)                                                             |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 94-27            | Amends § 17.06.020, zoning (17.06)                                        |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 94-28            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 95-01            | Amends Ch. 17.70, bed and breakfast facilities                            |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 95-02            | Amends § 5.08.110(E), retail merchants (Repealed by 97-21)                |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 95-03            | Amends § 13.24.010, water rates (Repealed by 98-15)                       |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 95-04            | Annexation (Special)                                                      |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 95-05            | Moved-on commercial structures (Repealed by 05-03)                        |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 95-06            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 95-07            | Annexation (Special)                                                      |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 95-09            | Adds [amends] Ch. 17.57, fee structure for developers to underwrite       |
|                  | city staff expenses for large-scale projects (17.57)                      |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 95-10            | Adds § 13.24.001; amends § 13.24.020, sewer rates (13.24)                 |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 95-11            | Amends § 17.12.150, zoning                                                |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 95-12            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 95-13            | Amends § 17.06.020(46), zoning (17.06)                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 95-14            | Amends § 17.09.210, zoning (17.09)                                        |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 95-15            | Amends § 17.09.660(C), zoning (Repealed by 17-18)                         |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 95-17            | Amends §§ 17.45.020(C) and 17.45.050(A), zoning (17.42, 17.45)            |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 95-18            | Amends § 2.52.030, planning commission (2.52)                             |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 95-19            | Amends § 17.72.100, zoning                                                |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 95-20            | Amends § 16.20.030, subdivisions (16.20)                                  |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 95-21            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 95-22            | Annexation (Special)                                                      |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 95-23            | Amends § 15.36.080, mobile homes (15.36)                                  |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 95-24            | Amends §§ 15.04.010, 15.04.015, 15.04.040, 15.12.010 and 15.27.010,       |
|                  | buildings and construction (15.27)                                        |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 95-25            | Annexation (Special)                                                      |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 96-01            | Amends §§ 12.24.120, 12.24.180 and 12.24.210, tree stewardship            |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 96-02            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 96-03            | Amends § 17.09.230(B), off-street parking and loading                     |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 96-04            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 96-05            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 96-06            | Annexation (Special)                                                      |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 96-07            | Amends § 17.09.230(B), off-street parking and loading (17.09)             |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 96-08            | Amends § 2.04.020, city council meetings (2.04)                           |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 96-09            | Amends § 17.06.020(21), definitions (17.06)                               |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 96-10            | Salaries for exempt positions (Special)                                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 96-11            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 96-12            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 96-13            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 96-14            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 96-15            | Amends § 17.12.150, ordinance or map amendment                            |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 96-16            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 96-17            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 96-18            | Amends [adds] Ch. 17.55, hillside developments (17.55)                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 97-01            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 97-02            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 97-03            | Amends § 17.45.030, zoning (17.45)                                        |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 97-04            | Amends § 17.48.030, zoning (17.48)                                        |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 97-05            | Amends § 17.51.030, zoning (17.51)                                        |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 97-06            | Amends § 17.09.230(A), zoning (17.09)                                     |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 97-07            | Annexation (Special)                                                      |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 97-08            | Amends § 17.20.040, zoning (17.20)                                        |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 97-09            | Amends § 2.28.040, purchasing agent (Repealed by 16-13)                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 97-10            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 97-11            | Salaries for exempt positions (Special)                                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 97-12            | Adds Ch. 17.55, zoning (17.55)                                            |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 97-13            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 97-14            | Amends § 15.08.010, electrical code (Repealed by 04-02)                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 97-15            | Salaries for exempt positions (Special)                                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 97-16            | Amends §§ 8.04.010(C) and (F), 8.04.030 and 8.04.110, garbage             |
|                  | and refuse (Repealed by 04-06)                                            |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 97-17            | Annexation (Special)                                                      |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 97-18            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 97-19            | Annexation (Special)                                                      |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 97-20            | Annexation (Special)                                                      |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 97-21            | Adds Ch. 3.13; repeals §§ 5.08.110, 5.08.120 and 5.08.130,                |
|                  | resort communities sales tax (3.13)                                       |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 97-22            | Adds Ch. 3.14, municipal transient rooms tax (3.14)                       |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 97-23            | Adds Ch. 3.15, municipal roads sales tax (3.15)                           |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 97-24            | Adds Ch. 3.17, municipal energy sales and use tax (3.17)                  |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 97-25            | Adds § 17.42.070l; amends §§ 17.42.040-17.42.060, zoning (17.42)          |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 97-26            | Amends § 17.45.020(D), zoning (17.45)                                     |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 97-27            | Annexation (Special)                                                      |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 97-28            | Amends § 2.60.636(A), personnel (Repealed by 01-03)                       |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 97-29            | Amends § 2.84.030, Moab Arts and Recreation Center advisory               |
|                  | board (Repealed by 18-04)                                                 |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 98-01            | Amends § 17.09.220(Q), (R) and (S), zoning (17.09)                        |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 98-02            | Amends § 17.09.230(B), zoning (17.09)                                     |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 98-03            | Amends § 17.09.090, zoning (17.09)                                        |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 98-04            | Adds §§ 2.04.020(C), (D) and (E) and 2.04.035(C), council                 |
|                  | meetings (2.04)                                                           |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 98-05            | Six month temporary moratorium on building permits issuance               |
|                  | (Special)                                                                 |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 98-06            | Adds Ch. 2.61, statutory appointee severance benefit appeals              |
|                  | (Repealed by 18-04)                                                       |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 98-07            | Adds Ch. 1.21, official name (1.21)                                       |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 98-08            | Adds §§ 15.03.010; amends §§ 15.04.010, 15.04.015, 15.16.010              |
|                  | and 15.24.010, uniform codes (15.03)                                      |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 98-10            | Amends § 17.02.060(26) [§ 17.06.020(26)], zoning (17.06)                  |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 98-11            | Amends § 17.06.020(28), zoning (17.06)                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 98-12            | Adds Ch. 13.26, wastewater, septage hauling (13.26)                       |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 98-13            | Adds Ch. 13.25, water, sewer impact fees (13.25)                          |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 98-14            | Salaries for exempt positions (Special)                                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 98-15            | Repeals and replaces § 13.24.020; repeals § 13.24.010, water,             |
|                  | sewer rates (13.24)                                                       |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 98-16            | Rezone (Special)                                                          |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 98-17            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 98-18            | Amends § 2.84.010, arts and recreation center advisory board              |
|                  | (Repealed by 18-04)                                                       |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 99-01            | Treasurer's salary (Special)                                              |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 99-02            | Annexation (Special)                                                      |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 99-03            | Amends §§ 5.20.070 and 5.20.660, alcoholic beverages                      |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 99-04            | Amends §§ 17.45.030 and 17.45.040, area and width requirements            |
|                  | (17.45)                                                                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 99-05            | Amends § 17.54.040, width requirements (17.54)                            |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 99-06            | Amends Ch. 17.66, planned unit developments (17.66)                       |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 99-07            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 99-08            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 99-09            | Adds §§ 5.20.110 and 5.20.155; amends §§ 5.20.150 and 5.20.171,           |
|                  | private club retail licenses                                              |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 99-10            | Amends § 2.28.040, purchasing procedure (Repealed by 16-13)               |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 99-11            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 99-12            | Amends § 17.70.060(B), bed and breakfast parking requirements             |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 99-13            | Salaries (Special)                                                        |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 99-14            | Annexation (Special)                                                      |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 99-15            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 99-16            | Moratorium on bed and breakfast business licenses (Special)               |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 99-17            | Amends § 13.24.020, sewer rate schedule (13.24)                           |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 99-18            | Adds Ch. 17.69, secondary dwellings                                       |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 00-01            | Moratorium on electronic variable message signs (Special)                 |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 00-02            | Amends Ch. 17.70, bed and breakfast facilities                            |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 00-03            | Amends Ch. 15.44, sign code (15.44)                                       |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 00-04            | Adds Ch. 17.76, wireless telecommunications facilities (Repealed          |
|                  | by 01-04)                                                                 |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 00-05            | Salaries (Special)                                                        |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 00-06            | (Failed)                                                                  |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 00-07            | Amends § 17.09.090, storage of large vehicles (17.09)                     |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 00-08            | Amends § 12.16.020, parking (12.16)                                       |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 01-01            | Repeals and replaces § 5.20.190, special event beer license               |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 01-02            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 01-03            | Repeals and replaces Ch. 2.60, personnel policies and procedures          |
|                  | (2.60)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 01-04            | Amends Ch. 17.76, wireless telecommunications facilities (17.76)          |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 01-05            | Repeals and replaces § 17.09.540; repeals §§ 17.09.550 and                |
|                  | 17.09.640, zoning (Repealed by 08-06)                                     |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 01-06            | Adds Ch. 2.49, campaign financial disclosure                              |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 01-07            | Amends § 13.08.040, purchase and installation of water meters             |
|                  | (Repealed by 19-14)                                                       |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 01-08            | Salaries (Not codified)                                                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 01-09            | Amends § 13.24.030, rebates for excessive water leaks (13.24)             |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 01-10            | Adds Ch. 13.26 [13.28], water source protection zones (13.28)             |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 01-11            | Amends §§ 17.06.020 and 17.09.680, carports (17.06)                       |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 02-01            | Adds §§ 6.04.071, 6.04.511 and 6.04.512; amends §§ 6.04.040,              |
|                  | 6.04.070 and 6.04.510, animal control (Repealed by 07-12)                 |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 02-02            | Annexation (Special)                                                      |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 02-03            | (Failed)                                                                  |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 02-04            | Adds Ch. 17.31; amends §§ 17.03.050 and 17.15.010, zoning                 |
|                  | (17.03, 17.31)                                                            |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 02-05            | Adds § 15.40.305, flood damage reduction                                  |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 02-06            | Adds § 8.08.170, maintenance of property within commercial                |
|                  | zones (8.08)                                                              |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 02-07            | Adds §§ 17.09.530 and 17.09.540, zoning (Repealed by 08-05)               |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 02-08            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 02-09            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 02-10            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 03-01            | Amends § 2.28.040, purchasing procedure (Repealed by 16-13)               |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 03-02            | Repeals and replaces Ch. 1.32, city annexation policy and                 |
|                  | procedures (1.32)                                                         |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 03-03            | Annexation (Special)                                                      |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 03-04            | Annexation (Special)                                                      |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 03-05            | Repeals and replaces Title 5, business licenses and regulations           |
|                  | (Repealed by 18-15)                                                       |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 03-06            | Annexation (Special)                                                      |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 03-07            | Amends § 2.28.040, purchasing procedure (Repealed by 16-13)               |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 03-08            | Adds Ch. 2.49, campaign finance disclosure (2.49)                         |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 03-09            | Annexation (Special)                                                      |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 03-10            | Amends §§ 5.20.155, 5.20.171, private club retail licenses                |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 04-01            | Amends §§ 13.25.030 and 13.25.060, water and sewer impact                 |
|                  | fees (13.25)                                                              |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 04-02            | Building Code (15.04)                                                     |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 04-03            | Amends § 17.69.030, zoning                                                |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 04-04            | Amends § 17.20.020, zoning (17.20)                                        |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 04-05            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 04-06            | Repeals and replaces Ch. 8.04, garbage and refuse (8.04)                  |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 05-01            | Amends official zone map (Not codified)                                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 05-02            | Adds Ch. 3.18; repeals Ch. 5.56, telecommunications license               |
|                  | tax (3.18)                                                                |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 05-03            | Repeals and replaces Ch. 5.64, moved-on commercial structures             |
|                  | (Repealed by 13-17)                                                       |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 05-04            | Adds § 2.28.045; amends § 2.28.040, purchasing agent (Repealed            |
|                  | by 16-13)                                                                 |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 05-05            | Annexation (Special)                                                      |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 05-06            | Annexation (Special)                                                      |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 05-07            | Adds Ch. 2.90, Moab Teen Center advisory board (Repealed by               |
|                  | 07-04)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 05-08            | Annexation (Special)                                                      |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 05-09            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 05-10            | Amends § 13.20.190, general use services                                  |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 06-01            | Adds §§ 17.06.015, 17.09.690 and 17.70.065; amends §§ 1.01.110,           |
|                  | 2.52.010, 2.52.020, 16.08.010, 16.08.050, 16.12.050, 17.09.530—17.09.610, |
|                  | 17.09.630, 17.09.660, 17.12.020—17.12.100, 17.12.130—17.12.160,           |
|                  | 17.66.140 and 17.70.070; renumbers § 17.09.580 to be 17.09.035;           |
|                  | repeals § 17.66.130, code adoption, planning commission,                  |
|                  | subdivisions, zoning (1.01, 2.52, 16.08, 16.12, 17.09, 17.66)             |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 06-02            | Amends § 17.66.050, zoning (17.66)                                        |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 06-03            | C-3 affordable housing fund (Special)                                     |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 06-04            | Amends official zone map (Special)                                        |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 06-05            | Amends official zone map (Special)                                        |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 06-06            | Annexation (Special)                                                      |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 06-07            | Adds § 2.28.042; amends § 2.28.040, purchasing agent (Repealed            |
|                  | by 16-13)                                                                 |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 06-08            | Amends §§ 17.51.020—17.51.060, zoning (17.51)                             |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 06-09            | Amends § 2.28.045, purchasing agent (Repealed by 16-13)                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 06-10            | Adds Ch. 17.79; amends § 16.08.050, subdivisions, condominium             |
|                  | developments (16.08, 17.79)                                               |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 06-11            | Amends §§ 15.44.270, 16.08.010, 17.12.150, 17.55.140 and 17.78.030;       |
|                  | repeals Ch. 3.24, sign code, subdivisions, zoning (15.44,                 |
|                  | 16.08, 17.55, 17.78)                                                      |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 06-12            | Adds Ch. 3.29, real estate transfer assessment agreements                 |
|                  | (3.29)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 06-13            | Amends §§ 17.69.030 and 17.69.040, zoning                                 |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 06-14            | Amends official zone map (Special)                                        |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 06-15            | Annexation (Special)                                                      |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 06-16            | Adds Ch. 17.32, SAR, sensitive area resort zone (17.32)                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 06-17            | Adds Ch. 17.65, master planned developments (17.65)                       |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 07-01            | Amends § 17.66.050, zoning (17.66)                                        |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 07-02            | Adopts 2006 building codes (Not codified)                                 |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 07-03            | Temporary zoning regulation (Not codified)                                |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 07-04            | Repeals Ch. 2.90, Moab teen center advisory board (Repealer)              |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 07-05            | Annexation (Special)                                                      |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 07-06            | Amends § 15.36.210, mobile homes                                          |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 07-07            | Amends charts of §§ 17.65.020 and 17.65.040 to include the                |
|                  | RC-1 district, zoning (17.65)                                             |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 07-08            | Amends § 17.24.020, zoning (17.24)                                        |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 07-09            | Adds § 17.09.700, zoning (17.09)                                          |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 07-10            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 07-11            | Annexation (Special)                                                      |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 07-12            | Repeals and replaces Ch. 6.04, animal control (6.04)                      |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 08-01            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 08-02            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 08-03            | Adds Ch. 17.04; amends §§ 17.18.020, 17.21.020, 17.24.020,                |
|                  | 17.27.020, 17.30.020, 17.32.020, 17.33.020, 17.35.020, 17.36.020,         |
|                  | 17.37.020; repeals §§ 17.12.130—17.12.160, zoning (17.04,                 |
|                  | 17.18, 17.20, 17.21, 17.27, 17.30, 17.32, 17.33, 17.35, 17.36,            |
|                  | 17.54)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 08-04            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 08-05            | Adds § 17.09.531; repeals and replaces § 17.09.530; repeals               |
|                  | §§ 17.09.590—17.09.610, zoning (Repealed by 18-01)                        |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 08-06            | Repeals and replaces § 17.09.540, zoning (Repealed by 08-07)              |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 08-07            | Adds Ch. 5.80; repeals section 17.09.540, home occupation                 |
|                  | permits (5.80)                                                            |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 08-08            | Vacation (Special)                                                        |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 08-09            | Street name change (Special)                                              |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 08-10            | Adds Ch. 17.80, zoning (17.80)                                            |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 08-11            | Adds Ch. 17.90, zoning (17.90)                                            |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 08-12            | Application process and review of preiliminary subdivision                |
|                  | plats (Special)                                                           |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 08-13            | Application process and review of final subdivision plat (Special)        |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 08-14            | Amends § 17.24.020, zoning (17.20, 17.24)                                 |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 08-15            | Amends §§ 17.06.020 and 17.48 [17.27.020], zoning (17.06,                 |
|                  | 17.27)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 08-16            | Amends official zone map (Not codified)                                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 08-17            | Amends Ch. 12.24, tree stewardship (12.24)                                |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 08-18            | Adds Ch. 13.07, stormwater management (13.07)                             |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 08-19            | Salaries (Not codified)                                                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 08-20            | Annexation (Special)                                                      |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 08-21            | Annexation (Special)                                                      |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 08-22            | Establishes a six-month temporary zoning regulation prohibiting           |
|                  | the erection or construction of any structure over 28 feet                |
|                  | high in a residential zone (Special)                                      |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 08-23            | Amends § 1.32.030, annexation policy plan (1.32)                          |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 08-24            | Amends §§ 17.20.030, 17.21.030, 17.27.020, 17.27.030 (17.20,              |
|                  | 17.21, 17.27)                                                             |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 08-25            | Amends § 17.06.020, zoning (17.06)                                        |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 08-26            | Adds Ch. 8.20, overnight camping (8.20)                                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 08-27            | Amends Ord. 08-22 with establishes a six-month temporary zoning           |
|                  | regulation prohibiting the erection or construction of any                |
|                  | structure over 28 feet high in a residential zone (Special)               |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 08-28            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 08-29            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 08-30            | Amends § 17.65.080, zoning (17.65)                                        |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 08-31            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 08-32            | Amends § 17.27.020, repeals Ch. 17.39, zonng (17.27)                      |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 08-33            | Repeals § 17.09.610, zoning (Repealer)                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 08-34            | Amends official zone map (Not codified)                                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 08-35            | Amends official zone map (Not codified)                                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 08-36            | Gas company francise (Special)                                            |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 08-37            | (Failed)                                                                  |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 08-38            | Amends Ch. 2.28, purchasing procedures (Repealed by 16-13)                |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 09-01            | Adds Ch. 17.52; amends §§ 6.04.480 and 17.54.020, keeping                 |
|                  | limited numbers of fowl for food production (6.04, 17.52)                 |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 09-02            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 09-03            | Repeals and replaces Ch. 15.40, flood damage prevention (Repealed         |
|                  | by 09-09)                                                                 |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 09-04            | Annexation (Special)                                                      |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 09-05            | Amends zoning map (Special)                                               |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 09-06            | Adds § 17.33.050; amends §§ 17.06.020 and 17.33.010--17.33.040,           |
|                  | zoning (17.33)                                                            |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 09-07            | Repeals Ch. 17.37, O-1 office-residential zone (Repealer)                 |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 09-08            | Amends § 17.06.020; repeals § 17.31.020, zoning (17.06, 17.31)            |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 09-09            | Repeals and replaces Ch. 15.40, flood damage prevention (15.40)           |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 09-10            | Grants electric utility franchise (Special)                               |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 09-11            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 09-12            | Amends § 6.04.440, animal control (6.04)                                  |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 10-01            | Amends § 17.55.090; repeals and replaces § 17.55.060, hillside            |
|                  | developments (17.55)                                                      |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 10-02            | Amends § 10.04.020; repeals and replaces § 10.04.230, vehicle             |
|                  | code (10.04)                                                              |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 10-03            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 10-04            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 10-05            | Adds § 17.09.665; amends § 17.09.660, zoning (Repealed by                 |
|                  | 17-18)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 10-06            | Amends §§ [5.80.010], 15.40.160, 15.44.380, 16.08.020, 16.08.050,         |
|                  | 16.12.050, 17.06.020, 17.09.220, 17.09.350, 17.09.530, [17.09.531],       |
|                  | 17.12.020, 17.12.110, 17.15.030, 17.18.020, 17.55.100, 17.65.080,         |
|                  | 17.69.050, 17.70.065, [17.79.080], 17.80.130 and 17.80.140;               |
|                  | repeals and replaces §§ 17.72.100--17.72.240; repeals § 17.06.015,        |
|                  | zoning (15.40, 15.44, 16.08, 16.12, 17.06, 17.09, 17.15,                  |
|                  | 17.18, 17.65, 17.72)                                                      |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 10-07            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 10-08            | Vacation (Special)                                                        |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 10-09            | (Failed)                                                                  |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 10-10            | Adds § 5.20.031; amends §§ 5.20.155, 5.20.250 and 5.20.360,               |
|                  | alcoholic beverages                                                       |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 10-11            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 10-12            | (Failed)                                                                  |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 10-13            | Amends §§ 17.09.530 and 17.09.531; repeals §§ 15.36.180--15.36.210,       |
|                  | 17.09.570, 17.09.620, 17.09.630, 17.09.650, Chs. 17.69 and                |
|                  | 17.70, zoning (Repealed by 18-01)                                         |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 10-14            | Amends §§ 17.18.050, 17.42.050, 17.45.050, 17.48.050, 17.51.050           |
|                  | and 17.54.050; repeals and replaces § 17.09.560, zoning (17.09,           |
|                  | 17.18, 17.42, 17.45, 17.48, 17.51, 17.54, 17.55)                          |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 10-15            | Amends §§ 17.06.020 and 17.12.010--17.12.110, zoning (17.06,              |
|                  | 17.12)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 10-16            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 10-17            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 10-18            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 10-19            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 10-20            | Amends zoning map (Special)                                               |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 10-21            | Amends § 15.04.010; repeals Ch. 15.48, buildings and construction         |
|                  | (15.04)                                                                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 10-22            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 10-23            | Adds Ch. 9.36, housing discrimination (9.36)                              |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 10-24            | Adds Ch. 9.40, employment discrimination (9.40)                           |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 11-01            | Amends §§ 17.06.020, 17.09.530, 17.09.531 and 17.45.020, zoning           |
|                  | (17.06, 17.45)                                                            |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 11-02            | (Failed)                                                                  |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 11-03            | Planned unit development vacation (Special)                               |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 11-04            | Adds § 5.04.020(C), business licenses (5.04)                              |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 11-05            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 11-06            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 11-07            | Amends §§ 16.04.010 and 17.06.020, subdivision and zoning                 |
|                  | definitions (16.04, 17.06)                                                |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 11-09            | Amends §§ 17.09.530 and 17.09.531, zoning (Repealed by 18-01)             |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 11-10            | (Failed)                                                                  |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 11-11            | Repeals Ch. 5.28, cabarets (Repealer)                                     |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 11-12            | Amends §§ 12.20.005 and 12.20.050, public parks (12.20)                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 11-13            | Salaries (Not codified)                                                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 11-14            | Amends § 6.04.510, animal control (6.04)                                  |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 11-15            | Amends §§ 17.45.040 and 17.48.040, zoning (17.45, 17.48)                  |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 11-16            | Amends § 17.09.030, zoning (17.09)                                        |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 12-01            | Rezone (Special)                                                          |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 12-02            | Amends arts and recreation center fee structure (Special)                 |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 12-03            | Annexation (Special)                                                      |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 12-04            | Rezone (Special)                                                          |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 12-05            | Adds §§ 17.42.020(I), 17.45.020(K), 17.48.020(O), 17.51.020(U),           |
|                  | 17.54.020(P) and Ch. 17.69; amends §§ 17.09.530 and 17.09.531,            |
|                  | secondary dwelling units (17.42, 17.45, 17.48, 17.51, 17.54,              |
|                  | 17.70)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 12-06            | Amends § 17.09.220(Q); repeals § 17.09.220(R), parking (17.09)            |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 12-07            | Amends §§ 17.80.050, 17.80.060, 17.80.070 and 17.80.080, large            |
|                  | scale retail developments (17.80)                                         |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 12-08            | Repeals § 17.09.680, carports (Inactive)                                  |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 12-09            | Amends § 17.09.530(B); repeals and replaces § 17.30.020(G),               |
|                  | child care (17.30)                                                        |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 12-10            | Salaries (Not codified)                                                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 12-11            | Amends Chs. 17.15, 17.42, 17.45, 17.48 and 17.51, residential             |
|                  | development standards (Failed)                                            |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 12-12            | Amends §§ 5.09.010(D) and (E), 5.20.660 and 12.20.040, alcohol            |
|                  | in public places (12.20)                                                  |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 13-01            | Amends Ch. 17.15, §§ 17.45.030, 17.45.040, 17.45.050, 17.45.060(B),       |
|                  | 17.48.030, 17.48.040, 17.48.050, 17.51.030, 17.51.040, 17.51.050          |
|                  | and 17.51.060; renames Chs. 17.42, 17.45, 17.48 and 17.51,                |
|                  | residential development standards (17.15, 17.45, 17.48, 17.51)            |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 13-02            | Amends § 16.12.030(I), preliminary plats (16.12)                          |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 13-03            | Amends §§ 17.09.660[(D)](8) and (16), site plans (Repealed                |
|                  | by 17-18)                                                                 |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 13-04            | Amends § 17.09.660, site plans (Repealed by 17-18)                        |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 13-05            | Rezone (Special)                                                          |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 13-06            | Salaries (Not codified)                                                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 13-07            | Rezone (Special)                                                          |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 13-08            | Amends §§ 17.72.070(A) and (B), certificate of zoning compliance          |
|                  | (17.72)                                                                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 13-09            | Amends §§ 16.24.020(L), 17.09.660(H)[(I)], 17.65.060(L) and               |
|                  | 17.66.150(E), land development (17.65, 17.66)                             |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 13-10            | Repeals and replaces §§ 16.24.020(B), (C) and (L), design                 |
|                  | standards (16.24)                                                         |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 13-11            | Amends § 17.65.080(A)(4), master planned developments (17.65)             |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 13-12            | Amends § 16.08.010, plat applications (16.08)                             |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 13-13            | Amends § 12.16.020, street and sidewalk obstructions (12.16)              |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 13-14            | Amends §§ 17.36.020 and 17.36.050, I-1 industrial zone (17.36)            |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 13-15            | Amends §§ 17.24.020(28) and (29) and 17.27.020, employee housing          |
|                  | (17.24, 17.27)                                                            |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 13-16            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 13-17            | Repeals and replaces Ch. 5.64, vendor business licenses (5.64)            |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 13-18            | Adds Ch. 9.44, mutual commitment registry (9.44)                          |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 13-19            | Amends § 12.08.060, sidewalk and driveway construction (12.08)            |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 14-01            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 14-02            | Adds §§ 5.80.010(D) and 17.09.540, home occupations (5.80)                |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 14-03            | Adds Ch. 5.21, retail sale of tobacco products (5.21)                     |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 14-04            | Officially names Riverview Drive (Special)                                |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 14-05            | Salaries (Not codified)                                                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 14-06            | (Failed)                                                                  |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 14-07            | Adopts building codes (15.04)                                             |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 14-08            | Right-of-way vacation (Special)                                           |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 14-09            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 14-10            | Amends §§ 15.44.070(B) and 15.44.390(B)(7), electronic variable           |
|                  | message signs (15.44)                                                     |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 14-11            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 15-01            | Salaries (Not codified)                                                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 15-02            | Rezone (Failed)                                                           |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 15-03            | Flood damage reduction (Void)                                             |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 15-04            | Amends Ch. 17.65, master planned developments (17.65)                     |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 15-05            | Amends Ch. 17.33, floodway zone (17.33)                                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 15-06            | Salaries (Not codified)                                                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 15-07            | Rezone (Special)                                                          |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 16-01            | (Failed)                                                                  |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 16-02            | Amends §§ 17.09.530 and 17.09.531, bed and breakfasts (Repealed           |
|                  | by 18-01)                                                                 |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 16-03            | Rezone (Special)                                                          |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 16-04            | Rezone (Special)                                                          |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 16-05            | Amends §§ 5.80.010 and 17.09.540, home occupations (5.80)                 |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 16-06            | (Number not used)                                                         |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 16-07            | Salaries (Not codified)                                                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 16-08            | Amends Ch. 13.25, water and sewer impact fees (13.25)                     |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 16-09            | Annexation (Special)                                                      |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 16-10            | Amends § 15.04.010, building codes (15.04)                                |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 16-11            | Annexation (Special)                                                      |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 16-12            | Amends Ch. 12.20, public parks (12.20)                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 16-13            | Repeals and replaces Ch. 2.28, purchasing procedures (Repealed            |
|                  | by 18-03)                                                                 |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 16-14            | Salaries (Not codified)                                                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 16-15            | Moratorium on new connections to the city wastewater treatment            |
|                  | system (Not codified)                                                     |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 17-01            | Rezone (Special)                                                          |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 17-02            | Moratorium on new commercial site plan applications (Not codified)        |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 17-03            | (Reserved)                                                                |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 17-04            | (Failed)                                                                  |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 17-05            | Annexation (Special)                                                      |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 17-06            | (Reserved)                                                                |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 17-07            | (Failed)                                                                  |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 17-08            | (Reserved)                                                                |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 17-09            | Moab water conservation and drought management advisory board             |
|                  | (2.90)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 17-10            | Annexation (Special)                                                      |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 17-11            | Repeals § 16.16.040, time limit for final plat recordation                |
|                  | (Repealer)                                                                |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 17-12            | (Failed)                                                                  |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 17-13            | Amends § 17.09.110, additional height allowed for public buildings        |
|                  | (9.28, 17.09)                                                             |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 17-14            | Amends § 17.36.060, I-1 industrial zone height requirements               |
|                  | (17.36)                                                                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 17-15            | Repeals § 16.24.030, subdivision protection strips (Repealer)             |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 17-16            | Amends §§ 13.25.060(B) and (C), sewer impact fees (13.25)                 |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 17-17            | Repeals and replaces Ch. 5.09, special event permits (Repealed            |
|                  | by 18-15)                                                                 |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 17-18            | Adds § 17.31.020(B) and Ch. 17.67; amends § 17.31.030(A)(6)               |
|                  | and Ch. 17.80; repeals §§ 17.09.660 and 17.09.665, zoning                 |
|                  | (17.31, 17.67, 17.80)                                                     |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 17-19            | Amends § 17.09.070; repeals § 17.09.060, accessory buildings              |
|                  | (17.09)                                                                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 17-20            | Repeals § 17.09.680, carports in side setback area of primary             |
|                  | dwellings (Repealer)                                                      |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 17-21            | Adds §§ 17.27.020(33) and 17.36.020(K); repeals § 17.09.531(14),          |
|                  | self-storage warehouses (17.27, 17.36)                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 17-22            | Amends § 17.06.020, flag-shaped or panhandle lots (17.06)                 |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 17-23            | Repeals and replaces §§ 17.72.100 through 17.72.170, land                 |
|                  | use appeals (17.72)                                                       |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 17-24            | Salaries (Not codified)                                                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 17-25            | Amends Ch. 13.20 and § 13.24.020, water and sewer system (13.20,          |
|                  | 13.24)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 17-26            | Rezone (Special)                                                          |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 17-27            | Amends § 17.15.050, residential area regulations (17.15)                  |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 17-28            | Amends § 17.09.560(A), accessory uses or structures (17.09)               |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 17-29            | Amends § 17.09.560(B), accessory building setbacks (17.09)                |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 17-30            | Amends Ch. 13.20 and § 13.24.020, water and sewer system (13.20,          |
|                  | 13.24)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 17-31            | Temporary ban on discharge of fireworks (Special)                         |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 17-32            | Adds § 17.30.020(S); amends § 17.06.020, small neighborhood               |
|                  | retail uses (17.06, 17.30)                                                |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 17-33            | (Reserved)                                                                |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 17-34            | Amends §§ 5.20.660 and 12.20.040, consumption of alcohol in               |
|                  | public places (12.20)                                                     |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 17-35            | Amends § 10.04.230, unlawful parking, idling or camping (10.04)           |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 17-36            | (Tabled)                                                                  |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 17-37            | Adds § 12.08.070; repeals § 17.09.350, motor vehicle access               |
|                  | (12.08)                                                                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 17-38            | (Reserved)                                                                |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 17-39            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 18-01            | Amends §§ 17.06.020, 17.18.020, 17.18.050, 17.18.070 [17.18.060],         |
|                  | 17.20.020, 17.21.020, 17.24.020, 17.27.020, 17.30.020, 17.31.020,         |
|                  | 17.35.020, 17.36.010 [17.36.020], 17.42.020, 17.42.060, 17.45.020,        |
|                  | 17.45.060, 17.48.020, 17.48.060, 17.51.020, 17.51.060, 17.54.020,         |
|                  | 17.54.050 and 17.54.070; replaces “secondary dwelling unit”               |
|                  | with “accessory dwelling unit” throughout code; repeals §§ 17.09.530      |
|                  | and 17.09.531, accessory dwelling units (17.06, 17.09, 17.18,             |
|                  | 17.20, 17.21, 17.24, 17.27, 17.30, 17.31, 17.35, 17.36, 17.42,            |
|                  | 17.45, 17.48, 17.51, 17.54, 17.67, 17.70, 17.72)                          |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 18-02            | Amends §§ 10.04.020 and 10.04.230, vehicle code (10.04)                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 18-03            | Adds Ch. 2.01; repeals and replaces Ch. 2.28, administration              |
|                  | and personnel (2.01, 2.28)                                                |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 18-04            | Amends Chs. 2.04, 2.08, 2.10, 2.12, 2.16, 2.24, 2.52, 2.56,               |
|                  | § 2.64.060 including Exh. A, and § 2.90.010; repeals Chs.                 |
|                  | 2.20, 2.32, 2.36, 2.40, 2.61, 2.68, 2.72, 2.84 and 2.88,                  |
|                  | administration and personnel (2.04, 2.08, 2.10, 2.12, 2.16,               |
|                  | 2.24, 2.52, 2.56, 2.64, 2.90)                                             |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 18-05            | Amends § 5.20.660(E), consumption of alcohol in public places             |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 18-06            | Amends §§ 17.06.020 and 17.12.170, flag-shaped or panhandle               |
|                  | lots (17.06, 17.12)                                                       |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 18-07            | Amends § 13.25.020(A), water and sewer impact fees (13.25)                |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 18-08            | Amends §§ 13.25.060(A) and (B) [(B) and (C)], water and sewer             |
|                  | impact fees (13.25)                                                       |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 18-09            | Amends § 12.08.060, sidewalk and driveway construction (12.08)            |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 18-10            | Adds § 17.36.020(L), industrial zone (17.36)                              |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 18-11            | Salaries (Not codified)                                                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 18-12            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 18-13            | Temporary fireworks ban (Not codified)                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 18-14            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 18-15            | Adds Title 4; amends Title 5; repeals § 17.09.540, special                |
|                  | event and street performer permitting, business licensing                 |
|                  | and home occupations (4.01, 4.02, 4.03, 4.07, 4.09, 4.11,                 |
|                  | 4.12, 4.13, 4.15, 4.17, 4.19, 5.04, 5.20, 5.21, 5.32, 5.60,               |
|                  | 5.64, 5.67, 5.80)                                                         |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 18-16            | (Void)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 18-17            | Adds § 8.04.065; amends § 8.04.010, disposable plastic bags               |
|                  | (8.04)                                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 18-18            | Adds Ch. 2.14, finance director (2.14)                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 18-19            | (Reserved)                                                                |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 18-20            | Adds Ch. 17.69, assured workforce housing; renumbers existing             |
|                  | Ch. 17.69 as 17.70 (17.69, 17.70)                                         |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 18-21            | Adopts South Moab Community Reinvestment Project Area Plan                |
|                  | for the South Moab Community Reinvestment Project Area (Special)          |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 18-22            | Amends § 17.67.020(B), site plan review (17.67)                           |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 19-01            | (Reserved)                                                                |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 19-02            | Adds Ch. 17.68, planned affordable development (17.68)                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 19-03            | (Reserved)                                                                |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 19-04            | (Reserved)                                                                |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 19-05            | (Reserved)                                                                |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 19-06            | Prohibits development and construction of nightly rentals                 |
|                  | for 180 days (Special)                                                    |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 19-07            | Adds § 17.20.020(4) [17.20.020(A)(4)]; amends § 17.20.040(E),             |
|                  | zoning (17.20)                                                            |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 19-08            | Amends Ch. 5.67, nightly rental licenses (5.67)                           |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 19-09            | (Reserved)                                                                |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 19-10            | Rezone (Failed)                                                           |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 19-11            | Amends Ch. 5.67, nightly rental licenses (5.67)                           |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 19-12            | (Reserved)                                                                |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 19-13            | Amends §§ 17.06.020, 17.09.690, 17.12.080(B) and (C)(1), 17.12.180(A),    |
|                  | 17.20.030, 17.24.020(A), 17.31.020(A), 17.42.050(D), 17.45.050(A),        |
|                  | 17.48.050(A) and (D), 17.51.050(A) and (D), 17.72.010, 17.72.090(B),      |
|                  | 17.90.080(B); replaces “family” with “household” and “duplex”             |
|                  | with “two-household dwelling” throughout code; repeals § 17.09.220(B),    |
|                  | zoning (6.04, 9.12, 9.16, 9.36, 12.08, 13.07, 13.16, 13.20,               |
|                  | 13.24, 13.25, 13.28, 15.36, 15.44, 17.06, 17.09, 17.12, 17.15,            |
|                  | 17.18, 17.20, 17.21, 17.24, 17.30, 17.31, 17.32, 17.42, 17.45,            |
|                  | 17.48, 17.51, 17.52, 17.54, 17.55, 17.65, 17.66, 17.67, 17.68,            |
|                  | 17.69, 17.71, 17.72, 17.90)                                               |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 19-14            | Repeals and replaces Ch. 13.08, water connections (13.08)                 |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 19-15            | (Reserved)                                                                |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 19-16            | Adds § 2.04.100, electronic participation in city council                 |
|                  | meetings (2.04)                                                           |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Moab Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 19-16, and legislation passed through May 28, 2019.
Disclaimer: The City Recorder's Office has the official version of the Moab Municipal Code. Users should contact the City Recorder's Office for ordinances passed subsequent to the ordinance cited above.

City Website: moabcity.org
City Telephone: (435) 259-5121
Code Publishing Company