7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=Preface 1/2
Preface
The original Municipal Code of the City of North Ogden, Utah, was published by Sterling Codifiers, Inc.,
as adopted by the City Council in 2002. In 2014, codification and administration of the Municipal Code
began in-house under the direction of Annette Spendlove, City Recorder. This City Code shall be cited
as the City Code of North Ogden, or "CCNO" as an acronym.
This City Code maintains a structure by subject matter using a hyphenated numbering system identifying
the title, chapter, and section (for example: 11-15-10).
? The first series of numbers in the sequence (11) designates the Title level.
? The second series of numbers in the sequence (15) designates the Chapter level.
? The last series of numbers in the sequence (10) designates the Section level.
The legislation within CCNO may be arranged as an alphanumeric ordered list to show hierarchal
relationships. CCNO's alphanumeric ordered list below is also shown in the Official City Number
Format.
A.
1.
a. i.
(1)
(A)
B.
(etc. for as many sections as required under the code)
The legislation within CCNO may also be arranged as an unordered list (using bullets, discs, squares,
etc.) to show items without hierarchal relationships. This numbering system and list structures assist in
subsequent codification as new legislation is added to CCNO.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=Preface 2/2
Vacant titles may be designed for future use and are marked as “Reserved” to ease internal expansion.
The legislative history identifies the specific legal sources of a chapter or section as noted in
parenthesis.
The City Code is supplemented from time-to-time with amendments and additions made by North Ogden
City. The specific legal sources that comprise this Municipal Code have been adapted during the
codification process from the original formatting of the official hard copy. In the event of a discrepancy or
discrepancies between the online Municipal Code and the official hard copy, the official hard copy
governs. The online Municipal Code is for informational and convenience purposes only.
NOTICE: THIS ONLINE CODE DOES NOT REFLECT RULES OR REGULATIONS THAT MAY BE
PROMULGATED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE CODE, OTHER REGULATIONS AND
TECHNICAL SPECIFICATION, AND MAY NOT REFLECT ALL OR THE MOST CURRENT VERSION
OF LEGISLATION ADOPTED BY THE CITY COUNCIL. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT THE
CITY OFFICE AT 801-782-7211.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=1:_ADMINISTRATION 1/43
1: ADMINISTRATION
1-1: NORTH OGDEN CITY CODE
1-2: SAVING CLAUSE
1-3: DEFINITIONS
1-4: GENERAL PENALTY
1-5: MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
1-6: OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
1-7: ELECTIONS
1-8: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS
1-9: MUNICIPAL CODE ENFORCEMENT
1-1: NORTH OGDEN CITY CODE
1-1-1: ADOPTION; TITLE; AUTHORITY
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS
1-1-4: ALTERATIONS
1-1-5: REFERENCE TO SPECIFIC ORDINANCES
1-1-6: CONSTRUCTION
1-1-1: ADOPTION; TITLE; AUTHORITY
A. Adoption; Authority: Pursuant to the provisions of Utah Code § 10-3-707, there is adopted the
"North Ogden City Municipal Code", as compiled, edited and published by the authority of the city
council.
B. Title; Citation; Reference: This code shall be known as the NORTH OGDEN CITY MUNICIPAL
CODE and it shall be sufficient to refer to the code as the "North Ogden City Municipal Code" in
any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It
shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or
any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the "North
Ogden City Municipal Code". Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections and
subsections of the "North Ogden City Municipal Code" and such references shall apply to that
numbered title, chapter, section and subsection as it appears in the code.
C. Reference Applies To Amendments: Whenever a reference is made to this code as the "North
Ogden City Municipal Code" or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the city, the
reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter
made.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 1.01.010, 1.01.020, 1.01.070 on 1/1/1987
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE
This city code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received without further proof in
all courts and in administrative tribunals of this state as the ordinances of the city of general and
permanent effect, except the excluded ordinances enumerated in CCNO 1-2-1 of this title.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=1:_ADMINISTRATION 2/43
Any ordinance amending the city code shall set forth the title, chapter and section number of the section
or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement
pertaining to the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this city code. All such amendments
or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the codifiers, and the said ordinance
material shall be prepared for insertion in its proper place in each copy of this city code. Each such
replacement page shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of the city
code.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
1-1-4: ALTERATIONS
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface in any way any section or
any page of this city code in such a manner that the meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or
omitted. Said code, while in actual possession of officials and other interested persons, shall be and
remain the property of the city and shall be returned to the office of the city recorder when directed so to
do by order of the city council.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
1-1-5: REFERENCE TO SPECIFIC ORDINANCES
The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are
otherwise connected with, ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise
and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the
corresponding provisions contained within this code.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 1.01.090 on 1/1/1987
1-1-6: CONSTRUCTION
The provisions of the ordinances of the city, and all proceedings under them, are to be construed with a
view to effect their objects and to promote justice.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 1.04.080 on 1/1/1987
1-2: SAVING CLAUSE
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES; PAST OBLIGATIONS
1-2-2: PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES; PAST OBLIGATIONS
A. All general ordinances of the city passed prior to the adoption of this city code are hereby
repealed, except such as are included in this city code or are by necessary implication herein
reserved from repeal (subject to the saving clauses contained in the following sections), and
excluding the following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances;
appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; franchise
ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or corporations; contract
ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants;
salary ordinances; fee ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or
other public places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections;
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=1:_ADMINISTRATION 3/43
ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the city; and all special
ordinances.
B. The repeal of the ordinances as provided in subsection A of this section, shall not affect any debt
or fee which is accrued, any duty imposed, any penalty incurred, nor any action or proceeding
commenced under or by virtue of the ordinances repealed or the term of office of any person
holding office at the time these ordinances take effect; nor shall the repeal of any ordinance have
the effect of reviving any ordinance heretofore repealed or superseded.
C. Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal or amendments of any ordinance or part or
portion of any ordinance of the city shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of
ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified
herein, nor be construed as a waiver of any license, fee or penalty at such effective date due and
unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such
ordinances relating to the collection of any such license, fee or penalty, or the penal provisions
applicable to any violation thereof, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu
thereof required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance, and all rights and
obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 1.01.100 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
1-2-2: PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways, or relating to the conduct,
duties, service or rates of public utilities shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this city code or by
virtue of CCNO 1-2-1 of this chapter, excepting as this city code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case, this city code shall be considered as amending such ordinance or ordinances in
respect to such provisions only.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS
A. No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance whether such former
ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense committed against such former
ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right
accrued or claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such
offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred or
any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes effect, save only that the
proceedings thereafter shall conform to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so
far as practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any provision of a
new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party affected, applied to any judgment
announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
B. This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or implication, whether the
repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other
ordinance.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=1:_ADMINISTRATION 4/43
C. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any action now pending under or
by virtue of any general ordinance of the city herein repealed, and the provisions of all general
ordinances contained in this code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new
enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating,
modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person,
firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the city under any ordinance or provision thereof in
force at the time of the adoption of this city code.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or
unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The city
council declares that it would have passed this code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause
and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences,
clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional, and if for any reason this code should
be declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be in full force and
effect.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 1.01.110 on 1/1/1987
1-3: DEFINITIONS
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL
1-3-3: CATCHLINES
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS
A. Whenever any word in any section of this city code importing the plural number is used in
describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons, any single matter, party or person shall
be deemed to be included, although distributive words may not have been used. Words used in
the present tense include the past and the future tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly
inapplicable. When any subject matter, party or person is referred to in this city code by words
importing the singular number only, or a particular gender, several matters, parties or persons
and the opposite gender and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included; provided, that
these rules of construction shall not be applied to any section of this city code which contains any
express provision excluding such construction or where the subject matter or context may be
repugnant thereto.
B. The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the city has been changed in the content of
this city code to "title", "chapter", "section" and/or "subsection" or words of like import for
organizational and clarification purposes only. Such change to the city's ordinances is not meant
to amend passage and effective dates of such original ordinances.
C. All words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the
language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar
and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such
peculiar and appropriate meaning.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 1.04.030, 1.04.040 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=1:_ADMINISTRATION 5/43
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=1:_ADMINISTRATION 6/43
The following words and phrases, whenever used in the ordinances of the city, shall be construed as
defined in this section unless from the context a different meaning is intended or unless a different
meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words or phrases:
AGENT: When an act is required by an ordinance, the same being such that it may be done as well by
an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts performed by
an authorized agent.
CITY: North Ogden City, Utah, and such territory outside the city's corporate boundaries over which the
city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision.
CODE: The North Ogden City municipal code.
COMPUTATION OF TIME: Except when otherwise provided, the time within which an act is required to
be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day, unless the last day is
Saturday, Sunday or a holiday, in which case it will also be excluded.
COUNCIL: The city council of North Ogden City, Utah. References of "all its members" or "all council
members" means the total number of council members holding office.
COUNTY: The county of Weber, Utah.
FEE: A sum of money charged by the city for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
GENDER: A word importing either the masculine or feminine gender only shall extend and be applied to
the other gender and to persons.
LAW: Denotes applicable federal law, the constitution and statutes of the state of Utah, the ordinances
of North Ogden City, Utah, and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be
promulgated thereunder.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
MAY: Is permissive.
MONTH: A calendar month.
MUST AND SHALL: Are each mandatory.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive to the sensibilities of reasonable persons, or any act or activity creating
a hazard which threatens the health and welfare of inhabitants of the city, or any activity which by its
perpetuation can reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the property of a person or persons
within the city.
OATH: Includes an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the
words "affirm" and "affirmed".
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any act required by the
provisions of this code.
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common,
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=1:_ADMINISTRATION 7/43
joint tenant or tenant by entirety of the whole or part of such or land.
PERSON: Includes a natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club,
company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or
employee of any of them.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt.
PRECEDING AND FOLLOWING: Next before and next after, respectively.
PROPERTY: Includes real and personal property.
REAL PROPERTY: Land and anything permanently affixed to the land, and condominiums.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods,
merchandise, articles or things direct to the consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: Land owned by a public agency for roadway, pedestrian, transit or other transportation
purposes.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent property line intended for the
use of pedestrians.
STATE: The state of Utah.
STREET: The entire area within a public right of way, established by:
A. Deed or conveyance;
B. Dedication to the public (and accepted by proper public authority) by the owners thereof;
C. Dedication to the public by continuous use as a public thoroughfare for a period of ten (10) years;
or
D. Dedication to the public by the federal city site act of 1867, or similar law, statute or ordinance,
which affords the principal means of access to abutting property.
TENANT AND OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the
whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
TITLE OF OFFICE: Use of the title of any officer, employee, department, board, commission or
committee means that officer, employee, department, board, commission or committee of the city.
WHOLESALER: The terms "wholesaler" and "wholesale dealer" as used in this code, unless otherwise
specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things to
persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters, but
when the written signature of any person is required by law to any official or public writing or bond, it
shall be in the proper handwriting of such person, or in case such person is unable to write, by such
person's proper mark.
YEAR: A calendar year.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=1:_ADMINISTRATION 8/43
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code 1.04.010, 1.04.020, 1.04.050, 1.04.070 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
1-3-3: CATCHLINES
The catchlines of the several sections of this city code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the
content of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to
govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such
sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 1.01.080 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
1-4: GENERAL PENALTY
1-4-1: SENTENCING
1-4-2: OFFENSES DESIGNATED; CLASSIFIED
1-4-3: PROHIBITED ACTS INCLUDE CAUSING AND PERMITTING
1-4-1: SENTENCING
A. Penalty For Violation Of Ordinance
1. Criminal: The city council may impose a minimum criminal penalty for the violation of any
municipal ordinance by a fine not to exceed the maximum class B misdemeanor
fine/imprisonment under Utah Code Annotated.
2. Civil:
a. Except as provided in subsection A2b of this section, the city council may
prescribe a minimum civil penalty for the violation of any municipal ordinance by a
fine not to exceed the maximum class B misdemeanor fine under Utah Code
Annotated.
b. A municipality may not impose a civil penalty and adjudication for the violation of a
municipal moving traffic ordinance.
B. Term Of Imprisonment For Misdemeanors: A person who has been convicted of a misdemeanor
may be sentenced to imprisonment as follows:
1. In the case of a class B misdemeanor, for a term not exceeding six (6) months;
2. In the case of a class C misdemeanor, for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days.
C. Infractions:
1. A person convicted of an infraction may not be imprisoned but may be subject to a fine,
forfeiture and disqualification, or any combination.
2. Whenever a person is convicted of an infraction and no punishment is specified, the
person may be fined as for a class C misdemeanor.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=1:_ADMINISTRATION 9/43
D. Fines Of Persons: A person convicted of an offense may, in addition to any term of imprisonment
imposed, be sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed:
1. Class B Misdemeanor: One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) when the conviction is of a
class B misdemeanor conviction; and
2. Class C Misdemeanor; Infraction: Seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) when the
conviction is of a class C misdemeanor conviction or infraction conviction.
E. Fines Of Corporations: The sentence to pay a fine, when imposed upon a corporation,
association, partnership or governmental instrumentality for an offense defined in this code, or
the ordinances of the city, or for an offense defined outside of this code over which this city has
jurisdiction, for which no special corporate fine is specified, shall be to pay an amount fixed by
the court, not exceeding:
1. Class B Misdemeanor: Five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) when the conviction is for a
class B misdemeanor conviction; and
2. Class C Misdemeanor; Infraction: One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) when the conviction
is for a class C misdemeanor conviction or for an infraction conviction.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
1-4-2: OFFENSES DESIGNATED; CLASSIFIED
A. Sentencing In Accordance With Chapter:
1. A person adjudged guilty of an offense under this code or the ordinances of this city shall
be sentenced in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
2. Ordinances enacted after the effective date hereof which involve an offense should be
classified for sentencing purposes in accordance with this chapter, unless otherwise
expressly provided.
B. Designation Of Offenses: Offenses are designated as misdemeanors or infractions.
C. Misdemeanors Classified:
1. Misdemeanors are classified into two (2) categories:
a. Class B misdemeanors;
b. Class C misdemeanors.
2. An offense designated as a misdemeanor or any act prohibited or declared to be unlawful
in this code or any ordinance of this city when no other specification as to punishment or
category is made, is a class B misdemeanor.
D. Infractions:
1. Infractions are not classified.
2. Any offense which is made an infraction in this code or other ordinances of this city, or
which is expressly designated an infraction and any offense designated by this code or
other ordinances of this city which is not designated as a misdemeanor and for which no
penalty is specified is an infraction.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=1:_ADMINISTRATION 10/43
E. Continuing Violation: In all instances where the violation of this code or any ordinance hereinafter
enacted is a continuing violation, a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during or on which the violation occurs or continues to occur.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
1-4-3: PROHIBITED ACTS INCLUDE CAUSING AND PERMITTING
Whenever in the ordinances of the city, any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing,
allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering, concealing or attempting the fact of such act or omission.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 1.04.060 on 1/1/1987
1-5: MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
1-5-1: ELIGIBILITY AND RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS
1-5-2: MEMBERSHIP; TERMS
1-5-3: MAYOR AS MEMBER OF CITY COUNCIL
1-5-4: MEETINGS; PROCEDURE AND CONDUCT
1-5-5: ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS; PROCEDURES
ARTICLE A: REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY
1-5-1: ELIGIBILITY AND RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS
A. Declaration Of Candidacy: A person filing a declaration of candidacy for a city office shall:
1. Have been a resident of the city in which the person seeks office for at least three
hundred sixty five (365) consecutive days immediately before the date of the election; and
2. Meet the other requirements of Utah Code § 20A-9-203.
B. Annexed Areas: A person living in an area annexed to the city meets the residency requirement
of this section if that person resided within the area annexed to the city for at least three hundred
sixty five (365) consecutive days before the date of the election.
C. Registered Voter: Any person elected to city office shall be a registered voter in the city.
D. Residency Maintained: Each elected officer of the city shall maintain residency within the
boundaries of the city during the officer's term of office.
E. Residence Outside City: If an elected officer of the city establishes a principal place of residence
as provided in Utah Code § 20A-2-105 outside of the city during the officer's term of office, the
office is automatically vacant.
F. Continuous Absence From City: If an elected city officer is absent from the city any time during
the officer's term of office for a continuous period of more than sixty (60) days without the
consent of the city council, the city office is automatically vacant.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
1-5-2: MEMBERSHIP; TERMS
A. Composition: The city shall have a governing body that consists of six (6) council members, of
which one is a mayor, who shall vote only in the case of a tie or in the appointment or dismissal
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=1:_ADMINISTRATION 11/43
of a city manager under Utah Code § 10-3-830 and who exercises ceremonial and administrative
functions, and five (5) are council members.
B. Election; Terms: The election and terms of office of the officers shall be as follows:
1. The offices of mayor and approximately half the council members shall be filled in
municipal elections held in 1977. The terms shall be for four (4) years. These offices shall
be filled every four (4) years in municipal elections.
2. The offices of the remaining council members shall be filled in a municipal election held in
1979. The terms shall be for four (4) years. These offices shall be filled every four (4)
years in municipal elections.
C. Vacancy In Office: Mayor or city council vacancies shall be filled as provided in Utah Code §
20A-1-510.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
1-5-3: MAYOR AS MEMBER OF CITY COUNCIL
A. Administration Vested In Mayor: The administrative powers, authority and duties are vested in
the mayor.
B. Presiding Officer; Mayor Pro Tempore: The mayor shall be the chairperson and preside at the
meetings of the city council. In the absence of the mayor or because of his inability or refusal to
act, the city council may elect a member of the city council to preside over the meeting as mayor
pro tempore, who shall have all the powers and duties of the mayor during his absence or
disability. The election of a mayor pro tempore shall be entered in the minutes of the meeting.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=1:_ADMINISTRATION 12/43
C. Powers And Duties:
1. The mayor is the chief executive officer to whom all employees of the city shall report.
2. The mayor shall:
a. Keep the peace and enforce the laws of the city;
b. Remit fines and forfeitures;
c. Report remittances under subsection C2b of this section to the city council at its
next regular session;
d. Perform all duties prescribed by law, resolution or ordinance;
e. Ensure that all the laws, ordinances and resolutions are faithfully executed and
observed;
f. Report to the city council the condition of the city and recommend for city council
consideration any measures that the mayor considers to be in the best interests of
the city;
g. When necessary, call on the residents of the city over the age of twenty one (21)
years to assist in enforcing the laws of the state and ordinances of the city;
h. Appoint, with the advice and consent of the city council, persons to fill city offices
or vacancies on commissions or committees of the city; and
i. Report to the city council any release granted under subsection C4b of this
section.
3. Subsection C2h of this section does not apply to the appointment of a city manager under
Utah Code § 10-3-830.
4. The mayor may:
a. At any reasonable time, examine and inspect the official books, papers, records or
documents of the city or of any officer, employee or agent of the city; and
b. Release any person imprisoned for violation of any city ordinance.
5. No Veto: The mayor shall have no power to veto any act of the city council, unless
otherwise specifically authorized by statute.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
1-5-4: MEETINGS; PROCEDURE AND CONDUCT
A. Regular Meetings: The governing body shall conduct regular meeting(s), which shall be held as
outlined in the North Ogden City Council Rules and Procedures. All meetings, except for site
visits and open houses shall be held at:
North Ogden Municipal Building
505 East 2600 North
North Ogden City Council Chambers
North Ogden, Utah
The governing body meeting(s) shall begin promptly at the time established during the annual
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=1:_ADMINISTRATION 13/43
adoption of the meeting schedule or as modified during a motion before the Council to amend the
meeting schedule when circumstances require amendment. The regularly scheduled meetings
may be cancelled by the Mayor if there is a legal holiday, election day, a quorum is unavailable,
there are no pressing agenda items, or if the City Recorder/Deputy City Recorder is unavailable.
B. Special Meetings: If at any time the business of the city requires a special meeting of the City
Council, such meeting may be ordered by the Mayor or any two (2) members of the City Council.
The order shall be entered in the minutes of the City Council. The order shall provide at least
twenty-four (24) hours' notice of the special meeting and notice thereof shall be served by the city
recorder on each member who did not sign the order by delivering the notice personally or by
leaving it at the member's usual place of abode. The personal appearance by a council member
at any specially called meeting constitutes a waiver of the notice required in this subsection.
C. Emergency Meetings: Emergency Meetings may be held when because of unforeseen
circumstances the City Council must meet to consider matters of an emergency or urgent matter.
Such meetings notice and procedures shall comply with the Utah Open Meetings Act which
require:
1. the public body or specified body gives the best notice practicable of:
a. the time and place of the emergency meeting; and
b. the topics to be considered at the emergency meeting.
2. An emergency meeting of a public body may not be held unless:
a. an attempt has been made to notify all the members of the public body; and
b. a majority of the members of the public body approve the meeting
D. Open Meetings; Exception: Every meeting is open to the public, unless closed pursuant to Utah
Code §§ 52-4-4 and 52-4-5.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
Amended by Ord. 2014-01 on 1/14/2014
Amended by Ord. 2018-25 on 10/9/2018
1-5-5: ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS; PROCEDURES
A. Power Exercised By Ordinance: The city council may pass any ordinance to regulate, require,
prohibit, govern, control or supervise any activity, business, conduct or condition authorized by
statute or any other provision of law. An officer of the city shall not be convicted of a criminal
offense where he relied on or enforced an ordinance he reasonably believed to be a valid
ordinance. It shall be a defense to any action for punitive damages that the official acted in good
faith in enforcing an ordinance or that he enforced an ordinance on advice of legal counsel.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=1:_ADMINISTRATION 14/43
B. Form Of Ordinance: Any ordinance passed by the city council shall contain and be in
substantially the following order and form:
1. A number;
2. A title which indicates the nature of the subject matter of the ordinance;
3. A preamble which states the need or reason for the ordinance;
4. An ordaining clause which states "Be it ordained by North Ogden City:";
5. The body or subject of the ordinance;
6. When applicable, a statement indicating the penalty for violation of the ordinance or a
reference that the punishment is covered by an ordinance which prescribes the fines and
terms of imprisonment for the violation of the city ordinance; or, the penalty may establish
a classification of penalties and refer to such ordinance in which the penalty for such
violation is established;
7. A statement indicating the effective date of the ordinance or the date when the ordinance
shall become effective after publication or posting as required by this section;
8. A line for the signature of the mayor or acting mayor to sign the ordinance;
9. A place for the city recorder to attest the ordinance and affix the seal of the city.
C. Requirements As To Form; Effective Date:
1. Ordinances passed or enacted by the city council shall be signed by the mayor, or if he is
absent, by the mayor pro tempore, or by a quorum of the city council, and shall be
recorded before taking effect. No ordinance shall be void or unlawful by reason of its
failure to conform to the provisions of Utah Code § 10-3-704(1), (2), (3) or (4).
2. Ordinances shall become effective twenty (20) days after publication or posting or thirty
(30) days after final passage by the city council, whichever is closer to the date of final
passage, but ordinances may become effective at an earlier or later date after publication
or posting if so provided in the ordinance.
3. Ordinances which do not have an effective date shall become effective twenty (20) days
after publication or posting, or thirty (30) days after final passage by the city council,
whichever is sooner.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=1:_ADMINISTRATION 15/43
D. Publication And Posting Of Ordinances:
1. Before an ordinance may take effect, except an ordinance enacted under Utah Code §§
10-3-706 through 10-3-710, the city council shall:
a. Deposit a copy of the ordinance in the office of the city recorder; and
i. Publish a short summary of the ordinance at least once:
(1) In a newspaper published within the city; or
(2) If there is no newspaper published within the city, in a newspaper of
general circulation within the city; or
ii. Post a complete copy of the ordinance in three (3) public places within the
city.
2. a. Any ordinance, code or book, other than the state code, relating to building or
safety standards, municipal functions, administration, control or regulations, may
be adopted and shall take effect without further publication or posting, if reference
is made to the code or book and at least one copy has been filed for use and
examination by the public in the office of the city recorder prior to the adoption of
the ordinance by the city council.
b. Any state law relating to building or safety standards, municipal functions,
administration, control or regulations, may be adopted and shall take effect without
further publication or posting if reference is made to the state code.
c. The ordinance adopting the code or book shall be published in the manner
provided in this subsection.
E. Recording, Numbering And Certification Of Passage: The city recorder shall record, in a book
used exclusively for that purpose, all ordinances passed by the city council. The city recorder
shall give each ordinance a number, if the city council has not already so done. Immediately
following each ordinance, or codification of ordinances, the city recorder shall make or cause to
be made a certificate stating the date of passage and of the date of publication or posting, as
required. The record and memorandum, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie evidence
of the contents, passage and publication or posting of the ordinance or codification.
F. Resolutions:
1. Purpose: Unless otherwise required by law, the city council may exercise all
administrative powers by resolution, including, but not limited to: a) establishing water and
sewer rates; b) charges for garbage collection and fees charged for city services; c)
establishing personnel policies and guidelines; and d) regulating the use and operation of
the city property. Punishment, fines or forfeitures may not be imposed by resolution.
2. Form: Any resolution passed by the city council shall be in a form and contain sections
substantially similar to that prescribed for ordinances.
3. Publication; Effective Date: Resolutions may become effective without publication or
posting and may take effect on passage or at a later date as the city council may
determine, but resolutions may not become effective more than three (3) months from the
date of passage.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=1:_ADMINISTRATION 16/43
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
ARTICLE A: REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY
1-5A-1: PURPOSE
1-5A-2: DESIGNATION; POWERS AND DUTIES
1-5A-1: PURPOSE
A. The purpose of this article is to establish a redevelopment agency and to designate the
legislative body of the city as the redevelopment agency. This is pursuant to the provisions of the
Utah neighborhood development act, specifically Utah Code § 17A-2-1201 et seq., as amended.
B. The city council finds that in order to preserve and further promote the continued peace, health,
safety, welfare and good order of the city, it is necessary to create and designate the legislative
body of this city as the redevelopment agency.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 2.24.010 on 1/1/1987
1-5A-2: DESIGNATION; POWERS AND DUTIES
The city council establishes a redevelopment agency and designates itself as the redevelopment agency
of the city and shall have all powers and duties as are specified in the Utah neighborhood
redevelopment act of Utah Code Annotated, as amended.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 2.24.020 on 1/1/1987
1-6: OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
1-6-1: CREATING OFFICES; FILLING VACANCIES
1-6-2: CITY RECORDER AND CITY TREASURER
1-6-3: BONDS OF OFFICERS
1-6-4: OATH OF OFFICE
1-6-5: COMPENSATION
1-6-6: APPOINTMENT OF DEPUTY OFFICERS
ARTICLE A: EMPLOYEE APPEALS BOARD
ARTICLE B: FINANCE DIRECTOR
1-6-1: CREATING OFFICES; FILLING VACANCIES
A. Offices Created By Council: The city council may create any office deemed necessary for the
government of the city and provide for filling vacancies in elective and appointive offices.
B. Mayor To Appoint And Fill Vacancies: The mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council,
may appoint and fill vacancies in all offices provided for by law or ordinance.
C. Continuation In Office: All appointed officers shall continue in office until their successors are
appointed and qualified.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
1-6-2: CITY RECORDER AND CITY TREASURER
A. Appointment: On or before the first Monday in February following a city election, the mayor, with
the advice and consent of the city council, shall appoint a qualified person to each of the offices
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=1:_ADMINISTRATION 17/43
of city recorder and city treasurer.
B. Ex Officio Auditor: The city recorder is ex officio city auditor and shall perform the duties of that
office.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
1-6-3: BONDS OF OFFICERS
A. Approval Of Bonds: The bonds of the council members shall be approved by the mayor and the
bond of the mayor shall be approved by the city council at the first meeting of the city council in
January following a city election.
B. Premium Paid By City: The premium charged by a corporate surety for any bond required by the
city shall be paid by the city.
C. Additional Bonds; Filing: The city council may at any time require further and additional bonds of
any or all officerselected or appointed. All bonds given by the officers, except as otherwise
provided by law, shall be filed with the city recorder, except that the bond of the city recorder
shall be filed with the city treasurer.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
1-6-4: OATH OF OFFICE
A. Constitutional Oath Of Office: All officers, whether elected or appointed, before entering on the
duties of their respective offices shall take, subscribe and file the constitutional oath of office. The
form of oath shall be as provided in the Utah constitution article IV, section 10.
B. Filing: The oath of office required under this section shall be administered by any judge, notary
public or by the city recorder. Elected officials shall take their oath of office at twelve o'clock
(12:00) noon on the first Monday in January following their election or as soon thereafter as is
practical. Appointed officers shall take their oath at any time before entering on their duties. All
oaths of office shall be filed with the city recorder.
C. Acts Of Officials Not Voided: No official act of any city officer shall be invalid for the reason that
he failed to take the oath of office.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
1-6-5: COMPENSATION
The salaries for the officers and employees of this city shall be established by the procedures of Utah
Code § 10-3-818, as amended.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
1-6-6: APPOINTMENT OF DEPUTY OFFICERS
A. Appointment Power: Any officer, elective or appointive, of this city, except as provided in
subsection E of this section, shall have the power to appoint a deputy by and with the consent of
the mayor and city council. (1987 Code § 2.08.010)
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=1:_ADMINISTRATION 18/43
B. Powers And Duties, Generally: Any deputy so appointed and qualified shall have and exercise all
the powers and duties of the principal officer. (1987 Code § 2.08.020)
C. Oath And Bond Required: Before assuming any duties of office, all such deputy officers shall
take and file the constitutional oath of office and shall furnish bond in such sum as may be
determined by the city council by resolution, the premium on any such bonds to be paid for out of
the general funds of the city. (1987 Code § 2.08.030)
D. Removal From Office: Any such deputy may be removed from office at any time, with or without
cause, by the officer so appointing such deputy, or by the mayor by and with the consent of the
city council. (1987 Code § 2.08.040)
E. Mayor And Council Members Excluded: This section shall not be construed to permit the
appointment of a deputy by the mayor or by any member of the city council; provided, however,
that in the event that the mayor or any member of the city council is holding any other office in
addition to the office of mayor or council member, a deputy can be appointed to such other office.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 2.08.010, 2.08.020, 2.08.030, 2.08.040, 2.08.050 on 1/1/1987
ARTICLE A: EMPLOYEE APPEALS BOARD
1-6A-1: ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE
1-6A-2: BOARD MEMBERS
1-6A-3: APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS
1-6A-4: PROCEDURE FOR APPEALS
1-6A-5: BOARD DECISION
1-6A-6: APPEAL OF BOARD DECISION
1-6A-1: ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE
There is hereby established an appeals board in the city. The purpose of the appeals board shall be to
consider appeals brought by employees of the city who are discharged or transferred to a position with
less remuneration, except that the following employees shall not be eligible to appeals before the
appeals board:
A. Members of the police department;
B. Heads of departments; and
C. Supervisors.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2000-04 on 3/1/2000
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
1-6A-2: BOARD MEMBERS
The board of appeals shall consist of five (5) members. All board members shall serve for a term of two
(2) years from the date they are appointed. Members of the board of appeals shall be selected prior to
July 1 in even numbered years. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent any member of the appeals
board from serving for two (2) or more consecutive terms and there shall be no limit on the number of
terms any member of the appeals board may serve. Two (2) members shall be members of the city
council ("the council members") and shall be appointed as set forth in CCNO 1-6A-3A. The remaining
three (3) members of the appeals board shall be employees or appointed officers of the city ("the
employee members") and shall be appointed as set forth in CCNO 1-6A-3B.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2000-04 on 3/1/2000
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=1:_ADMINISTRATION 19/43
1-6A-3: APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS
A. Council Members:
1. The council members of the appeals board shall be appointed by the city council at a
regularly scheduled meeting of the city council.
2. The mayor shall have ballots prepared prior to the meeting listing each member of the city
council.
3. The mayor shall not be eligible to serve on the appeals board and his name shall not be
listed on the ballots. The mayor also shall not participate in the voting for the council
members of the appeals board.
4. At the meeting, the mayor shall distribute the ballots to the council members and each
council member shall vote for two (2) council members to serve as the council members
of the appeals board; provided, that no council member may cast both of his or her votes
for the same member of the council.
5. The mayor shall count the ballots and announce the results of the balloting during the
meeting at which the council votes.
6. The council member having the highest number of votes shall be the chairperson of the
appeals board. The council member having the second highest number of votes shall be
a member of the appeals board. The council member having the third highest number of
votes shall be an alternate and shall serve on the appeals board only if the chairperson
and council member are unable to serve.
7. If there is a tie among three (3) or more members of the council for the highest number of
votes, the names of the three (3) or more tied council members shall be put into a hat and
the mayor shall draw three (3) names out of the hat. The first name drawn shall be the
chairperson of the appeals board. The second name shall be a member of the appeals
board. The third name drawn shall be the alternate. All other tied members of the council
shall not be members of the appeals board.
8. If there is one city council member who receives more votes than any other and a tie
between two (2) or more council members for the next highest number of votes, the
council member receiving the highest number of votes shall be the chairperson of the
appeals board. The mayor shall put the names of the tied council members into a hat and
draw two (2) names out of the hat. The council member whose name is drawn out of the
hat first shall be a member of the appeals board. The council member whose name is
drawn out second shall be the alternate. The other council members who were tied shall
not be members of the appeals board.
9. All other ties in the voting for council members shall be broken by putting the names of
the tied council members in a hat and drawing out names until all of the vacancies in the
appeals board are filled.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=1:_ADMINISTRATION 20/43
B. Employee Members:
1. For purposes of choosing the three (3) members of the appeals board from among the
employees and appointed officers of the city ("the employee members"), the city shall be
divided into four (4) departments. The departments shall be:
a. The employees and appointed officers of the police department;
b. The employees and appointed officers of the public works department; and
c. The employees and appointed officers of all other departments of the city.
2. Each department shall have a person designated as the department lead, who shall
supervise the selection of the employee member from his or her department. The
department leads shall be:
a. Department 1, the chief of the police department.
b. Department 2, the community services director.
c. Department 3, the public works director.
d. Department 4, the city administrator.
3. During each even numbered year, the employees and appointed officers in each
department shall appoint one person from among their number to represent the
department on the appeals board. The appointment shall be by secret ballot distributed to
the employees of each department. The department lead shall call a special meeting of
the employees and appointed officers in his or her department for the purpose of
selecting an employee member from that department.
4. The department lead shall notify the mayor of the time of the special meeting and the
mayor or his designee shall attend the meeting.
5. At the meeting, the mayor or his designee shall explain the purpose of the meeting and
shall explain the purpose of the appeals board. The mayor or his designee shall also
supervise the election of the employee members.
6. Prior to the special meeting, the department lead shall prepare ballots. The ballots shall
list the names of each employee and appointed officer in the department, including the
department lead, and shall provide a space beside each name for the employees and
appointed officers to indicate the employees or appointed officer they are voting for.
7. The employees of each department shall each vote for two (2) employees or appointed
officers in the department; provided, that no employee or appointed officer shall cast both
of his votes for the same person. Ballots on which one or two (2) names are marked shall
be valid, but ballots on which three (3) or more names are marked shall be invalid and
shall not be counted. The department lead shall participate in the voting.
8. The mayor or his designee shall count the votes. The employee or appointed officer
receiving the highest number of votes shall be the employee member from that
department. The employee or appointed officer receiving the second highest number of
votes shall be the alternate from that department.
9. In the event two (2) or more employees or appointed officers from any department are
tied, the mayor or his designee shall place the names of the tied employees or appointed
officers into a hat and draw out two (2) names. The first name drawn shall be the
employee member from that department. The second name drawn shall be the alternate
from that department.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=1:_ADMINISTRATION 21/43
10. In the event one employee or appointed officer receives more votes than any other and
there is a tie for the second highest number of votes, the employee or appointed officer
with the highest number of votes shall be the employee from that department. The mayor
or his designee shall place the names of the employees or appointed officers with the
second highest number of votes into a hat and draw one name. That person shall be the
alternate from that department.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2000-04 on 3/1/2000
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
1-6A-4: PROCEDURE FOR APPEALS
A. Eligibility; Filing: Any employee who is discharged or transferred to a position with less
remuneration and who is eligible for a hearing before the appeals board shall comply with all
policies in the city personnel policies and procedures manual before filing an appeal with the
appeals board. If the employee has complied with all applicable personnel policies and is still
unsatisfied with the result, the employee may file an appeal with the appeals board by filing
written notice of the appeal with the city recorder within ten (10) days of receiving the final
decision under the city's personnel policies.
B. Referral To Appeals Board: Upon receiving an appeal under subsection A of this section, the city
recorder shall transmit a copy of the appeal to the chairperson of the appeals board as quickly as
reasonably possible.
C. Employee Member Disqualification: In any appeal before the appeals board, the three (3)
employee members of the appeals board shall be determined by disqualifying the employee
member of the appeals board which was selected by:
1. In the case of an appeal by an employee who was discharged, the department in which
the appellant worked immediately prior to the discharge; or
2. In the case of an appeal by an employee who was transferred to a position with less
remuneration, the department in which the appellant worked immediately prior to the
transfer.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=1:_ADMINISTRATION 22/43
D. Procedure Specified: Upon receiving notification of an appeal from the city recorder, the
chairperson of the appeals board shall contact all of the members of the appeals board who will
sit on the appeal and call a meeting of the appeals board to begin considering the appeal. The
following procedures shall govern the appeal board's consideration of the appeal:
1. The first order of business in any investigation shall be to determine whether any member
of the appeals board has a conflict of interest which would prevent that member from
participating in the investigation. The following shall be examples of conflicts which would
prevent an appeals board member from participating in the investigation:
a. Working closely with the appellant, either immediately prior to the discharge or
transfer, or at some time in the past;
b. Strong feelings in favor of or against the appellant;
c. Strong feelings in favor of or against the department head or other person who
made the decision to discharge the appellant or to transfer the appellant to a
position with less remuneration.
2. Any member of the appeals board may notify the chairperson that he or she believes he
or she may have a conflict which would disqualify that person from impartially considering
the appeal before the appeals board. If the chairperson receives notice from any member
of the appeals board of a conflict, the chairperson shall meet with the member. During the
meeting, the member shall explain the conflict to the chairperson and the chairperson
shall decide whether the member shall be excused. The decision of the chairperson
regarding an attempt by a member of the appeals board to be excused shall be final.
a. If the chairperson decides not to excuse a member of the appeals board under
this section, the member shall participate in the investigation.
b. If the chairperson excuses a member of the appeals board from participating in an
investigation under this section, the chairperson shall appoint an alternate to take
the excused member's place. If the excused member was a council member, the
chairperson must replace the excused member with the council alternate. If the
excused member was an employee member, he or she must be replaced with the
alternate from the department which selected the excused member.
c. If the chairperson requests to be excused, the other council member of the board
of appeals shall make a decision on his or her request. If the chairperson is
excused, the other original council member shall assume the duties of the
chairperson.
3. After the final members of the appeals board which will hear the appeal have been
determined, the members of the appeals board shall set a timetable for the investigation.
The timetable shall provide for the conclusion of the investigation within fifteen (15) days
of the date the chairperson of the appeals board received notice of the appeal.
4. As part of its investigation, the appeals board shall, at a minimum, interview:
a. The appellant;
b. The person who made the decision to discharge the appellant or transfer the
appellant to a position with less remuneration; and
c. Any person who made a decision on the issue under the city's personnel policies.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=1:_ADMINISTRATION 23/43
5. The appeals board may interview any other witnesses or employees who the appeals
board believes have information which will be helpful in making a decision on the appeal.
The appeals board shall have authority to compel employees and officers of the city to
attend its meetings and be interviewed, but shall have no power of subpoena to compel
other persons to cooperate with its investigation.
6. The appeals board shall not have the power to place persons under oath, but the appeals
board may inform employees and officers of the city that any misrepresentations made
before the appeals board may be cause for discipline, up to and including termination of
employment with the city.
7. The appeals board shall have access to all records of the city which are classified as
public documents under the government records access and management act, Utah
Code § 63-2-101 et seq.
8. The meetings of the appeals board may be held during business hours or at any other
time convenient to the members of the appeals board. If the members of the appeals
board cannot agree on a time to hold meetings, the chairperson shall set the times for the
meetings of the appeals board, and all members of the appeals board shall be required to
attend all meetings of the appeals board.
9. The chairperson of the appeals board shall preside over all meetings of the appeals
board.
10. The city shall pay all members of the appeals board and employees interviewed by the
appeals board their normal hourly wage during all times the members are attending
meetings of the appeals board.
11. The appellant shall have the right:
a. To be present at all meetings of the appeals board;
b. To be represented by counsel of the appellant's choice at all stages of the
investigation; provided, that nothing herein shall be construed to create a duty on
the part of the city to supply counsel for the appellant;
c. To confront any witnesses interviewed by the appeals board; and
d. To examine all evidence considered by the appeals board.
12. All meetings of the appeals board shall be closed to the public, except that the appellant
may request an open hearing, in which case the meetings of the appeals board shall be
open to the public.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2000-04 on 3/1/2000
1-6A-5: BOARD DECISION
A. Required: At the conclusion of its investigation, the appeals board shall make a decision. The
decision shall be made by secret ballot.
B. Closed Meeting For Discussion: After receiving all pertinent evidence and testimony, the appeals
board may hold a closed meeting to discuss the appeal.
C. Ballots: The chairperson of the appeals board shall prepare ballots, which shall have spaces for
the members of the appeals board to vote to affirm the discharge or transfer or to overturn the
discharge or transfer.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=1:_ADMINISTRATION 24/43
D. Voting: The voting shall be by secret ballot and the completed ballots shall be returned to the
chairperson of the appeals board, who shall collect the ballots, count the votes, and certify the
decision of the appeals board to the city recorder.
E. Decision To Appellant: The city recorder shall send a copy of the appeals board's decision to the
appellant as soon as the city recorder receives the decision.
F. Overturn Of Decision: If the appeals board votes to overturn the discharge or transfer:
1. The appellant shall be reinstated to employment or to the previous wage;
2. The appellant shall be paid his previous wage from the time of the decision forward;
provided, that the appellant returns to employment with the city; and
3. The appeals board shall vote again to determine whether the appellant shall be paid to
reimburse the appellant for the time the appellant was discharged or transferred.
a. The appeals board may reimburse the appellant for the time the appellant was
discharged or transferred; provided, that under no circumstances may the appeals
board vote to reimburse the appellant for more than fifteen (15) days.
b. If the appeals board votes to reimburse the appellant:
i. A discharged appellant shall be paid his or her full wage for the time the
appellant was discharged, up to fifteen (15) days; and
ii. A transferred employee shall be paid the difference between the previous
wage and the new wage for the time the transfer was in force, up to fifteen
(15) days.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2000-04 on 3/1/2000
1-6A-6: APPEAL OF BOARD DECISION
A. No Appeal By City: If the appeals board votes to overturn the discharge or transfer, the
proceeding before the appeals board shall be closed and the city shall have no right to appeal
the decision of the appeals board. Nothing in the appeals board's decision shall affect the city's
right to take other disciplinary action against the appellant short of discharge or transfer in
response to the circumstances which led to the original discharge or transfer.
B. Appellant: If the appeals board affirms the discharge or transfer of the appellant, the appellant
shall have the right to appeal the appeals board's decision to the city council. The appeal shall be
made by filing a written notice of appeal with the city recorder within fourteen (14) days of the
time the appeals board announces its decision.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2000-04 on 3/1/2000
ARTICLE B: FINANCE DIRECTOR
1-6B-1: APPOINTMENT
1-6B-2: POWERS AND DUTIES
1-6B-3: BOND REQUIRED
1-6B-1: APPOINTMENT
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=1:_ADMINISTRATION 25/43
The finance director shall be a qualified person appointed and removed by the mayor, with the advice
and consent of the city council.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-13 on 8/13/2002
1-6B-2: POWERS AND DUTIES
A. Generally:
1. The finance director shall not assume the duties of the city treasurer, but will perform the
financial duties as set out at Utah Code § 10-6-139. (Ord. 2002-13, 8-13-2002; amd. 2006
Code)
2. The finance director shall:
a. Maintain the general books for each fund of the city and all subsidiary records
relating thereto, including a list of the outstanding bonds, their purpose, amount,
terms, date and place payable.
b. As appropriate, keep accounts with all receiving and disbursing officers of the city.
c. Preaudit all claims and demands against the city before they are allowed.
d. Oversee the preparation of the necessary checks in payment approved city
obligations. Such checks shall include an appropriate certification pursuant to
Utah Code § 11-1-1, examples of which shall be as presented in the uniform
accounting manual for Utah cities.
e. Also certify on the voucher or check copy, as appropriate, that:
i. The claim has been preaudited and documented;
ii. The claim has been approved in one of the following ways:
(1) Purchase order directly approved by the mayor in the councilmayor
optional form of government, or the governing body or its
delegate in other cities;
(2) Claim directly approved by the governing body; or
(3) Claim approved by the financial officer.
iii. The claim is within the lawful debt limit of the city; and
iv. The claim does not over expend the appropriate departmental budget
established by the governing body.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=1:_ADMINISTRATION 26/43
B. Approval Authority: Pursuant to the city financial administration ordinance, and consistent with
the appropriate budgetary controls set out herein and in other city operational directives, the
finance director is hereby approved by the city council to act as the financial officer for the
purpose of approving:
1. Payroll checks, if the checks are prepared in accordance with a salary schedule
established in a personnel ordinance or resolution; or
2. Routine expenditures, such as, but not limited to, utility bills, payroll related expenses,
supplies, materials, and payments on city approved contracts and capital expenditures
which were referenced in the budget document and approved by an appropriation
resolution adopted for the current fiscal year.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-13 on 8/13/2002
1-6B-3: BOND REQUIRED
Pursuant to Utah Code § 10-6-159, the finance director shall be bonded for a reasonable amount as
determined appropriate by the city council.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-13 on 8/13/2002
1-7: ELECTIONS
1-7-1: PRIMARY ELECTIONS
1-7-1: PRIMARY ELECTIONS
Pursuant to Utah Code § 20A-9-404, primary elections shall be held on the Tuesday following the first
Monday in October preceding the November municipal elections, except that no primary elections shall
be held if the number of candidates for a particular office does not exceed twice the number of offices to
be filled. All elections shall be nonpartisan.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 2.16.010 on 1/1/1987
1-8: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS
1-8-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT
1-8-2: EFFECT OF HEADINGS
1-8-3: SEVERABILITY
1-8-4: DEFINITIONS
1-8-5: APPOINTMENT AND QUALIFICATIONS OF THE ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE AND/OR
ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICER
1-8-6: POWERS OF ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE AND/OR ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICER
1-8-7: PROCEDURES AT ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS
1-8-8: REQUEST FOR ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING
1-8-9: NOTICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS
1-8-10: FAILURE TO APPEAR AT ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING
1-8-11: ADMINISTRATIVE ORDERS
1-8-12: FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER
1-8-13: APPEAL
1-8-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=1:_ADMINISTRATION 27/43
For specified municipal action, as more particularly defined and designated in this code, in which an
adverse decision by a city official results in detriment to a responsible person or the responsible person's
property, it is the purpose and intent of the city council to afford that person due process of law by way of
an administrative hearing. Due process shall require proper notice of the nature of the violation and the
opportunity to be heard by a fair and impartial administrative law judge, the right to present evidence, the
right to cross examination, the right to be represented by an attorney or other advocate and the right to
appeal an administrative order to the district court.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2013-10 on 8/27/2013
1-8-2: EFFECT OF HEADINGS
Title, chapter, and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify, or in
any manner affect the scope, meaning, or intent of the provisions of this chapter.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2013-10 on 8/27/2013
1-8-3: SEVERABILITY
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, portion, or provision of this chapter is, for any
reason, held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such
decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The city council hereby
declares that it would have adopted this chapter and each section, subsection, sentence, clause,
phrase, portion, or provision thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections,
clauses, phrases, portions, or provisions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. This section shall apply
to all amendments made to this chapter.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2013-10 on 8/27/2013
1-8-4: DEFINITIONS
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following meanings unless a
different meaning clearly appears from the context:
ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION: A citation issued to a responsible person that gives notice of a violation
and requires the responsible person to remedy a violation of city ordinance, to pay a civil fee and/or to
make a mandatory appearance before an administrative law judge.
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE AND/OR ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICER: A hearing officer
appointed to preside over administrative hearings.
ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER: An order issued by an administrative law judge and/or administrative
hearing officer. The order may include an order to enter upon private property to abate a violation of city
ordinance, to pay civil fees and administrative costs, to reverse or modify decisions of city officials as
provided elsewhere in this code or take any other action as authorized or required by this chapter and
applicable state codes.
EMERGENCY ABATEMENT: The immediate elimination or eradication of any condition that creates an
imminent life safety hazard.
ITEMIZED STATEMENT OF COSTS: A written notice to a responsible person, itemizing the city's actual
costs and administrative cost of abating a code violation, ordering payment of those costs and providing
an explanation of the procedure for a responsible person to appeal the reasonableness of the costs.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=1:_ADMINISTRATION 28/43
MUNICIPAL ACTION: An administrative citation or any other adverse municipal decision for which the
right to an administrative hearing is specifically provided by ordinance.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON: Any natural person, firm, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership,
association, club, company, corporation, business trust, organization, or the manager, lessee, agent,
sergeant, officer, or employee of any of them, or any other entity that is recognized by law as the subject
of rights or duties relating to a person or property affected by a municipal action. For purposes of this
chapter, "responsible person" also indicates a "person" whose interest is adverse to the city at an
administrative hearing.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2013-10 on 8/27/2013
1-8-5: APPOINTMENT AND QUALIFICATIONS OF THE ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE AND/OR
ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICER
A. The mayor, with the consent of the city council, shall appoint an administrative law judge and/or
administrative hearing officer to preside at administrative hearings.
B. The administrative law judge and/or administrative hearing officer shall serve for a term of two (2)
years and, during that two (2) year term, shall be subject to removal by the mayor only for cause.
C. Cause for removal may be for any conduct unbecoming a hearing officer as determined by the
city council, dereliction of assigned duties, the existence of a bias or conflict of interest that might
affect impartiality of decisions or the failure of the city council to appropriate funding for the
administrative law judge and/or administrative hearing officer position.
D. The administrative law judge and/or administrative hearing officer may appeal a removal for
cause to the city council which shall uphold the removal if there is substantial evidence to support
the mayor's decision.
E. A person appointed to serve as an administrative law judge and/or administrative hearing officer
shall either be law trained or have significant experience with the requirements and operation of
administrative hearing processes. The person appointed shall be free from any bias or conflict of
interest that might affect impartiality of decisions.
F. An administrative law judge and/or administrative hearing officer is subject to disqualification for
bias, prejudice, interest, or any other reason for which a judge may be disqualified in a court of
law.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2013-10 on 8/27/2013
1-8-6: POWERS OF ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE AND/OR ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING
OFFICER
A. An administrative law judge and/or administrative hearing officer shall have authority to hold an
administrative hearing for violations of this code and such other matters as specifically
designated by ordinance.
B. An administrative law judge and/or administrative hearing officer may continue a hearing for good
cause shown by one of the parties or if the administrative law judge and/or administrative hearing
officer independently determines that due process has not been adequately afforded to a party.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=1:_ADMINISTRATION 29/43
C. At the request of any party to an administrative hearing, an administrative law judge and/or
administrative hearing officer may issue administrative subpoenas for witnesses, documents, and
other evidence where the attendance of the witness or the admission of evidence is deemed
helpful by the administrative law judge and/or administrative hearing officer to decide issues at
the hearing. All costs related to the subpoena, including witness and mileage fees, shall be borne
by the party requesting the subpoena.
D. The administrative law judge and/or administrative hearing officer may modify civil fees or fines
upon a finding of good cause. The administrative law judge and/or administrative hearing officer
may reduce the fines to what is just and equitable under the circumstances; however, in
connection with an appeal regarding an itemized statement of costs, the administrative law judge
and/or administrative hearing officer may not order the responsible person to pay less than actual
costs incurred by the city and shall require the responsible person to pay the city's administrative
costs as established in the consolidated fee schedule.
E. Where specifically authorized by municipal ordinance, the administrative law judge and/or
administrative hearing officer shall have the authority to reverse or modify the decision of a city
official.
F. An administrative law judge and/or administrative hearing officer has continuing jurisdiction over
the subject matter of an administrative hearing for the purposes of: granting a continuance;
ordering compliance by issuing an administrative order; ensuring compliance of that order;
authorizing the city to enter upon private property to abate a violation; modifying an
administrative order, assessing costs of abatement, assessing civil fines; or, where extraordinary
circumstances exist, granting a new hearing.
G. An administrative law judge and/or administrative hearing officer may require a responsible
person to post a performance bond to ensure compliance with an administrative order, but only if
agreed to by the enforcement official handling the matter for the city.
H. An administrative law judge and/or administrative hearing officer shall not make any order that
would require or allow a responsible person to violate state law or city ordinance.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2013-10 on 8/27/2013
1-8-7: PROCEDURES AT ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS
A. Administrative hearings are intended to be informal in nature. Formal rules of evidence and
discovery shall not apply; however, upon request made in writing reasonably in advance of a
hearing, the city shall provide to a responsible person requesting a hearing the opportunity to
review documents, photographs or other tangible evidence it intends to present at the hearing
and shall provide a list of the witnesses it intends to call at the hearing. Failure to request
discovery shall not be a basis for a continuance. Complainant information shall not be disclosed
or released unless the complainant is a witness at the hearing. The procedure and format of the
administrative hearing shall follow duly adopted policies and procedures.
B. The city shall bear the burden of proof to establish the existence of a violation of municipal
ordinance.
C. Such proof shall be established by a preponderance of the evidence.
D. Each party shall have the opportunity to cross examine witnesses and present evidence in
support of his case. A written declaration signed under penalty of perjury may be accepted in lieu
of a personal appearance. Testimony may be given by telephone or other electronic means.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=1:_ADMINISTRATION 30/43
E. Administrative hearings shall be held at city hall, open to the public and shall be recorded by
audiotape; however, at the discretion of the administrative law judge, administrative hearings
may be held at the location of a violation as long as adequate provision is made to preserve a
verbatim record of the hearing.
F. The responsible person shall have the right to be represented by an attorney or other advocate.
If an attorney will be representing a responsible person at a hearing, notice of the attorney's
name, address, and telephone number should be given to the city attorney at least one day prior
to the hearing. If such notice is not given, the hearing may be continued at the city's request, and
all costs of the continuance shall be assessed to the responsible person.
G. The burden to prove any raised defenses shall be upon the party raising any such defense and
shall be established by a preponderance of the evidence.
H. Administrative hearings may be held on Mondays through Fridays, excluding city holidays,
between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2013-10 on 8/27/2013
1-8-8: REQUEST FOR ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING
A. Where the right to an administrative hearing has been established under this code, a responsible
person having that right may request an administrative hearing, if the request is filed within ten
(10) calendar days from the date of service of one of the following:
1. Itemized statement of costs;
2. Administrative citation;
3. Notice of any other municipal action where the right to an administrative hearing is
provided under any other title and chapter of this code.
B. The request for an administrative hearing shall be made in writing, and shall be accompanied by
a filing fee in the amount established in the consolidated fee schedule. This fee shall not be
waived.
C. The request shall comply with the following requirements:
1. It shall be in writing;
2. It shall contain a legible, plain statement of the reason or reasons that the responsible
person requesting the hearing is entitled to relief from the municipal action;
3. It shall be accompanied by a copy of the itemized statement of costs, administrative
citation or other notice of municipal action for which the hearing is requested;
4. Where no written notice of the municipal action has been issued by the city, the request
shall describe the nature of the municipal action from which the appeal is taken, including
the date of the action and the name of the municipal official responsible for the municipal
action;
5. It shall contain the name of the responsible person requesting the hearing and the
address to which all notices and orders shall be mailed;
6. It shall be dated and signed by the responsible person requesting the hearing; and
7. It shall be filed with the city recorder.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=1:_ADMINISTRATION 31/43
D. When it issues an administrative citation, the city may require a mandatory appearance at an
administrative hearing.
E. Within twenty (20) days after receiving a request for an administrative hearing, or the service of a
citation requiring a mandatory appearance, the administrative law judge and/or administrative
hearing officer shall schedule a date, time, and place for the administrative hearing. Failure to
hold the hearing within twenty (20) days of the request shall not be a basis for reversal of the
municipal action. No adverse action, except an emergency abatement pursuant to CCNO 1-9-19
of this title, shall be taken pending the administrative hearing.
F. Failure to request an administrative hearing within ten (10) calendar days from the date of
service of any of the notices in subsection A of this section shall constitute a waiver of the right to
an administrative hearing and the right to an appeal.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2013-10 on 8/27/2013
1-8-9: NOTICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS
A. Notice of the date, time, and place of the administrative hearing shall be served upon the
responsible person requesting the hearing no later than five (5) city business days in advance of
the hearing. Failure to provide timely notice of the hearing shall result in the continuation of the
hearing. No adverse action will be taken or imposed by the city, with the exception of emergency
abatement action.
B. Notice of the administrative hearing may be included in an administrative citation, or may be
personally served or served by mailing the notice to the address designated in the request for
hearing.
C. Upon service of the notice the responsible person receiving the service shall be required to
attend the administrative hearing at the appointed date and time.
D. Notice of emergency abatement shall be served upon the responsible person personally or by
regular mail as soon as practicable after abatement of the emergency condition but no later than
ten (10) days after the abatement is completed.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2013-10 on 8/27/2013
1-8-10: FAILURE TO APPEAR AT ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING
A. A responsible person who fails to appear at an administrative hearing shall be deemed to have
waived all rights in connection with the hearing, including the right to appeal.
B. Provided that proper notice of the hearing has been given as provided in CCNO 1-8-9, the
administrative law judge and/or administrative hearing officer, after receiving a proffer of the
evidence supporting the municipal action, may enter an administrative order in the absence of
the responsible person.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2013-10 on 8/27/2013
1-8-11: ADMINISTRATIVE ORDERS
A. A responsible person and the city may enter into a stipulated agreement, which shall be signed
by both parties. Such agreement may be entered as an administrative order. Entry of such
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=1:_ADMINISTRATION 32/43
agreement shall constitute a waiver of the right to an administrative hearing and the right to
appeal.
B. Within ten (10) days after receiving evidence, the administrative law judge and/or administrative
hearing officer shall issue a written administrative order that affirms, rejects or modifies the
itemized statement of costs, administrative citation, and notice of emergency abatement or other
municipal action.
C. If affirmed, the administrative order shall specify the evidence supporting the administrative law
judge's and/or administrative hearing officer's decision and the action required to satisfy the
order.
D. The administrative law judge and/or administrative hearing officer may assign the party who
prevails at the administrative hearing to prepare findings of fact and conclusions of law.
E. An administrative law judge and/or administrative hearing officer may issue an administrative
order that requires a responsible person to cease from violating this code and to take any
necessary corrective action.
F. An administrative law judge and/or administrative hearing officer may order the city to enter upon
private property and abate all violations, including the removal of animals, noxious weeds,
overgrown landscape, junk, including junk vehicles, deleterious objects or structures, etc., which
exist in violation of municipal ordinance. Whenever an order of abatement is entered, the
administrative law judge and/or administrative hearing officer shall order the responsible person
to pay to the city the actual costs of the abatement and the administrative costs of the city to
perform the abatement.
G. As part of an administrative order, an administrative law judge and/or administrative hearing
officer may establish specific deadlines for the payment of fees and costs, and condition the total
or partial assessment of civil fees on the responsible person's ability to take necessary corrective
actions by specified deadlines. Such fees shall continue to accrue until the responsible person
complies with the administrative law judge's and/or administrative hearing officer's decision and
corrects the violation.
H. An administrative order imposing civil fines for failure to abate a violation of this code by a stated
deadline, shall continue to accrue additional fines until the responsible person complies with the
administrative law judge's and/or administrative hearing officer's decision and corrects the
violation but shall not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for any single violation.
I. An administrative law judge and/or administrative hearing officer may schedule subsequent
review hearings as may be necessary or as requested by the city to ensure compliance with an
administrative order.
J. An administrative law judge and/or administrative hearing officer may order a responsible person
to post a performance bond to ensure compliance with an administrative order, but only if agreed
to by the enforcement official handling the matter for the city.
K. An administrative law judge and/or administrative hearing officer may revoke or suspend a
business license, a building permit, or permits for any alteration, repair, or construction pertaining
to any existing or new structures or signs on the property, or any permits pertaining to the use
and development of real property or a structure where a violation is located where specifically
authorized in this code.
L. An administrative order shall become final on the date of signing by an administrative law judge
and/or administrative hearing officer.
M. An administrative order shall be served on all parties by regular mail at the address listed in the
citation or request for hearing.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=1:_ADMINISTRATION 33/43
N. An administrative law judge and/or administrative hearing officer may order any action
reasonably necessary to obtain compliance with the applicable city ordinances.
O. An administrative law judge and/or administrative hearing officer may assess civil fines and costs
of abatement and administrative costs to a responsible person.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2013-10 on 8/27/2013
1-8-12: FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER
A. It shall be unlawful for any responsible person to fail to comply with the terms and deadlines set
forth in a final administrative order.
B. A violation of this section shall be a class B misdemeanor.
C. Upon failure of a responsible person to comply with the terms and deadline set forth in the
administrative order, the city may use all appropriate legal means to recover the civil penalties
and administrative costs to obtain compliance.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2013-10 on 8/27/2013
1-8-13: APPEAL
A. The city or any responsible person adversely affected by a final administrative order made in the
exercise of the provisions of this chapter may file a petition for review in the district court.
B. The petition shall be barred unless it is filed within thirty (30) days after the administrative order is
final.
C. In the petition, the responsible person may only allege that the administrative order was arbitrary,
capricious or illegal.
D. The court shall:
1. Presume that the administrative order is valid;
2. Review the record to determine whether the order was arbitrary, capricious, or illegal; and
3. Affirm the administrative order if it is supported by substantial evidence in the record.
E. The record of the proceedings including minutes, findings, orders and, if available, a true and
correct transcript of the proceeding shall be transmitted to the reviewing court.
F. The party requesting the hearing shall bear the cost of preparing the transcript of the hearing.
G. If the proceeding was tape recorded, a transcript of such tape recording shall be deemed a true
and correct transcript for purposes of this subsection. If a transcript of a hearing cannot be
prepared because the tape recording is incomplete or unintelligible, the district court may, in its
discretion, remand the matter to the administrative law judge and/or administrative hearing officer
for a supplemental proceeding to complete the record. The district court may limit the scope of
the supplemental proceeding to issues that, in the court's opinion, need to be clarified.
H. If there is a record, court review shall be limited to the record of the proceeding. The court may
not accept or consider any evidence outside such record unless that evidence was offered to the
administrative law judge and/or administrative hearing officer and the court determines that the
administrative law judge improperly excluded it. The court may call witnesses and take evidence
if there is no record.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=1:_ADMINISTRATION 34/43
I. The filing of a petition for review with the district court does not stay execution of an
administrative order. Before filing a petition, a responsible person may request the administrative
law judge and/or administrative hearing officer to stay an administrative order. Upon receipt of a
request to stay, the administrative law judge and/or administrative hearing officer may order the
administrative order to be stayed pending district court review if the administrative law judge
and/or administrative hearing officer finds such stay to be in the best interest of the city.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2013-10 on 8/27/2013
1-9: MUNICIPAL CODE ENFORCEMENT
1-9-1: PURPOSE
1-9-2: SCOPE
1-9-3: EXISTING LAW CONTINUED
1-9-4: PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS
1-9-5: EFFECT OF HEADINGS
1-9-6: SEVERABILITY
1-9-7: DEFINITIONS
1-9-8: GENERAL ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY
1-9-9: AUTHORITY TO INSPECT
1-9-10: CHOICE OF REMEDIES; DIRECTOR
1-9-11: ADOPTION OF POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
1-9-12: ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION
1-9-13: SERVICE OF NOTICE OR CITATION
1-9-14: CIVIL FEES
1-9-15: ASSESSMENT OF COSTS
1-9-16: HEARING AND REVIEW AUTHORITY
1-9-17: ADMINISTRATIVE ABATEMENT
1-9-18: PROCEDURES FOR ABATEMENT
1-9-19: EMERGENCY ABATEMENT
1-9-20: LIEN PROCEDURES
1-9-21: PROHIBITION AGAINST MUNICIPAL PERMITS OR SERVICES
1-9-22: SUIT AND JUDGMENT FOR EXPENSES AND FEES
1-9-23: HEARING REQUIRED PRIOR TO DEMOLITION
1-9-1: PURPOSE
The city council finds that fair, efficient and effective enforcement of the health, safety and zoning
regulations contained in this code is necessary to promote the peace, quality of life, health, safety and
morals of the citizens of North Ogden.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-09 on 9/7/2010
1-9-2: SCOPE
The provisions of this chapter may be applied to violations of this code which occur within North Ogden
City limits and such territory outside North Ogden City limits over which the city has jurisdiction or control
by virtue of any constitutional provision or law. This chapter establishes procedures and remedies that
may be used by the city to achieve compliance with applicable codes. Authority is granted to the director
or his designees to enforce by administrative citation violations of the provisions of CCNO Titles 5,
"Health And Sanitation", and CCNO Title 11, "Zoning Regulations".
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-09 on 9/7/2010
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=1:_ADMINISTRATION 35/43
1-9-3: EXISTING LAW CONTINUED
The provisions of this chapter shall not invalidate any other title, chapter, or ordinance of this code, but
shall be read in conjunction with those titles, chapters, and ordinances and shall be used as an
additional remedy for enforcement of violations thereof.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-09 on 9/7/2010
1-9-4: PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS
The city shall have sole discretion in deciding whether to file a civil or criminal judicial case or pursue an
administrative enforcement action for the violation of any of its ordinances or applicable code
requirements. The enactment of this chapter shall not be construed to limit the city's right to prosecute
any violation as a criminal offense.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-09 on 9/7/2010
1-9-5: EFFECT OF HEADINGS
Title, chapter, and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify, or in
any manner affect the scope, meaning, or intent of the provisions of this chapter.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-09 on 9/7/2010
1-9-6: SEVERABILITY
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, portion, or provision of this chapter is, for any
reason, held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such
decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The city council hereby
declares that it would have adopted this chapter and each section, subsection, sentence, clause,
phrase, portion, or provision thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections,
clauses, phrases, portions, or provisions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. This section shall apply
to all amendments made to this chapter.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-09 on 9/7/2010
1-9-7: DEFINITIONS
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following meanings unless a
different meaning clearly appears from the context:
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=1:_ADMINISTRATION 36/43
ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION: A citation issued to a responsible person that gives notice of a violation
and requires the responsible person to remedy a violation of city ordinance, to pay a civil fee and/or
make a mandatory appearance before an administrative hearing officer.
ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS: A fee established in the consolidated fee schedule, representing the
proportional cost to the city of administering its code enforcement program over and above the actual
cost of an abatement.
ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING: A hearing held pursuant to the procedures established by CCNO 1-8.
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE: The administrative law judge/hearing officer described in CCNO 1-8.
DIRECTOR: The director of the city's code enforcement program as appointed by the mayor.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL: Any person designated by the director to enforce violations of this code.
IMMINENT LIFE SAFETY HAZARD: Any condition that creates a serious and immediate danger to life,
property, health, or public safety.
ITEMIZED STATEMENT OF COSTS: A written notice to a responsible person, itemizing the city's actual
costs and administrative cost of abating a code violation, ordering payment of those costs and setting
forth the procedure to appeal the reasonableness of the costs.
NOTICE OF EMERGENCY ABATEMENT: A written notice that informs a responsible person of
emergency abatement actions taken by the city and provides an itemized statement of costs for those
actions.
OWNER OF RECORD: The natural person, firm, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership,
association, club, company, corporation, business trust, organization, or any other legal entity who is
identified by the Weber County Tax Records as having an ownership interest in real property.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON: Any natural person, firm, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership,
association, club, company, corporation, business trust, organization, or the manager, lessee, agent,
sergeant, officer, or employee of any of them, or any other entity that is recognized by law as the subject
of rights or duties relating to a person or property affected by a municipal action. For purposes of this
chapter, "responsible person" also indicates a "person" whose interest is adverse to the city at an
administrative hearing.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-09 on 9/7/2010
Amended by Ord. 2015-22 on 9/1/2015
1-9-8: GENERAL ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY
Whenever the director finds that a violation of the specified titles of this code has occurred or continues
to exist, he may undertake any of the procedures herein. The director or any designated enforcement
official shall have the authority to gain compliance with the provisions of this code subject to the
provisions of this chapter. Such authority shall include the power to issue administrative citations,
inspect public and private property, abate violations of this code and nuisances on public and private
property, and to use any remedy available under this chapter or other applicable law.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-09 on 9/7/2010
1-9-9: AUTHORITY TO INSPECT
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=1:_ADMINISTRATION 37/43
A. Enforcement officials are hereby authorized, in accordance with applicable law, to enter upon
any property or premises to ascertain whether the provisions of this code are being violated and
to make any reasonable examination or survey necessary to determine compliance with this
code. This may include the taking of photographs, samples, or other physical evidence.
B. All inspections, entries, examinations, and surveys shall be done in a reasonable manner in
accordance with applicable law.
C. Except in the case of an imminent life safety hazard, if it is necessary to enter upon private
property to determine the existence of a violation, the enforcement official shall either obtain the
consent of the owner of record or person in possession of the property or obtain a search warrant
before entering the property.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-09 on 9/7/2010
Amended by Ord. 2015-22 on 9/1/2015
1-9-10: CHOICE OF REMEDIES; DIRECTOR
The director shall have the choice of which remedies to pursue in a given violation. Abatement does not
have to be preceded by a citation, nor is there any necessity to hold a hearing prior to any remedy,
unless stated by this chapter.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-09 on 9/7/2010
1-9-11: ADOPTION OF POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
The city manager shall establish policies and procedures relating to the enforcement of city ordinances,
maintaining records and other administrative functions.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-09 on 9/7/2010
1-9-12: ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION
A. Upon discovering a violation of this code, an enforcement official may serve the responsible
person with an administrative citation.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=1:_ADMINISTRATION 38/43
B. The administrative citation shall contain the following information:
1. The name and address of the responsible person;
2. The date of the violation(s);
3. The address of the violation(s);
4. A citation to the code section(s) violated;
5. The amount of the civil fee imposed for each violation;
6. An explanation of how the civil fee shall be paid, the time period in which the civil fee shall
be paid, and the consequences of failure to pay the civil fee when due;
7. A date certain by which the condition that violates this code must be remedied;
8. An explanation of the requirement to attend an administrative hearing if the condition is
not remedied by the deadline or if the responsible person desires to contest the
administrative citation;
9. The signature of the enforcement official; and
10. If possible, the signature of the responsible person.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-09 on 9/7/2010
1-9-13: SERVICE OF NOTICE OR CITATION
A. Whenever a notice or citation is served pursuant to this chapter, service upon a responsible party
shall be complete upon delivering a copy of the notice and/or administrative citation either
personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the owner
of record along with any other responsible person as identified in the records of the Weber
County assessor, North Ogden City business license records or North Ogden City utility records.
B. A written notice, served upon the owner of record, is required prior to any abatement action
undertaken by the City unless an Emergency Abatement is required as provided for in CCNO 1-
9-19.
C. Failure of an owner of record or responsible person to actually receive the notice or
administrative citation shall not affect the validity of any action taken hereunder if notice has been
served in the manner set forth above.
D. Service of notice or administrative citation requirements for real property related violations should
conform to the requirements for placing a lien on real property as set forth in Utah Code §§ 10-
11-1 through 10-11-4.
E. Any additional requirements not specifically stated in this chapter but required by law or inferred
by this chapter shall be considered incorporated into this chapter by adoption.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=1:_ADMINISTRATION 39/43
F. The Notice for any citation or abatement shall:
1. identify the owner of record according to the records of the Weber County Recorder;
2. describe the property and the nature and results of the examination and investigation
conducted in accordance with CCNO 1-9-9; and
3. require the owner of record, occupant, or, if applicable, another responsible person for the
property to:
a. eradicate or destroy and remove any identified violation examined and investigated under
CCNO 1-9-9 within a time period designated by the municipal inspector but no less than
10 days after the day on which notice is delivered in person or post-marked.
4. Identify that the City intends to abate the nuisance and charge the owner of record as provided
under Utah Code, if they fail to eradicate or destroy and remove any violations within the specified
time.
5. Identify the address of the municipal office which posted the Notice along with a phone number.
6. For a notice of injurious and noxious weeds described in Subsection (A), the municipal inspector
is not required to make more than one notice for each annual season of weed growth for weeds
growing on a property.
7. The Enforcement Official shall sign the Notice required under Subsection (B) under penalty of
perjury.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-09 on 9/7/2010
Amended by Ord. 2015-22 on 9/1/2015
1-9-14: CIVIL FEES
A. If a responsible person fails to correct a violation by the deadline listed in an administrative
citation, civil fines shall be paid to the city as follows:
1. For any violation the civil fine shall be as shown in the consolidated fee schedule.
2. Each and every subsequent day of violation shall be a separate violation until the violation
is corrected.
3. The maximum amount of civil fines to accrue under subsection A2 of this section shall be
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for any single violation.
B. Payment of any civil fine shall not excuse any failure to correct a violation or the reoccurrence of
the violation, nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the city. Payment of civil fines does not
apply toward costs for the abatement of nuisances as provided in this chapter.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-09 on 9/7/2010
Amended by Ord. 2015-22 on 9/1/2015
1-9-15: ASSESSMENT OF COSTS
A. Whenever actual costs are incurred by the city to remedy violations of this code, such costs shall
be assessed against the owner of record. In addition to the actual costs to the city to abate the
violation including employee time, materials, and other costs, an administrative cost, in the
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=1:_ADMINISTRATION 40/43
amount established in the consolidated fee schedule shall also be assessed to reimburse the city
for its administrative costs.
B. When abatement is completed, the director shall prepare an itemized statement of costs In
accordance with CCNO 1-9-18(D).
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-09 on 9/7/2010
Amended by Ord. 2015-22 on 9/1/2015
1-9-16: HEARING AND REVIEW AUTHORITY
The administrative law judge/administrative hearing officer is to be the default arbiter for review of code
violations charged by administrative citation and for the abatement of nuisances.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-09 on 9/7/2010
1-9-17: ADMINISTRATIVE ABATEMENT
Any condition caused, maintained, or permitted to exist in violation of CCNO Title 5 or CCNO Title 11
may be abated by the city pursuant to the procedures set forth in this chapter.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-09 on 9/7/2010
1-9-18: PROCEDURES FOR ABATEMENT
A. When an owner of record or responsible person fails to comply with a written notice served
pursuant to CCNO 1-9-13 from the city to remedy a condition that violates this code, the director
may initiate proceedings to abate the condition in accordance with this chapter and Utah Code
10-11 et seq. and as set forth in this chapter.
B. The city shall physically post the notice created under CCNO 1-9-13(F) on the property, with any personal
identifying information removed, at least 24 hours prior to entry for abatement purposes.
C. The municipal inspector may after posting physical notice:
1. enter the property and at the expense of the municipality, employ necessary assistance to enter
the property and destroy or remove an item or other nuisance identified in a written notice
described in CCNO 1-9-13; and
2. prepare an itemized statement in accordance with Subsection D; and
3. mail to the owner of record according to the records of the county recorder a copy of the
statement demanding payment within 30 days after the day on which the statement is
post-marked.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=1:_ADMINISTRATION 41/43
D. The itemized statement shall:
1. include:
a. the address of the property described in Subsection (A);
b. an itemized list of and demand for payment for all expenses within 30 days, including
administrative expenses, incurred by the municipality under Subsection (C)(1); and
c. the address of the city treasurer where payment may be made for the expenses; and
2. notify the owner of record:
a. that failure to pay the expenses described in Subsection (D)(1)(b) may result in a lien on
the property in accordance with Utah Code § 10-11-4;
b. that the owner may file a written objection to all or part of the statement within twenty (20)
days after the day of the statement post-mark; and
c. where the owner may file the objection, including the municipal office and address.
3. If the owner files an objection under Subsection (2)(b) that objection shall be heard by the
administrative hearing officer pursuant to CCNO 1-8.
4. A statement mailed in accordance with Subsection (C)(3) is delivered when mailed by
certified mail addressed to the owner of records of record last-known address according
to the records of the county recorder.
E. The city is authorized to use any remedy provided for in Utah Code including actions in district court or
filing a lien to be included with the tax notice under CCNO 1-9-20.
F. Nothing in this section shall limit remedies available to the City as provided for in Utah Law.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-09 on 9/7/2010
Amended by Ord. 2015-22 on 9/1/2015
1-9-19: EMERGENCY ABATEMENT
A. Whenever the director determines that an imminent life safety hazard exists that requires
immediate correction or elimination, the director shall exercise the following powers without prior
notice to the responsible person:
1. Order the immediate vacation of any tenants, and prohibit occupancy until all repairs are
completed;
2. Post the premises as unsafe, substandard, or dangerous;
3. Board, fence, or secure the building or site;
4. Raze and grade that portion of the building or site to prevent further collapse, and remove
any hazard to the general public;
5. Make any minimal emergency repairs as necessary to eliminate any imminent life safety
hazard; or
6. Take any other action appropriate to eliminate the emergency.
B. The enforcement official may, based on exigent circumstances, enter property without a search
warrant or administrative order to accomplish the above listed acts.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=1:_ADMINISTRATION 42/43
C. The director shall pursue only the minimum level of correction or abatement as necessary to
eliminate the immediacy of a hazard. Costs incurred by the city during the emergency abatement
process shall be calculated and an itemized statement of costs shall be prepared as outlined in
CCNO 1-9-18(D). Further correction needed to bring the violation into compliance will be
addressed through the administrative citation procedures set forth in this chapter including any
reasonable estimates for outstanding invoices.
D. The director may also pursue any other administrative or judicial remedy to abate any remaining
violations.
E. After an emergency abatement, the city shall, within ten (10) days, serve the itemized statement
of costs upon the owner of record as provided in CCNO 1-9-15.
F. Such notice shall include a description of the imminent life safety hazard warranting the
emergency abatement.
G. A owner of record, or responsible person has the right to contest the need for the emergency
abatement and/or the reasonableness of the itemized statement of costs at an administrative
hearing. A request for such hearing shall be filed in accordance with CCNO 1-8-8, within twenty
(20) days from the date of service of the itemized statement of costs. Failure to request an
administrative hearing shall constitute a waiver of an administrative hearing and waiver of the
right to appeal.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2013-10 on 8/27/2013
Amended by Ord. 2015-22 on 9/1/2015
1-9-20: LIEN PROCEDURES
Whenever the city, either acting on its own or through a private contractor, is required to abate a health
or safety violation existing on real property, it shall follow the procedures outlined in Utah Code § 10-11-
1 et seq., to record a lien on the real property in the amount of the city's costs of abatement, including
administrative costs in the amount set forth in the consolidated fee schedule.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-09 on 9/7/2010
1-9-21: PROHIBITION AGAINST MUNICIPAL PERMITS OR SERVICES
The city shall withhold city utility services; business licenses; permits for kennels; or permits for any
alteration, repair, or construction pertaining to any existing or new structures or signs on the property, or
any permits pertaining to the use and development of the real property or the structure where a violation
is located until such time as the violation has been resolved, all civil fees paid and all of the city's costs
of enforcement reimbursed.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-09 on 9/7/2010
1-9-22: SUIT AND JUDGMENT FOR EXPENSES AND FEES
In the event collection of expenses incurred by the city under the provisions of CCNO Titles 5, "Health
And Sanitation", and CCNO Title 11, "Zoning Regulations", is pursued through the courts, the city may
sue for and shall be entitled to receive judgment of all such expenses, together with reasonable attorney
fees, interest and court costs and shall execute upon such judgment in the manner provided by law
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2015-22 on 9/1/2015
1-9-23: HEARING REQUIRED PRIOR TO DEMOLITION
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=1:_ADMINISTRATION 43/43
A. In the event a structure is found to be dangerous by the Building Official as provided for in CCNO
5-8, and demolition is the only remedy available because the building is beyond repair, or the
costs of the repairs exceed the value of the structure the City is authorized to demolish the
building. The Building Official shall post notice on the structure prohibiting entry without the
permission of the official.
B. Prior to demolition the City shall provide the Owner of Record with notice of a hearing, in front of the
Administrative Hearing Officer (AHO), to establish the necessity to demolish the structure. The notice shall
be sent at least twenty (20) days prior to the hearing by certified mail and provide a specific description of
the dangerous condition found, as well as the remedy. The Owner is allowed to present any evidence of
repairs, condition, valuation, or other relevant information which will help the AHO make a decision.
1. Should the property owner not appear at the hearing the AHO shall uphold the determination of
the municipal officials and the City shall send by certified mail the official decision of the AHO to
the Owner of Record.
2. The Owner of Record shall have thirty (30) days to file an action in District Court challenging a
decision for the Demolition of a structure which was determined to be dangerous.
3. All charges for demolition shall be paid for by the Owner of Record and may be assessed against
the property in any manner authorized by this code or state and federal law.
C. In the case of Emergency Conditions, where imminent danger to life or significant property damage would
occur should the building not be demolished, as determined by the City official in charge, the demolition
may proceed without a prior hearing.
1. In the event an Emergency Demolition occurs the City shall hold a hearing at the earliest
convenient time for the property owner, or after providing twenty (20) days certified notice of the
date and time of the hearing.
2. Should the Owner not appear at the hearing the AHO shall uphold the determination of the
municipal officials and the City shall send by certified mail the official decision of the AHO to the
Owner of Record.
3. The Owner of Record shall have thirty (30) days to file an action in District Court challenging a
decision for the Demolition of a structure which was determined to be dangerous and any
associated costs.
4. All charges for demolition shall be paid for by the Owner of Record and may be assessed against
the property in any manner authorized by this code or state and federal law.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2016-21 on 7/19/2016
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=3:_REVENUE_AND_FINANCE 1/26
3: REVENUE AND FINANCE
3-1: PURCHASING
3-2: TAXES
3-3: FUNDS
3-1: PURCHASING
3-1-1: DEFINITIONS
3-1-2: PURCHASE ORDERS REQUIRED
3-1-3: DUTIES ASSIGNED
3-1-4: COMPETITIVE BID
3-1-5: PURCHASE ORDERS AND CONTRACTS NOT REQUIRING BIDS
3-1-6: ADVERTISEMENT, REJECTION AND EXTENSION OF BIDS
3-1-7: BONDS OF BIDDERS MAY BE REQUIRED
3-1-8: BILATERAL CONTRACTS REQUIRED
3-1-9: DISPOSAL OF CITY PROPERTY
3-1-9-1: DISPOSAL OF PROPERTY IN POLICE CUSTODY
3-1-10: RECORD OF FIXED ASSETS
3-1-11: INSPECTION OF MERCHANDISE RECEIVED
3-1-12: PERSONAL LIABILITY OF OFFICERS
3-1-13: ACQUISITION OF REAL PROPERTY
3-1-1: DEFINITIONS
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:
ADVERTISING FOR BIDS: Notice will be published at least once on the state public notice website and
on the City's website. The request for bid shall include:
A. A description of the material, supplies, services, personal property or construction in sufficient
detail that prospective bidders should know what their obligations will be;
B. The time and place for the opening of the bids;
C. Notification of the City's requirements for a bidder's good faith deposit, bid bond or performance
bond, as well as proof of liability insurance and workers' compensation insurance;
D. An announcement that the City may reject all bids, or any part thereof;
E. The description required in subsection A of this definition may be made either in the
advertisement itself or by reference to detailed plans and specifications on file with the City
Recorder;
F. Any other information upon which the bidder must rely in order to be a responsible bidder.
EMERGENCY CONDITION: A situation which creates a threat to public health, welfare or safety, such
as may arise by reason of flood, epidemics, riots, equipment failures, earthquakes, or such other reason
as may be declared an emergency by the City Council. The existence of such condition must create an
immediate need for materials, services or construction that cannot be met through normal procurement
methods, and the lack of which would seriously threaten the function of City government, the
preservation or protection of public or private property, or the health or safety of any person.
PURCHASE ORDER: A document that commits the City to pay for goods or services obtained on credit,
and is authorized by designated agents of the City.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2003-13 on 4/22/2003
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=3:_REVENUE_AND_FINANCE 2/26
Amended by Ord. 2018-12 on 6/26/2018
3-1-2: PURCHASE ORDERS REQUIRED
A. When Required: A purchase order shall be used whenever goods and limited services are to be acquired
by outright purchase. The purchase order shall specify any of the following relevant items including: the
nature of the goods or services to be acquired, the purchase price or estimate thereof, freight charges,
prompt payment discounts, the delivery date, the vendor from whom acquired, the department and
division for whom the acquisition is being made, the budgetary department and general ledger number
where the funding for the proposed purchase has been appropriated, and such other provisions or
information as may be appropriate or required. The purchase order shall incorporate by reference all the
terms, conditions and specifications, if any, contained in the related request for bids.
B. Less Than Five Thousand Dollars: Notwithstanding the above conditions, a purchase order shall not be
required for purchases of less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). All such expenditures shall be
approved by the Department Head, or authorized designee.
C. Routine Expenses: Notwithstanding the above conditions, a purchase order shall not be required for the
purchase and payment of routine, consistent expenses, such as, but not limited to: payroll taxes and
related expenses, payments on previously approved leases, contract services, utility bills, or similar
expenses. Such purchases shall be by way of check request as shall be established by the Finance
Director in accordance with accepted accounting standards.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2003-13 on 4/22/2003
Amended by Ord. 2018-12 on 6/26/2018
3-1-3: DUTIES ASSIGNED
A. Disperse Purchase Orders: The City Council hereby ordains and establishes that the Finance
Director shall be responsible to manage purchase orders of five thousand dollars ($5,000) or
more, keep records of all such purchase orders and oversee the operations of the purchasing
function in such a manner as to effectively execute procurement and property acquisition and
disposition policies as may be established by the City Council by policy declaration or the City
Administrator/Manager by way of administrative directive, and as shall be incorporated into this
chapter.
B. Duties Delegated: The Finance Director may delegate purchasing responsibility, when
determined appropriate by the City Administrator/Manager, to any Department Head of the City.
C. Authorization Required:
1. Purchase orders shall require authorization and signatures as follows:
Amount Authorization Required
$5,000.00 to $25,000.00 - City Administrator/Manager; and Finance Director or City
Treasurer
Greater than $25,000.00 - City Administrator/Manager; and Mayor or Mayor Pro
Tempore; and Finance Director or City Treasurer. Council authorization may be accepted
in lieu of Mayor or Mayor Pro Tempore authorization.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=3:_REVENUE_AND_FINANCE 3/26
D. Department Heads; Authorization: Each Department Head shall be authorized to make
purchases costing less than five thousand dollars ($5000.00) without the use of purchase
orders. Department Heads are free to establish department-specific purchasing processes as
needed.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2003-13 on 4/22/2003
Amended by Ord. 2018-12 on 6/26/2018
3-1-4: COMPETITIVE BID
All purchases and contracts, whether by sealed bid, quotation or negotiation, shall be made on a
competitive basis to the maximum practical extent, except as noted in CCNO 3-1-5 of this chapter and
as outlined below.
A. Amounts In Excess Of Twenty-five Thousand Dollars:
1. Except as otherwise provided within this chapter, all purchase orders and other contracts
of every kind, involving amounts in excess of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00)
for personal services, or for the purchase, lease, rental or sale of personal property,
materials, equipment or supplies, shall be let by competitive bidding, after public
advertising, to the lowest responsible bidder.
2. No purchase shall be split into parts by any concerned party so as to produce amounts
artificially lower than the total purchase price. This shall not exclude the purchase of
components over different budget years within budget constraints.
3. If it is reasonably expected that the City will expend more than $25,000 on a particular
product or service in a fiscal year, even if individual purchases do not meet the minimum
threshold requiring bidding, regular bidding requirements shall apply.
B. Amounts Less Than Twenty-five Thousand Dollars But In Excess Of Five Thousand Dollars:
1. All purchase orders and contracts in amount less than twenty-five thousand dollars
($25,000.00), but in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), shall be offered in the
open market by obtaining at least three (3) written bids wherever possible. The
Department Heads shall keep a list of the date the vendors were contacted and the
vendors’ contact information.
2. No purchase shall be split into parts by any concerned party so as to produce artificial
amounts lower than the total purchase price. This shall not exclude the purchase of
components over different budget years within budget constraints.
C. Purchases Less Than Five Thousand Dollars: These purchases may be completed as authorized
by the appropriate department head.
D. Vendors Of Gasoline And Diesel Fuel:
1. The City Council recognizes and finds that wholesale vendors of gasoline and diesel fuel
are generally unable to quote prices on fuel that are valid for more than one day. To
ensure fair pricing, the City must compare and document fuel prices from at least two
vendors, at least once per quarter, if fuel is to be purchased during that quarter.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=3:_REVENUE_AND_FINANCE 4/26
E. Choosing by Advantages: The City reserves the right to award bids and contracts and to make
purchases in the best interest of the City. The Mayor is authorized to approve purchases and the
awarding of bids and contracts after informing the City Council as to why a certain vendor was
selected that demonstrates the advantage to the City in selecting the particular service, product,
or vendor.
F. Contract Length: No contract for goods or services shall have an initial term of more than five
years. The total term of any contract, including the initial term plus any extensions, may not
exceed eight years.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 2018-12 on 6/26/2018
3-1-5: PURCHASE ORDERS AND CONTRACTS NOT REQUIRING BIDS
A. The restrictions contained in CCNO 3-1-4 of this chapter shall not apply in the following situations:
1. State/Other Procurement Contracts:
a. Purchases, which are made from vendors who are under the state procurement contract,
and when the price is that price (or a lower price than that) established by the contract
awarded by the State.
b. Purchases which are made from vendors who, within the past sixty (60) days, have been
under the State procurement contract, and when the price offered is the price established
by the former contract awarded by the State, or less.
c. Purchases made using other cooperative contracts as authorized by the City
Administrator.
2. Government Goods and Services: For goods and services made available by any federal, state or
local unit of government, or association of government, when those goods or services were
acquired in compliance with the provisions of this chapter or the Utah procurement code.
3. Sole Source: Purchases or contracts are for items which may only be purchased from a single or
sole source manufacturer or distributer and no reasonable similar alternative exists.
4. Professional Services: Contracts for professional services less than $15,000 in any fiscal year.
5. Legal Services: Contracts for legal services on a per-case or short-term basis.
6. Fringe Benefits: Purchases of services or benefits that are part of any personnel fringe benefit
agreements that are authorized by the City Council may be negotiated between the City and the
service or benefit vendor.
7. City Owned Concession Or Recreation Facility: Purchases or contracts for supplies, materials or
inventory to be used for resale at any City-owned and/or operated concession or recreation
facility.
8. Public Auction and Other Similar Circumstances: Supplies, materials or equipment which can be
purchased at any public auction, closeout sale, bankruptcy sale or other similar sale, and it is
found that a purchase at any such auction or sale may be made at a cost below the market cost in
the community.
9. Exchange Of Supplies, Material Or Equipment: Exchanges of supplies, material or equipment
between the City and any other entity, which are not by sale or auction.
10. State Correctional Industries Division: Supplies, material or equipment produced by the state
correctional industries division.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=3:_REVENUE_AND_FINANCE 5/26
B. Contracts Or Purchases Not Suited To Competitive Bidding: Contracts and purchases which by their
nature are not suited to award by competitive bidding shall not be subject to the competitive bidding
requirements of CCNO 3-1-4 of this chapter. These contracts include:
1. Contracts or purchases for additions to and repairs and maintenance of equipment and systems
owned by the City which may be more efficiently added to, repaired or maintained by a particular
person or firm.
2. Contracts or purchases for equipment, parts, or supplies which, by reason of the existing systems,
training of City personnel, or the inventory of replacement parts maintained by the City, is more
compatible with the existing equipment or systems owned by the City.
3. Utility services such as water, electric power, natural gas, and telephone.
4. Witness and jury fees and other payments as may be ordered by the court.
5. Medicines or medical supplies which are not generic in nature and which would not be available
from other sources through competitive bid or negotiation.
6. The purchase of subscriptions, magazines, software, software support, books, trade journals,
reference works, periodicals, examination or testing materials, and similar items.
7. Goods, materials, supplies, and services utilized by the City for purposes of performing duties in
regards to elections.
8. Memberships, certifications, trainings, accreditations required or relevant to the duties of City
employees.
9. Drug testing, employee physicals, fitness-for-duty evaluations, and background checks.
10. Realtors, appraisers, or title work.
11. Performers, promoters/agents, and license holders for City events.
12. Contracts or purchases that are not suited to competitive bidding due to proximity, or
other relevant factors, as approved by the City Administrator/Manager and Finance
Director and documented on the purchase order.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=3:_REVENUE_AND_FINANCE 6/26
13. When the public emergency will not tolerate the delay incident to the advertising for or
solicitation of bids.
a. Purchases under this subsection shall be based on a need that is compelling and
of unusual urgency, such as when the City would be seriously injured financially or
otherwise if the personal property or services were not furnished by a certain time,
and when they could not be procured by that time by means of advertising,
bidding and/or solicitation of quotations as previously provided.
b. Emergency procurement, which shall be limited to those supplies, services or
construction necessary to meet the emergency whenever practical. Approval by
the City Council shall be obtained before procurement if not detrimental in the
emergency or as soon as possible after the purchase is made as outlined in
CCNO 3-1-3C of this chapter.
c. The department for whom the emergency purchases are made shall, as soon as
practical, file a written report with the City Administrator/Manager, which shall
contain the following information:
d. The conditions which created the emergency and a description of the threat to the
health, welfare or safety of the public pursuant to finding that an emergency exists;
i. The basis for the selection of the particular contractor or supplier and a
description of what efforts were utilized to identify and contact alternative
suppliers or contractors;
ii. The contractor or supplier's name and address, along with a list of the
supplies, materials, services or construction procured under the contract.
iii. Completed and signed purchase orders with attached invoices requesting
payment for the emergency purchases.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=3:_REVENUE_AND_FINANCE 7/26
e. The City Administrator/Manager shall review the report submitted and, if
appropriate, shall declare the condition an emergency and shall approve the
report and requisitions and authorize the payment of the emergency purchases.
i. The City Administrator/Manager is empowered to declare a state of
emergency, for the purposes of this chapter, when, in her/his opinion, such
condition, as set out in subsection F3a of this section, exists, and when the
amount to be expended to meet such emergency does not exceed twenty
five thousand dollars ($25,000.00).
ii. Where the City Administrator/Manager finds and declares an emergency,
under subsection F4a of this section, the City Administrator/Manager, in
conjunction with the department for whom the emergency purchases are
made, shall, as soon as practical, file a written report with the mayor and
City Council, which shall contain the following information:
(1) The conditions which created the emergency and a description of
the threat to the health, welfare or safety of the public pursuant to
finding that an emergency exists;
(2) The basis for the selection of the particular contractor or supplier
and a description of what efforts were utilized to identify and
contact alternative suppliers or contractors;
(3) The contractor's or supplier's name and address, along with a list of
the supplies, materials, services or construction procured under the
contract;
(4) Completed signed purchase orders with attached invoices
requesting payment for the emergency purchases.
iii. The City Council shall review the report submitted, and if appropriate, shall
ratify the City Administrator/Manager's declaration of the condition an
emergency, and shall approve the report and requisitions and authorize the
payment of the emergency purchases.
14. When the City Council enters into a contract for goods or services and identifies why it is in the
best interest of the City.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2003-13 on 4/22/2003
Amended by Ord. 2018-12 on 6/26/2018
3-1-6: ADVERTISEMENT, REJECTION AND EXTENSION OF BIDS
A. Advertisement of Bid:
1. The Department Head shall provide the City Recorder with an appropriate advertisement
or description of the item to be advertised so that the City Recorder may formulate a bid
advertisement. The City Recorder shall then, with the concurrence of the City
Administrator/Manager, place the advertisement in the manner most likely to result in the
greatest number of bids as determined by the City Recorder and City
Administrator/Manager as well as on the City Website.
2. Contracts shall be awarded by competitive sealed bidding, except as otherwise provided
herein.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=3:_REVENUE_AND_FINANCE 8/26
3. An invitation for bids shall be issued when a contract is to be awarded by competitive
bidding for an anticipated amount in excess of twenty five thousand ($25,000). The
invitation shall include a purchase description and all contractual terms and conditions
applicable to the procurement.
4. Public notice of the invitation for bids shall be given a reasonable time prior to the date set
forth therein for the opening of bids. The notice may include publication in a newspaper of
general circulation within the City a reasonable time prior to bid opening. "Reasonable
time" for purposes of this section, means that a notice of an invitation for bids shall, prior
to the acceptance of a bid, be published at least once a week for three (3) consecutive
weeks.
5. Bids shall be opened publicly at City hall, or other place designated in the invitation for
bids if use of the City hall is not available or impracticable at the time of the bid opening,
in the presence of one or more witnesses, including whenever practicable the City
Administrator/Manager, City Recorder, Finance Director, and the appropriate Department
Head at the time designated in the invitation.
6. The amount of each bid and any other relevant information specified in the bid notice,
together with the name of each bidder, shall be recorded by the City Recorder at the time
the bids are opened. The record and each bid shall be open to public inspection.
7. Bids shall be unconditionally accepted without alteration or correction, except as
authorized in this chapter.
8. Bids shall be evaluated based on the requirements set forth in the invitation for bids,
which may include criteria to determine acceptability such as inspection, testing, quality,
workmanship, delivery and suitability for a particular purpose. Those criteria that will affect
the bid price and will be considered in evaluation for award shall be objectively
measurable. The criteria may include discounts, transportation costs, and total or life
cycle cost. No criteria may be used in bid evaluations that are not set forth in the invitation
for bids.
9. Correction or withdrawal of inadvertently erroneous bids before or after award, or
cancellation of awards or contracts based on such bid mistakes, shall be permitted in
accordance with rules and regulations set out in the bid notice.
10. After bid opening, no changes in bid prices or other provisions of bids prejudicial to the
interest of the City or fair competition shall be permitted. Except as otherwise provided by
this chapter or rules and regulations set out in the bid notice, all decisions to permit the
correction or withdrawal of bids or to cancel awards or contracts based on bid mistakes
shall be supported by a written determination made by the City Administrator/Manager or
City Council, depending on the value of the bid received, and in accordance with the
provisions of CCNO 3-1-3C of this chapter.
11. The contract shall be awarded with reasonable promptness by written notice to the lowest
responsive and responsible bidder whose bid meets the requirements and criteria set
forth in the invitation for bids. In the event all bids for a construction project exceed
available funds as certified by the Finance Director or City Administrator/Manager and the
low responsive and responsible bid does not exceed such funds by more than five
percent (5%), the City Administrator/Manager is authorized, in situations where time or
economic considerations preclude re-solicitation of work of a reduced scope, to negotiate
an adjustment of the bid price, including changes in the bid requirements, with the low
responsive and responsible bidder, in order to bring the bid within the amount of available
funds.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=3:_REVENUE_AND_FINANCE 9/26
12. When it is considered impractical to prepare initially a purchase description to support an
award based on price, an invitation for bids may be issued requesting the submission of
unpriced offers to be followed by an invitation for bids limited to those bidders whose
offers have been qualified under the criteria set forth in the first solicitation.
B. Rejection of Bids:
1. An invitation for bids, a request for proposals, or other solicitation may be canceled, or
any or all bids or proposals may be rejected, in whole or in part, as may be specified in
the solicitation, when it is in the best interests of the City in accordance with rules and
regulations as set out in the bid notice or invitation. The reasons for such rejections shall
be made part of the contract or bid file.
2. Bids may be rejected when the City Council, with the advice of the City
Administrator/Manager and such technical department personnel as the City
Administrator/Manager may determine appropriate, determines that bid prices, after
advertising once for all competitive bids, are not reasonable (either as to all or as to some
part of the requirement), exceed the estimated construction cost of a public improvement
project by an amount that is unacceptable, or have not been independently arrived at in
open competition; provided, that no negotiated purchase or contract may be entered into
under this subsection after the rejection of all of the bids received unless the stipulations
below are met:
a. Notification To Negotiate: Notification of the intention to negotiate and reasonable
opportunity to negotiate shall have been given to each responsible bidder whose
bid conformed to the invitation for bids; and
b. Negotiated Price: The negotiated price is the lowest negotiated price offered by a
reasonable supplier; and provided, further, that the City Administrator/Manager
may, at his/her discretion, elect to re-advertise for bids with approval of the City
Council.
C. Extension of Bids: The City Administrator/Manager, with the approval of the mayor, may extend
the time for opening of bids, if in his/her opinion it is in the public interest to do so. Notice of the
extension shall be given to all prospective bidders by the City Recorder in such manner as is
most practical under the circumstances. Such extension shall not exceed ten (10) working days.
No extension may be granted for the purpose of qualifying a bid that was delivered after the time
advertised for the original opening.
D. Late Bids: No bids shall be received or accepted at any time subsequent to the time indicated in
the announcement. Any bids delivered by mail, or any other means, subsequent to the appointed
time shall not be opened.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=3:_REVENUE_AND_FINANCE 10/26
E. Responsible Bidder: The City shall award contracts which are required to be let by competitive
bidding under CCNO 3-1-4A of this chapter to the responsible bidder who receives the highest
rating under the choosing by advantages system or provides the lowest bid, whichever is
specified in the bid request documents The City may reject any low bid and accept the next
lowest bid if the City determines that the low bid was made by a bidder who is not responsible.
1. 1. The City may consider any or all of the following when determining whether a bidder is
responsible;
a. Whether the bid fully complies with the invitation for bids;
b. The bidder is financially responsible;
c. The bidder's honesty and integrity;
d. Whether the bidder has the skill and business judgment to complete the contract;
e. The bidder's experience;
f. Whether the bidder has the facilities and equipment to complete the contract;
g. The bidder's conduct under other contracts, regardless of whether the contracts
were with the City or with other parties;
h. The quality of the bidder's other work, regardless of whether the work was
performed for the City or for other parties; and
i. Any other matter bearing on the likelihood that the bidder will promptly and
efficiently perform the contract if it is awarded to the bidder.
F. If the City determines that the low bidder is not responsible, the City shall notify the bidder in
writing that it is rejecting the bidder's bid. The notice shall also contain a short description of the
reasons for the rejection.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 2018-12 on 6/26/2018
3-1-7: BONDS OF BIDDERS MAY BE REQUIRED
A. Bidders may be required to supply deposits of good faith, or bonds with sufficient sureties, in
such amounts as shall be deemed adequate and approved by the City Administrator/Manager or
City Council, as set out in the bid notice, not only to ensure performance of the contract or
purchase order in the time and manner prescribed, but also to save, indemnify and hold the City
harmless against losses, damages, claims, liabilities, judgments, costs and expenses which may
accrue in consequences of the granting of the contract or purchase orders.
B. Before any contract for the construction, alteration or repair of any public building, public work or
public improvement of the City is awarded to any person, that person shall furnish to the City
such bonds as are required by Utah Code Annotated section 14-1-13 et seq.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2003-13 on 4/22/2003
Amended by Ord. 2018-12 on 6/26/2018
3-1-8: BILATERAL CONTRACTS REQUIRED
A bilateral contract signed by both parties is required:
A. Whenever personal property is acquired by means of lease, rental or installment purchase;
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=3:_REVENUE_AND_FINANCE 11/26
B. Whenever personal or professional services are required by the City, except where the services
are to be performed at the vendor's place of business or where the services are for non-repetitive
repairs or maintenance and where a purchase order has been bid or negotiated to cover said
services;
C. Whenever consultant services are to be acquired;
D. Whenever real estate or any interest therein is to be acquired except: 1. When acquired pursuant
to the power of eminent domain and entry of a decree by a court; 2. When acquired as a result of
the filings and recording of a map or plat as required by Utah Code Annotated section 57-5-4, as
amended; 3. When real estate is donated or dedicated to the City;
E. Whenever the requesting office, department, agency or City Council shall so specify;
F. Whenever the vendor requires that a contract other than a purchase order be signed by the City;
and
G. Whenever intergovernmental, interagency and service provider agreements require participation
by the City involving funding, performance or assumption of liability or risk in any form.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2003-13 on 4/22/2003
Amended by Ord. 2018-12 on 6/26/2018
3-1-9: DISPOSAL OF CITY PROPERTY
A. Petition: Department Heads shall petition the City Administrator/Manager and mayor to declare
property surplus, obsolete or unusable.
B. Advertise: Any property thus classified with resale value shall be advertised for sale.
C. No Resale Value: Property not deemed to have any resale value shall be disposed of by the
Department Head in the manner deemed to be in the best interest of the public and approved by
the City Administrator/Manager.
1. List; Bid Refusal: The Department Head shall provide the Finance Director with a list of all
such property disposed of so that it may be removed from the list of City assets. The City
may refuse any or all bids on items offered for sale.
D. Alternative Disposition: In accordance with the terms of Utah Code Annotated section 10-8-2, the
City may make a finding that a use or disposition of certain City property provides for the safety,
health, prosperity, moral well-being, peace, order, comfort or convenience of the inhabitants of
the City, in which case the City Council may authorize the purchase, receipt, holding, selling,
leasing, conveying and other disposition of real and personal property for the benefit of the City,
whether the property is within or without the City's corporate boundaries and under the terms of
such a finding is not obligated to sell such property at bid but may improve, protect, and do any
other thing in relation to this property that an individual could do.
E. Real Property:
1. North Ogden City hereby determines that all real estate owned by the City constitutes a
significant parcel of real property pursuant to Utah Code. a. Utility easements do not
constitute a significant parcel of real property pursuant to Utah Code.
2. Before the disposition of a significant parcel of real property the City shall provide public
notice on its website and in three physical locations throughout the City in compliance
with Utah Code 10-8-2 and subsequent revisions.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=3:_REVENUE_AND_FINANCE 12/26
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2003-13 on 4/22/2003
Amended by Ord. 2017-25 on 11/28/2017
Amended by Ord. 2018-12 on 6/26/2018
3-1-9-1: DISPOSAL OF PROPERTY IN POLICE CUSTODY
A. Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide a procedure, that complies with state law, for
the City to follow when disposing of property held as evidence after it is no longer needed in a
criminal prosecution and unclaimed property when effort to find the rightful owner fails.
B. Disposal Schedule: As often as it deems necessary, but no less than once annually, the police
department shall prepare a list of property no longer needed as evidence and a separate list of
unclaimed property. The lists shall contain the following information: 1. A general description of
each item of property. 2. The name and address of the owner of each item of property, if known.
C. Property Held As Evidence: Prior to disposal of property, other than weapons, contraband and
property with no intrinsic value, held as evidence, the police department shall do the following:
1. Provide twenty (20) days' advance notice to the prosecutor assigned to the case for which
the property held as evidence was kept of the City's intent to dispose of the property.
2. Exercise due diligence in attempting to locate the owner, if known, of the property.
a. a. Due diligence shall consist of sending notice, by regular mail, to the last known
address of the owner of the property, giving the owner twenty (20) days to claim
the property.
3. If after twenty (20) days the prosecutor fails to object to the disposal of the property and
the owner of the property either cannot be located or fails to claim the property, the police
department shall dispose of the property as provided in subsection F of this section.
D. Weapons, Contraband And Items Of No Intrinsic Value Held As Evidence: When the evidence to
be disposed of consists of a weapon, contraband or has no intrinsic value, the police department
shall dispose of the property as follows:
1. If a weapon was used in the commission of a crime the police department shall:
a. Notify the owner as provided in subsection C of this section if the owner of the
weapon was not involved in the commission of the crime.
b. If the owner of the weapon was involved in the commission of the crime, the police
department may destroy the weapon or dispose of it as provided in subsection F
of this section.
2. If the property consists of contraband, the police department shall destroy it.
3. If the property has no intrinsic value, the police department shall destroy it.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=3:_REVENUE_AND_FINANCE 13/26
E. Unclaimed Property: The police department may accept for safekeeping property which is lost or
found for which the owner can be readily identified and property for which the owner cannot be
readily identified, if the property has an estimated fair market value in excess of fifty dollars
($50.00), and dispose of the property according to the following procedures:
1. The police department shall take reasonable steps to notify the owner of the property.
a. Reasonable steps shall consist of notifying citizens by way of the police
department website that the police department maintains a "lost and found" for
unclaimed property; and
b. If no claim for the property is made after holding the item for three (3) months,
publishing a notice containing a general description of the item and the date of
intended disposal in a newspaper of general circulation or other medium as
provided by state law.
2. If after nine (9) days from the posting of the notice described in subsection E1b of this
section the owner of the property fails to claim the property, the police department shall
notify the person who turned in the unclaimed property who may take possession of the
property subject to the following:
a. Pay the fee for storage and advertising of the item in the amount established in
the consolidated fee schedule.
b. Sign a receipt for the item.
3. If after following the procedures outlined in this subsection E, no one makes claim for the
item of property, the police department shall dispose of the unclaimed property as
provided in subsection F of this section.
F. Disposal Of Unneeded Evidence And Unclaimed Property: When the owner of unneeded
evidence and unclaimed property fails to make claim for the property after the police department
has followed the procedures outlined in this section, the police department is authorized to sell
the property using any reasonable method or means approved by the City manager in
consultation with the City finance officer and the proceeds from the sale are to be credited to an
unclaimed property revenue account.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2011-02 on 3/8/2011
Amended by Ord. 2018-12 on 6/26/2018
3-1-10: RECORD OF FIXED ASSETS
Whenever payment is made for acquisition of a fixed asset unit and whenever acquisition costs of said
unit exceed five thousand dollars ($5000.00) and whenever the unit has a useful life of more than one
year, the Finance Director or designee shall forthwith enter a record of said acquisition upon the
inventory records of the City. A property sticker shall be placed upon moveable asset units as is
practical. Components with unit costs of $5,000 or more may be considered a fixed asset if they are
easily separable and can function apart from the main unit.
The Finance Director must be notified of all assets that are being traded in towards the purchase of a
new item.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=3:_REVENUE_AND_FINANCE 14/26
Donations to the City by outside organizations must be reported to the Finance Director with
documentation from the donating organization, a description of items being donated, and the market
value. Any item donated that exceeds five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) will be recorded as a fixed
asset.
Department heads are responsible for all fixed assets within their departments. The Finance Director or
designee shall conduct a regular asset inventory in order to maintain accurate records, safeguard
assets, and ensure proper financial reporting.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2003-13 on 4/22/2003
Amended by Ord. 2017-08 on 3/21/2017
Amended by Ord. 2018-12 on 6/26/2018
3-1-11: INSPECTION OF MERCHANDISE RECEIVED
A. It shall be the responsibility of the Department Head or his designees to immediately inspect all
materials, supplies, equipment and personal property of any nature purchased pursuant to this
chapter immediately upon delivery from the vendor and prior to the acceptance of the delivery.
B. The signature of the individual conducting the inspection shall be required on all invoices to
designate that they have inspected and received the merchandise listed on said invoice.
C. Damaged property or items not specified on the purchase order shall not be accepted, and the
nonconforming nature of the goods, together with the reason for rejection thereof, shall be noted
in writing upon the delivery receipt.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2003-13 on 4/22/2003
Amended by Ord. 2018-12 on 6/26/2018
3-1-12: PERSONAL LIABILITY OF OFFICERS
A. No officer or employee of the City shall make any expenditure or encumbrance in excess of the
total appropriation remaining (excluding salaries and benefits) for any department. Any obligation
that is contracted by any such officer or employee in excess of the total remaining department
appropriation is the personal obligation of the officer or employee and is unenforceable against
the City.
B. All purchases or all encumbrances on behalf of the City shall be made or incurred only upon any
order or approval of the persons duly authorized to act on behalf of the City in such capacity. The
liability for purchases or encumbrances made contrary to this chapter, or without authorization as
provided herein, shall become the personal liability of the officer or employees who contracted for
such purchase or caused such encumbrance.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2003-13 on 4/22/2003
Amended by Ord. 2018-12 on 6/26/2018
3-1-13: ACQUISITION OF REAL PROPERTY
A. Dedication by Plat:
1. All real property interests dedicated to the City on plats properly approved by the Planning
Commission and Planning Department including real property, rights-of-way, and utility
easements are only acquired upon the recordation of the subdivision plat at the Weber
County Recorder’s Office.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=3:_REVENUE_AND_FINANCE 15/26
B. Acquisition by Agreement:
1. All real property which is not dedicated by plat will be officially acquired only upon written
agreement authorized by the City Council. The City Council reserves the right to refuse
any property proposed to be acquired by the City.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2017-25 on 11/28/2017
Amended by Ord. 2018-12 on 6/26/2018
3-2: TAXES
ARTICLE A: MUNICIPAL ENERGY SALES AND USE TAX
ARTICLE B: SALES AND USE TAX
ARTICLE C: TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDERS TAX
ARTICLE A: MUNICIPAL ENERGY SALES AND USE TAX
3-2A-1: DEFINITIONS
3-2A-2: TAX LEVIED
3-2A-3: EXEMPTIONS FROM TAX
3-2A-4: EXISTING FRANCHISES
3-2A-5: CONTRACT WITH STATE TAX COMMISSION
3-2A-6: STATE STATUTES INCORPORATED
3-2A-7: ADDITIONAL LICENSE NOT REQUIRED
3-2A-1: DEFINITIONS
As used in this article:
CONSUMER: A person who acquires taxable energy for any use that is subject to the municipal energy
sales and use tax.
CONTRACTUAL FRANCHISE FEE:
A. A fee:
1. Provided for in a franchise agreement; and
2. That is consideration for the franchise agreement; or
B. 1. A fee similar to subsection A of this definition; or
2. Any combination of subsections A or B1 of this definition.
DELIVERED VALUE:
A. The fair market value of the taxable energy delivered for sale or use in the municipality and
includes:
1. The value of the energy itself; and
2. Any transportation, freight, customer demand charges, service charges, or other costs
typically incurred in providing taxable energy in usable form to each class of customer in
the municipality;
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=3:_REVENUE_AND_FINANCE 16/26
B. Does not include the amount of a tax paid under Utah Code 59-12 Part 1 or 2.
ENERGY SUPPLIER: A person supplying taxable energy, except for persons supplying a de minimus
amount of taxable energy, if such persons are excluded by rule promulgated by the state tax
commission.
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT: A franchise or an ordinance, contract, or agreement granting a franchise.
FRANCHISE TAX:
A. A franchise tax;
B. A tax similar to a franchise tax; or
C. Any combination of subsections A or B of this definition.
PERSON: Means and includes any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation,
estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, this state, any county, city, municipality, district or other
local governmental entity of the state, or any group or combination acting as a unit.
SALE: Any transfer of title, exchange or barter, conditional or otherwise, in any manner, of taxable
energy for a consideration. It includes:
A. Installment and credit sales;
B. Any closed transaction constituting a sale;
C. Any transaction under which right to acquire, use or consume taxable energy is granted under a
lease or contract and the transfer would be taxable if an outright sale were made.
STORAGE: Any keeping or retention of taxable energy in North Ogden City for any purpose, except
sales in the regular course of business.
TAXABLE ENERGY: Gas and electricity.
USE:
A. The exercise of any right or power over taxable energy incident to the ownership or the leasing of
the taxable energy;
B. Does not include the sale, display, demonstration or trial of the taxable energy in the regular
course of business and held for resale.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 3.08.010 on 1/1/1987
3-2A-2: TAX LEVIED
There is levied, subject to the provisions of this article, a tax on every sale or use of taxable energy
made within the city equaling six percent (6%) of the delivered value of the taxable energy to the
consumer. This tax shall be known as the municipal energy sales and use tax.
A. The tax shall be calculated on the delivered value of the taxable energy to the consumer.
B. The tax shall be in addition to any sales or use tax on taxable energy imposed by the city
authorized by Utah Code 59-12 Part 2, the local sales and use tax act.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=3:_REVENUE_AND_FINANCE 17/26
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 2.08.020 on 1/1/1987
3-2A-3: EXEMPTIONS FROM TAX
A. No exemptions are granted from the municipal energy sales and use tax except as expressly
provided in Utah Code § 10-1-305(2)(b); notwithstanding an exemption granted by Utah Code §
59-1-104.
B. The following are exempt from the municipal energy sales and use tax, pursuant to Utah Code §
10-1-305(2)(b):
1. Sales and use of aviation fuel, motor fuel, and special fuels subject to taxation under Utah
Code 59-13;
2. Sales and use of taxable energy that is exempt from taxation under federal law, the
United States constitution, or the Utah constitution;
3. Sales and use of taxable energy purchased or stored for resale;
4. Sales or use of taxable energy to a person, if the primary use of the taxable energy is for
use in compounding or producing taxable energy or a fuel subject to taxation under Utah
Code 59-13;
5. Taxable energy brought into the state by a nonresident for the nonresident's own
personal use or enjoyment while within the state, except taxable energy purchased for
use in the state by a nonresident living or working in the state at the time of purchase;
6. The sale or use of taxable energy for any purpose other than as a fuel or energy; and
7. The sale of taxable energy for use outside the boundaries of the city.
C. The sale, storage, use or other consumption of taxable energy is exempt from the municipal
energy sales and use tax levied by this article, provided:
1. The delivered value of the taxable energy has been subject to a municipal energy sales or
use tax levied by another municipality within the state authorized by Utah Code 59-12
Part 3; and
2. The city is paid the difference between the tax paid to the other municipality and the tax
that would otherwise be due under this article, if the tax due under this article exceeds the
tax paid to the other municipality.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 3.08.030 on 1/1/1987
3-2A-4: EXISTING FRANCHISES
A. This article shall not alter any existing franchise agreements between the city and energy
suppliers.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=3:_REVENUE_AND_FINANCE 18/26
B. There is a credit against the tax due from any consumer in the amount of a contractual franchise
fee paid if:
1. The energy supplier pays the contractual franchise fee to the city pursuant to a franchise
agreement in effect on July 1, 1997;
2. The contractual franchise fee is passed through by the energy supplier to a consumer as
a separately itemized charge; and
3. The energy supplier has accepted the franchise.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 3.08.040 on 1/1/1987
3-2A-5: CONTRACT WITH STATE TAX COMMISSION
A. On or before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article, the city shall contract with
the state tax commission to perform all functions incident to the administration and collection of
the municipal energy sales and use tax, in accordance with this article. The mayor, with the
approval of the city attorney, is authorized to enter into an agreement with the state tax
commission that may be necessary to the administration and operation of the municipal energy
sales and use tax ordinance enacted by the ordinance codified in this article.
B. An energy supplier shall pay the municipal energy sales and use tax revenues collected from
consumers directly to the city monthly if:
1. The city is the energy supplier; or
2. a. The energy supplier estimates that the municipal energy sales and use tax
collected annually from its Utah consumers equals one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) or more; and
b. The energy supplier collects the municipal energy sales and use tax.
C. An energy supplier paying the municipal energy sales and use tax directly to the city may deduct
any contractual franchise fees collected by the energy supplier qualifying as a credit and remit
the net tax less any amount the energy supplier retains as authorized by Utah Code § 10-1-
307(4).
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 3.08.050 on 1/1/1987
3-2A-6: STATE STATUTES INCORPORATED
A. Except as herein provided, and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of
Utah Code 10-1 Part 3, municipal energy sales and use tax act, as well as this article, all of the
provisions of Utah Code 59-12 Part 1, as amended, and in force and effect on the effective date
hereof, insofar as they relate to sales and use taxes, excepting sections 59-12-101 and 59-12-
119 thereof, and excepting for the amount of the sales and use taxes levied therein, are adopted
and made a part of this article as if fully set forth herein.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=3:_REVENUE_AND_FINANCE 19/26
B. Wherever, and to the extent that in Utah Code 59-12 Part 1, as amended, the state of Utah is
named or referred to as the "taxing agency", the name of the city shall be substituted, insofar as
is necessary for the purposes of that part, as well as Utah Code 10-1 Part 3, as amended.
Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to require substitution of the name of the city for the
word "state" when that word is used as part of the title of the state tax commission or of the
constitution of Utah, nor shall the name of the city be substituted for that of the state in any
section when the result of such a substitution would require action to be taken by or against the
city or any agency thereof, rather than by or against the state tax commission in performing the
functions incident to the administration or operation of this article.
C. Any amendments made to Utah Code 59-12, Part 1, as amended, which would be applicable to
the city for the purposes of carrying out this article are incorporated herein by reference and shall
be effective upon the date that they are effective as a Utah statute.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 3.08.060 on 1/1/1987
3-2A-7: ADDITIONAL LICENSE NOT REQUIRED
No additional license to collect or report the municipal energy sales and use tax levied by this article is
required, provided the energy supplier collecting the tax has a license issued under Utah Code § 59-12-
106.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 3.08.070 on 1/1/1987
ARTICLE B: SALES AND USE TAX
3-2B-1: TITLE
3-2B-2: PURPOSE
3-2B-3: EFFECTIVE DATE
3-2B-4: TAX LEVIED
3-2B-5: PENALTY
3-2B-1: TITLE
This article shall be known as the SALES AND USE TAX ORDINANCE OF NORTH OGDEN CITY.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 3.12.010 on 1/1/1987
3-2B-2: PURPOSE
A. The forty eighth session of the Utah legislature has authorized the counties and municipalities of
the state to enact sales and use tax ordinances imposing a one percent (1%) tax.
B. It is the purpose of this article to conform the sales and use tax of the municipality to the
requirements of the sales and use tax act, Utah Code 59-12, as currently amended.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 3.12.020 on 1/1/1987
3-2B-3: EFFECTIVE DATE
The ordinance codified in this article shall become effective as of one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01)
A.M., January 1, 1990.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=3:_REVENUE_AND_FINANCE 20/26
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 3.12.030 on 1/1/1987
3-2B-4: TAX LEVIED
A. Rate:
1. From and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article, there is levied
and there shall be collected and paid a tax upon every retail sale of tangible personal
property, services and meals made within the municipality at the rate of one percent (1%).
2. An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in this municipality of
tangible personal property from any retailer on or after the operative date of the ordinance
codified in this article at the rate of one percent (1%) of the sales price of the property.
B. Retail Sales Defined: For the purpose of this article, all retail sales shall be presumed to have
been consummated at the place of business delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out of
state or to a common carrier for delivery to an out of state destination. In the event the retailer
has no permanent place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are
consummated shall be as determined under the rules and regulations prescribed by and adopted
by the state tax commission.
C. State Statute Provisions Adopted:
1. Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the
provisions of the sales and use tax act, all of the provisions of Utah Code 59-12, as
amended, and in force and effect on the effective date hereof, insofar as they relate to
sales taxes, excepting Utah Code §§ 59-12-101 and 59-12-119 thereof, are adopted and
made a part of this article as though fully set forth herein.
2. Wherever, and to the extent that in Utah Code 59-12, the state is named or referred to as
the taxing agency, the name of this municipality shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in
this subsection shall be deemed to require substitution of the name of the municipality for
the word "state" when that word is used as part of the title of the state tax commission, or
of the constitution of the state of Utah, nor shall the name of the municipality be
substituted for that of the state in any section when the result of that substitution would
require action to be taken by or against the municipality or any agency thereof, rather
than by or against the state tax commission in performing the functions incident to the
administration or operation of this article.
D. Additional License Not Required: If an annual license has been issued to a retailer under Utah
Code § 59-12-106, an additional license shall not be required by reason of this section.
E. Exclusions: There shall be excluded from the purchase price paid or charged by which the tax is
measured:
1. The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer;
2. The gross receipts from the sale of or the cost of storage, use or other consumption of
tangible personal property upon which a sales or use tax has become due by reason of
the sale transaction to any other municipality and any county in the state, under the sales
or use tax ordinance enacted by that county or municipality in accordance with the sales
and use tax act.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 3.12.040 on 1/1/1987
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=3:_REVENUE_AND_FINANCE 21/26
3-2B-5: PENALTY
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a class B
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in CCNO 1-4-1.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 3.12.050 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
ARTICLE C: TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDERS TAX
3-2C-1: DEFINITIONS
3-2C-2: LEVY OF TAX
3-2C-3: RATE
3-2C-4: RATE LIMITATION AND EXEMPTION
3-2C-5: EFFECTIVE DATE OF TAX LEVY
3-2C-6: INTERLOCAL AGREEMENT FOR COLLECTION
3-2C-7: REPEAL OF INCONSISTENT TAXES AND FEES
3-2C-1: DEFINITIONS
As used in this article:
CITY: North Ogden City, Utah.
COMMISSION: The state tax commission.
CUSTOMER:
A. Subject to subsections B and C of this definition, "customer" means the person who is obligated
under a contract with a telecommunications provider to pay for telecommunications service
received under the contract.
B. For purposes of this article, "customer" means:
1. The person who is obligated under a contract with a telecommunications provider to pay
for telecommunications service received under the contract; or
2. If the end user is not the person described in subsection B1 of this definition, the end user
of telecommunications service.
C. "Customer" does not include a reseller:
1. Of telecommunications service; or
2. For mobile telecommunications service, of a serving carrier under an agreement to serve
the customer outside the telecommunications provider's licensed service area.
END USER:
A. The person who uses a telecommunications service.
B. For purposes of telecommunications service provided to a person who is not an individual, "end
user" means the individual who uses the telecommunications service on behalf of the person
who is provided the telecommunications service.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=3:_REVENUE_AND_FINANCE 22/26
GROSS RECEIPTS ATTRIBUTED TO THE CITY: Those gross receipts from a transaction for
telecommunications services that is located within the city for the purposes of sales and use taxes under
Utah Code 59-12, sales and use tax act, and determined in accordance with Utah Code § 59-12-207.
GROSS RECEIPTS FROM TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: The revenue that a
telecommunications provider receives for telecommunications service rendered, except for amounts
collected or paid as:
A. A tax, fee or charge:
1. Imposed by a governmental entity;
2. Separately identified as a tax, fee or charge in the transaction with the customer for the
telecommunications service; and
3. Imposed only on a telecommunications provider;
B. Sales and use taxes collected by the telecommunications provider from a customer under Utah
Code 59-12, sales and use tax act; or
C. Interest, a fee, or a charge that is charged by a telecommunications provider on a customer for
failure to pay for telecommunications service when payment is due.
MOBILE TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: Is as defined in the mobile telecommunications sourcing
act, 4 USC section 124.
PLACE OF PRIMARY USE:
A. For telecommunications service other than mobile telecommunications service, the street
address representative of where the customer's use of the telecommunications service primarily
occurs, which shall be:
1. The residential street address of the customer; or
2. The primary business street address of the customer; or
B. For mobile telecommunications service, is as defined in the mobile telecommunications sourcing
act, 4 USC section 124.
SERVICE ADDRESS:
A. If the location described in this definition is known, the location of the telecommunications
equipment:
1. To which a call is charged; and
2. From which the call originates or terminates;
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=3:_REVENUE_AND_FINANCE 23/26
B. If the location described in subsection A of this definition is not known, but the location described
in subsection B of this definition is known, the location of the origination point of the signal of the
telecommunications service first identified by.
1. The telecommunications system of the telecommunications provider; or
2. If the system used to transport the signal is not a system of the telecommunications
provider, information received by the telecommunications provider from its service
provider; or
3. If the locations described in subsections A or B of this definition are not known, the
location of a customer's place of primary use.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER:
A. Subject to subsections B and C of this definition, "telecommunications provider" means a person
that:
1. Owns, controls, operates or manages a telecommunications service; or
2. Engages in an activity described in subsection A1 of this definition for the shared use with
or resale to any person of the telecommunications service.
B. A person described in subsection A of this definition is a "telecommunications provider" whether
or not the public service commission of Utah regulates:
1. That person; or
2. The telecommunications service that the person owns, controls, operates or manages.
C. "Telecommunications provider" does not include an aggregator as defined in Utah Code § 54-8b-
2.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE:
A. "Telephone service", as defined in Utah Code § 59-12-102, other than mobile
telecommunications service, that originates and terminates within the boundaries of this state;
and
B. "Mobile telecommunications service", as defined in Utah Code § 59-12-102:
1. that originates and terminates within the boundaries of one state; and
2. only to the extent permitted by the mobile telecommunications sourcing act, 4 USC
section 116 et seq.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2004-05 on 4/27/2004
3-2C-2: LEVY OF TAX
There is hereby levied a municipal telecommunications license tax on the gross receipts from
telecommunications service attributed to the city.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2004-05 on 4/27/2004
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=3:_REVENUE_AND_FINANCE 24/26
3-2C-3: RATE
The rate of the tax levy shall be three and one-half percent (3.5%) of the telecommunication provider's
gross receipts from telecommunications service that are attributed to the municipality, subject to the
following:
If the location of a transaction is determined to be other than the city, then the rate imposed on the gross
receipts for telecommunications services shall be the lower of: a) the rate imposed by the taxing
jurisdiction in which the transaction is located; or b) the rate for nonmobile telecommunication services
shall be the rate imposed by the municipality in which the customers service address is located; or for
mobile telecommunications service, the rate imposed by the municipality of the customers primary place
of use.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2004-05 on 4/27/2004
Amended by Ord. 2008-11 on 6/10/2008
3-2C-4: RATE LIMITATION AND EXEMPTION
This rate of this levy shall not exceed three and one-half percent (3.5%) of the telecommunication
providers's gross receipts from telecommunication service attributed to the city, unless a higher rate is
approved by a majority vote of the voters in the city that vote in:
A. A municipal general election;
B. A regular general election; or
C. A local special election.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2004-05 on 4/27/2004
Amended by Ord. 2008-11 on 6/10/2008
3-2C-5: EFFECTIVE DATE OF TAX LEVY
This tax shall be levied beginning the earlier of July 1, 2004, or the first day of any calendar quarter after
a seventy five (75) day period beginning on the date the commission received notice pursuant to Utah
Code § 10-1-403 that the city has enacted the ordinance codified herein.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2004-05 on 4/27/2004
3-2C-6: INTERLOCAL AGREEMENT FOR COLLECTION
On or before the effective date hereof, the city shall enter into the uniform interlocal agreement with the
commission as described in Utah Code § 10-1-405 for the collection, enforcement and administration of
this municipal telecommunications license tax.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2004-05 on 4/27/2004
3-2C-7: REPEAL OF INCONSISTENT TAXES AND FEES
A. Any tax or fee previously enacted by the city under authority of Utah Code § 10-1-203, or Utah
Code 11-26, local taxation of utilities limitation, is hereby repealed.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=3:_REVENUE_AND_FINANCE 25/26
B. Nothing in this article shall be interpreted to repeal any city ordinance or fee which provides that
the city may recover from a telecommunications provider the management costs of the city
caused by the activities of the telecommunications provider in the rights of way of the city, if the
fee is imposed in accordance with Utah Code § 72-7-102 and is not related to the city's loss of
use of a highway as a result of the activities of the telecommunications provider in a right of way,
or increased deterioration of a highway as a result of the activities of the telecommunications
provider in a right of way, nor does this article limit the city's right to charge fees or taxes on
persons that are not subject to the municipal telecommunications license tax under this article
and locate "telecommunications facilities", as defined in Utah Code § 72-7-108, in the city.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2004-05 on 4/27/2004
3-3: FUNDS
3-3-1: MOTOR POOL FUND
3-3-2: PARK ACQUISITION AND DEVELOPMENT FUND
3-3-1: MOTOR POOL FUND
A. Created: There is created a special budgetary fund within the city budget to be known as the
"motor pool fund", for which an annual budget is required.
B. Transfer Of Funds: All operable motor vehicles, excepting those vehicles presently maintained
and operated by the water department, sewer department, storm water department and solid
waste department, shall be and are transferred from the general fund and such vehicles shall
hereafter be deemed general fixed assets of the motor pool fund.
C. Lease; Monthly Payment: The following special funds and departments within the general fund
may lease vehicles from the motor pool fund and shall make monthly payments to the motor pool
fund for the operation and maintenance of such vehicles, the monthly payments to be based
upon the cost of vehicle maintenance, replacement and depreciation:
1. Departments:
a. Administrative;
b. Police;
c. Inspection;
d. Animal control;
e. Streets;
f. Community services;
g. Community development.
2. Special Funds:
a. Water utility;
b. Sewer utility;
c. Solid waste.
D. Lease Required: A lease shall be prepared to carry into effect the provisions of subsection C of
this section.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=3:_REVENUE_AND_FINANCE 26/26
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 3.16.010, 3.16.020, 3.16.030, 3.16.040 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
3-3-2: PARK ACQUISITION AND DEVELOPMENT FUND
A. Established: There is established a fund to be known as the "park acquisition and development
fund" in the city.
B. Deposits; Permit Fees: As a condition precedent to the issuance of any permit from the
construction of any residential building or structure, a sum as established in the consolidated fee
schedule for the first "dwelling unit" (as defined in CCNO 11-2-1), and for each additional
dwelling unit, must be paid to the city, with the same to be deposited in the park fund, such fee to
be paid by the person making the application for such permit at the time the application for such
permit is filed.
C. Other Funds: Other funds may, from time to time, be deposited in the park fund as the city
council may from time to time prescribe by ordinance or otherwise.
D. Use Of Funds: The funds deposited in the park acquisition and development fund shall be used
only for the acquisition, planning or improvement of public parks in the city as the city council
may prescribe.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 3.20.010, 3.20.020, 3.20.030, 3.20.040 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=4:_BUSINESS_AND_LICENSE_REGULATIONS 1/49
4: BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
4-1: BUSINESS LICENSE PROVISIONS
4-2: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
4-3: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES AND EMPLOYEES
4-4: RESIDENTIAL SOLICITATION
4-1: BUSINESS LICENSE PROVISIONS
4-1-1: DEFINITIONS
4-1-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; EXEMPTIONS
4-1-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE
4-1-4: BOND REQUIRED
4-1-5: FEE FOR LICENSE
4-1-6: BOARD OF EQUALIZATION
4-1-7: LICENSE INSPECTORS
4-1-8: INTERSTATE COMMERCE
4-1-9: TEMPORARY BUSINESSES
4-1-10: CHRISTMAS TREE SALES
4-1-11: REVOCATION OF LICENSE
4-1-12: FOOD TRUCK REGULATIONS
4-1-13: PENALTY
ARTICLE A: REVOCATION FOR PORNOGRAPHY VIOLATION
4-1-1: DEFINITIONS
The following terms shall be defined as indicated for the purpose of this chapter:
BUSINESS: Includes every trade, occupation, profession or activity engaged in within the city with the
object of gain or economic profit, excluding, however, the act of employees rendering service to
employers.
EMPLOYEE: Includes all natural persons who work for an employer for salary or commission or wages,
and who are subject to the direction and control of such employer and who do not share the profits and
losses of such employer. It includes all full time officers of public agencies.
ENGAGING IN BUSINESS: One or more transactions where gross receipts are in excess of five
hundred dollars ($500.00) during any twelve (12) month period. The term also includes, but is not limited
to, engaging in selling any tangible property either at retail or wholesale, installation of goods, engaging
in manufacture of goods or property and rendering of any personal services for others for a
consideration by persons engaged in any profession, trade, craft, business, occupation or other calling,
except the rendering of personal services by an employee to his employer under any contract of
personal employment.
PERSON: Any individual, receiver, assignee, trustee in bankruptcy, trust, firm, partnership, joint venture,
corporation, club, company, business trust, association, society or other group of individuals acting as a
unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit or otherwise.
PLACE OF BUSINESS: A place maintained or occupied by the licensee for the transaction of business.
It does not include a place in which goods of the licensee are kept for storage or display only, if no
services are tendered, business transacted or sales consummated at such place.
TEMPORARY BUSINESS: Any sale made by a person, firm, or corporation engaging in the temporary
business of selling goods, wares, or merchandise from a tent, truck, ending cart, or other area outside of
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=4:_BUSINESS_AND_LICENSE_REGULATIONS 2/49
a permanent structure on property owned or leased by the person, firm, or corporation on a lot for a
period of no more than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days within a single calendar year (with or
without a permanent building) and which is not associated with any other business conducted on the
same lot. (1987 Code § 5.04.010; amd. Ord. 2003-11, 5-27-2003)
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 5.04.010 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2003-11 on 5/27/2003
Repealed & Reenacted by Ord. 2014-23 on 9/16/2014
4-1-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; EXEMPTIONS
A. License Required:
1. Every person engaged in business in the city, except as set forth, shall secure a license
from the city for such business, except that any person engaged in the construction,
electrical or plumbing trade whose principal place of business is located outside the city
limits, and who is duly licensed by the state under applicable state law, shall be allowed to
engage in business without a business license from the City. Such license or registration
shall be issued upon written application therefor in such form as the city may prescribe
and upon payment of the fees required in this chapter, and when it is ascertained that all
prerequisites for the issuance of each such license or registration have been satisfied and
fulfilled. In the case of a new building, the business license will not be approved until the
building has been approved for occupancy by the building inspection department.
2. It is unlawful for any person to engage in business without first obtaining a license or
registering therefor in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=4:_BUSINESS_AND_LICENSE_REGULATIONS 3/49
B. Exempt Businesses: The following businesses, ventures or activities are exempt from the
licensing and fee requirements of this chapter:
1. Any organization carried on or managed wholly for the benefit of charitable purposes or
from which profit is not derived, directly or indirectly, by any person.
2. Any activity, the receipts from which are to be appropriated entirely to any church, school,
religious or benevolent purpose.
3. Any activity conducted by a religious, charitable, fraternal, educational, military or
governmental organization so long as the receipts from such activity are appropriated for
the purposes and objects for which such organization is formed and no person directly or
indirectly derives a profit therefrom.
4. Any person conducting a business, venture or activity which is exempted from the
licensing and fee requirements pursuant to this chapter shall still be required to pay any
fee required to cover the costs of necessary inspection done by the city, which shall
include all inspections to determine compliance with applicable codes. The inspection
fees shall be in an amount determined by resolution of the city council.
5. Nothing in this chapter shall apply to any public utility business holding a franchise from
the city under which the city is to be paid a franchise fee or tax in lieu of all other license
fees or taxes.
6. If any person furnishes such evidence as shall satisfy the city council that he, by reason
of his misfortune or physical infirmities, merits exception from the payment of any license
fee required in this chapter, the mayor may remit such license with the consent of the city
council.
7. Any organization conducting a business on behalf or at the request of the city in
connection with the promotion of city sponsored celebrations, pageants, displays, projects
or other city sponsored events.
8. Any businesses operated only occasionally and by individuals who are under the age of
18. For a business to qualify no income from the business may be distributed to an
individual 18 or older unless for the repayment of goods or supplies for the business.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 5.04.020, 5.040.030, 5.04.040 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2017-23 on 10/17/2017
4-1-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE
A. Requirements: All applications for license shall be made in writing. Upon granting a license, the
city shall issue a certificate of license which shall contain the name of the license, the business,
calling, trade or profession to be carried on thereunder, the class of the license, if such licenses
are divided into classes, and the place where the licensed business is to be carried on, giving the
street number if such business is to be carried on at a fixed place, and the date of the expiration
of such license.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=4:_BUSINESS_AND_LICENSE_REGULATIONS 4/49
B. Content Of Application: The application shall contain:
1. The date of application;
2. The name of the person, firm or corporation desiring the license;
3. The kind of license desired, stating the business, calling, trade or profession to be
performed, practiced or carried on;
4. The class of license desired if licenses are divided into classes;
5. Proof of such applicant's compliance or qualifications under applicable state regulatory
laws before issuing the city revenue license;
6. The period of time for which the license may be issued; and
7. Any other matter or thing which may be required and necessary for the purpose of
enabling the city to fix the amount of license fee.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 5.04.050, 5.04.060 on 1/1/1987
4-1-4: BOND REQUIRED
All applicants for business licenses for the following businesses shall be required to give bonds in favor
of the city for the purposes indicated in such amounts as may be set by resolution. All aggrieved persons
shall have a right to bring an action under such bond against the licensee and the sureties. Such bonds
shall be executed by corporate sureties only unless otherwise authorized by the city council. No license
shall be issued until the bonds required in this chapter have been filed and approved by the city
attorney:
A. Employment agencies, conditioned upon the faithful observance of the ordinances of the city and
the payment of all damages occasioned to any person by reason of any misstatement,
misrepresentation, fraud or deceit practiced by the licensee or his agents or employees;
B. Persons lending money upon personal securities, evidence of indebtedness, assignments of
salary, salary warrants or any personal property, other than banks and other regulated financial
institutions, conditioned upon the faithful observance of the ordinances of the city and the laws of
the state respecting money brokers, loan agencies and pawnbrokers and usury laws;
C. Messenger or special delivery services, conditioned upon the faithful observance of all
ordinances of the city and the payment of all damages arising from any negligence in the
conducting of such business.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 5.04.070 on 1/1/1987
4-1-5: FEE FOR LICENSE
A. Required: An applicant shall, upon the filing of his application for a license, deposit with the city a
fee prescribed by resolution for the business, trade, profession, occupation or calling for which a
license is applied. The city shall issue an interim receipt showing the receipt of such deposit, but
such receipt shall not be deemed to be a certificate of license. In the event license should be
refused, the money so deposited shall be repaid to the applicant upon his demand. All licenses
shall be payable annually, in advance (unless otherwise provided) and shall date from the date
the certificate of license is issued and shall expire one year from the date the certificate of license
is issued.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=4:_BUSINESS_AND_LICENSE_REGULATIONS 5/49
All business licenses for businesses operating in North Ogden City at the time this subsection is
adopted shall expire on December 31, 2012.
B. Late Payment Penalty: If any license fee or tax is not paid within two (2) months of the due date,
a penalty of twenty five percent (25%) of the amount of the license fee or tax shall be added to
the original amount thereof, and if not paid within four (4) months of the due date, an additional
penalty of twenty five percent (25%) shall be added to the original amount thereof. All penalties
provided for in this subsection shall be collected by the city and payment thereof enforced in the
same manner as the license fees are collected and payment thereof enforced. No license shall
be issued until all penalties legally assessed have been paid in full.
C. Multiple Businesses: Except as may be otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, whenever
more than one business, trade, profession, calling or occupation is being carried on by one
licensee under one roof, such licensee shall for all of such businesses, trades, professions,
callings or occupations pay only the highest license fee provided in this chapter applicable to any
of such businesses, trades, professions, callings or occupations.
D. New Businesses: The license fees for new businesses shall be due and payable on the date that
business is first commenced. The provisions of this subsection apply only to new businesses,
and nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as exempting a late applicant from
payment of the full license fee, or permitting the refund of any portion of a license fee already
paid.
E. Debt To City: Every license fee, tax or assessment levied by any ordinance of the city and all
interest accruing thereon after the date of the delinquency, and all penalties levied or assessed
thereon by any ordinance of the city for failure to pay the sum within the time required,
constitutes a debt to the city, and the city may maintain an action to recover the same and all
costs associated therewith, including a reasonable attorney fee, in any court of competent
jurisdiction, which remedy shall be in addition to any and all other remedies which may be
provided.
F. Rebates: No rebate shall be allowed upon any license unless the licensee has been damaged by
fire or other unavoidable accident or property damage. In all such cases, the city council shall
have discretionary power as to what amount, if any, shall be rebated.
G. Exceptions to Fee Requirement: In accordance with Utah Code § 10-1-203, all home based
businesses shall be exempt from paying a business license fee except for businesses which
materially exceeds the offsite impact of the primary residential use alone. The following
businesses have a rebuttable presumption that they exceed the offsite impacts because of the
noise, traffic, smells, or other non-residential externalities:
1. In home child or adult care and preschool businesses;
2. Businesses that require or attract more than 10 vehicle trips per day, including but not limited to
package delivery, client visits, and employee trips;
3. Businesses which are allowed by City Code to utilize employees who live outside of the residence
but work in the home;
4. Any business that is required to have a fire inspection; and
5. Any business that is required to obtain a license from another government agency, such as the
Department of Health.
6. Any business which typically requires overnight parking including for residential rentals.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 5.04.090, 5.04.100, 5.04.110, 5.04.120, 5.04.130 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=4:_BUSINESS_AND_LICENSE_REGULATIONS 6/49
Amended by Ord. 2012-14 on 7/10/2012
Amended by Ord. 2017-23 on 10/17/2017
4-1-6: BOARD OF EQUALIZATION
The city council constitutes a board of equalization for the equalization of license rates. The board shall
have the authority to examine the assessment rolls, to hear complaints of persons, firms or corporations
aggrieved by their license assessments, and to make corrections of any such assessments deemed to
be illegal, unequal or unjust; provided, however, that any corrections made by the board shall be entered
in detail in a record of license abatements, and the members of the board shall approve the entries in
writing before the accounts are adjusted. The board shall meet at the call of the mayor to hear any
complaints and authorize any adjustments which it may deem proper in the assessments made by the
city. All complaints pertaining to licenses due on January 1 must be presented to the board prior to
March 1, and all complaints pertaining to licenses due at any other time must be presented to the board
within sixty (60) days from the date such licenses are due. All complaints not presented before such
deadlines shall be barred.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code on 1/1/1987
4-1-7: LICENSE INSPECTORS
All police officers and building inspectors are appointed license inspectors and may examine all places
of business or persons required to obtain business licenses. All business licenses shall be displayed in a
visible and conspicuous place during all business hours. Inspecting officers shall report to the city
administrator all businesses or persons that have failed to obtain or display business licenses as
required by this chapter. It shall be the duty and power of all license inspectors:
A. Complaints Against Violators: To cause complaints to be filed against all persons violating any of
the provisions of this chapter;
B. Authority To Enter: To have and exercise the power to enter free of charge during business
hours any place of business of which a license is required by this chapter and to demand the
exhibition of a current license from any person or persons engaged or employed in the
transaction of such business.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 5.04.160 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
4-1-8: INTERSTATE COMMERCE
It is unlawful for any person to engage in any business, occupation, calling or profession which is solely
in interstate commerce without first registering with the city and paying the registration fee prescribed by
resolution and filing with the city such information as may be required by the city council.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 5.04.180 on 1/1/1987
4-1-9: TEMPORARY BUSINESSES
A. Lot Standards: All temporary businesses must be located on improved property containing
improvements such as paved off street parking, curb, gutter and sidewalk in good repair. The lot
must meet the site development standards for the zone in which it is located.
B. Zones Permitted: All temporary businesses must be located within the following zones: C-1, C-2,
CP-1, CP-2 or MP-1.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=4:_BUSINESS_AND_LICENSE_REGULATIONS 7/49
C. Departmental Review: Review and approval of the site and the proposed temporary business by
the following departments must occur prior to conducting any sale or rendering any service, if
applicable:
1. Weber/Morgan health department, for the purpose of ensuring adequate sanitary
facilities;
2. Building inspector, for the purpose of examining and approving the construction of
temporary shelters, electrical, plumbing and heating installation, traffic flow and potential
hazards, off street parking and general site standards.
D. Site Plan: The applicant for a temporary business license must submit a site plan showing the
type of building or shelter from which sales are to be made, as well as its location on the lot.
Temporary structures shall be adequately attached to the ground to prevent wind uplift as per
building code, or as approved by the building official and where the temporary business is
conducted between November 15 and March 15 of any year, a roof of substantial strength and
design to support a snow load of not less than thirty (30) pounds. If the business is conducted
from a vehicle, its license number must be given. The location of ingress and egress to the site
from the street, the location and size of all proposed signs and the number and size of off street
parking stalls must also be shown. In addition, the following is required:
1. The proposed hours of operation;
2. The dates upon which the sales are to be conducted;
3. A general description of goods offered for sale;
4. A letter from the property owner granting permission to the temporary business to use his
lot, together with any conditions for approval;
5. A revenue and regulatory license fee for each location, the same to be established by
resolution;
6. A refundable deposit in a sum to be established by resolution which shall accompany the
application and which shall be returned within fourteen (14) days from the date of
termination of the temporary business so long as the area is cleaned and placed in the
pre-business condition and order.
E. Term: Every license issued shall contain on the face thereof the date upon which the license
period ends. Every business shall immediately cease doing business at the conclusion of the
license period and shall vacate the temporary business site within five (5) days thereof, leaving
the same in its pre-business condition.
F. Cleaning Or Repairing Premises By City: In the event the city elects or deems it necessary to
utilize city manpower or equipment or expend public funds to replace the site of a temporary
business in its pre-business condition, the city shall have and be authorized to maintain a cause
of action against the applicant, its officers and employees, for the payment of all costs and
expenses, including a reasonable attorney fee, which may arise or accrue in cleaning or repairing
the said premises, or in pursuing any remedy provided by the laws of the state whether such
remedy necessitates or results in filing of a lawsuit or not. Such applicant further grants unto the
city a lien against all property of applicant located, brought or kept upon such premises for the
foregoing costs, expenses and fees.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 5.04.190 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
Repealed & Reenacted by Ord. 2014-23 on 9/16/2014
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=4:_BUSINESS_AND_LICENSE_REGULATIONS 8/49
4-1-10: CHRISTMAS TREE SALES
The sale of Christmas trees is subject to the licensing and other requirements for a temporary business.
Any nonprofit organization submitting an application for the conduct of a temporary business shall not be
required to pay the license fee but shall be subject to other application and use standards set forth in this
chapter.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 5.04.200 on 1/1/1987
4-1-11: REVOCATION OF LICENSE
A. Authority: All licenses which have been issued or which may hereafter be issued by the city shall
be subject to revocation as hereinafter provided, without regard to any expiration date on such
license as issued.
B. Hearing; Notice: Whenever, it appears to the city's business license official that a license holder
has engaged in conduct warranting revocation of any license or licenses issued by the city, the
business license official may direct that notice be sent to the holders of such licenses directing
such holders to appear as provided under CCNO 1-8 to show cause, if any, why such license or
licenses should not be revoked.
C. Appearance By Licensee: At the hour and date stated in such notice, the licensee shall have an
opportunity to appear before the administrative law judge and show cause why such license
should not be revoked.
D. Determination Of The Administrative Law Judge: In the event that the administrative law judge on
such hearing shall determine that the public interests are best served by the revocation of such
license or that the licensee has failed to comply with the city zoning code or international building
code or codes of professional ethics for licensee's particular profession, or has been convicted of
a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude or has admitted to conduct which is tantamount to
violating laws relating to felonious conduct or moral turpitude, or has violated any laws relating to
the sale, display or distribution of pornographic materials or has failed to comply with the
requirement of this chapter, including CCNO Article A, relating to business licenses, the
administrative law judge shall thereupon order such license canceled and revoked, and
thereupon such license shall become null and void.
E. Refunds Or Rebates: In the event of revocation as provided in this section, there shall be no
refund or rebate of any part of the original license fee paid by the licensee.
F. Failure Of Licensee To Appear: In the event that the licensee fails, neglects or refuses to appear
at the hour and date set for such hearing, the administrative law judge may proceed to determine
the matter in the absence of the licensee, or may in his sole discretion, continue the date of such
hearing to some later date and at such later date proceed to act on the matter without further
notice to the licensee.
G. Operation With Revoked License Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person to carry on, conduct or
operate any business, trade or profession for which a city license is required after such person's
license has been revoked or canceled in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2011-15 on 9/27/2011
4-1-12: FOOD TRUCK REGULATIONS
A. Purpose: This section is intended to articulate North Ogden City’s regulations related to the operation of
Food Trucks within its jurisdiction. Should any provision of this section violate Utah Code, the Utah Code
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=4:_BUSINESS_AND_LICENSE_REGULATIONS 9/49
overrides this section. Where Utah Code allows for discretion by local jurisdictions this title shall control.
B. License Required: Food Truck operators are required to obtain a business license in North Ogden City
and provide the same information as other business licenses. Food Trucks must also provide proof of
insurance on the vehicle and/or trailer.
1. Food Trucks which are licensed in other Utah jurisdictions are still required to pay a business
license fee which is reduced to 25% of the current business license fee, but must provide a
current business license for that jurisdiction, current health department permit, and proof of
current fire safety inspection.
2. Exception: Food Trucks which operate as part of a Special Event Permit are not required to obtain
a North Ogden City business license provided the event providers submit proof of business
license, health certificate, and fire inspection in another jurisdiction within the State of Utah for all
Food Trucks which attend the event three (3) days prior to the event.
3. Multiple Locations on Private Property: A Food Truck may operate at multiple locations under the
same license issued by the City if they provide the City with written approval by all landowners,
and site plans identifying where the Food Truck and parking will be located in each location.
C. Hours of Operations: Food Trucks are allowed to operate from 7:00 am through 10:00 pm any day of the
week.
D. Food Truck Locations:
1. Food Trucks may be parked along Washington Blvd. between 2750 North and 1600 North with
the following regulations:
a. They must park at least eighty (80) feet from any curb cut, crosswalk, and fire hydrant in a
location where parking is authorized.
b. All Food Trucks must orient to the sidewalk/curb so that patrons are able to safely access
the vehicle or trailer away from the travel lanes.
c. No employees should load or unload items onto the travel lane side of the vehicle.
d. No vehicle or trailer may be left for longer than 15 hours.
2. Food Trucks may not park in parks or public parking lots unless an appropriate special event
permit has been obtained.
3. Food Trucks may park on private property provided they have written permission with them at all
times, which includes the phone number and contact information of the property owner.
4. Food Trucks must maintain a 10 foot separation between other food trucks and vendors for fire
safety purposes regardless of whether they are located on public or private property.
E. Food Truck Operators which do not have a current health inspection certificate, or fire safety inspection
shall be required to obtain these approvals prior to licensure from North Ogden City.
F. Special Event Permit: All events on North Ogden City property which include Food Trucks, shall be
required to obtain a special event permit from the City Parks Department. All Food Trucks attending the
event shall have verification of current business licenses, health certificates, and fire inspections from
another jurisdiction within the State. North Ogden City business licenses are not required for Food Trucks
attending these events regardless of whether they are public or private events.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=4:_BUSINESS_AND_LICENSE_REGULATIONS 10/49
G. Private Events: For events which occur on property not owned by North Ogden City no business license is
required from North Ogden City, though they may be inspected for compliance with health and safety
regulations and must have a valid business license and health certificate from another Utah jurisdiction
and not operate for more than three days in a row. For purposes of this chapter, public school, private
school and charter school events are considered a private event, provided the Food Trucks are not
parked in any public right-of-ways or on North Ogden City property. Utilization of the public right of way
requires a Special Event Permit and a traffic plan.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 5.04.210 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
Amended by Ord. 2017-23 on 10/17/2017
4-1-13: PENALTY
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of an infraction as well as a civil
citation, upon conviction or citation, shall be subject to penalty as provided in CCNO 1-4.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2017-23 on 10/17/2017
ARTICLE A: REVOCATION FOR PORNOGRAPHY VIOLATION
4-1A-1: APPLICABILITY
4-1A-2: CONVICTIONS; AUTHORITY OF CITY
4-1A-3: HEARING
4-1A-4: OPERATION UNLAWFUL DURING REVOCATION
4-1A-5: PENALTY
4-1A-1: APPLICABILITY
Notwithstanding any other licensing provisions contained in this title, all licenses issued by the city on or
after April 1, 1977, shall be subject to the conditions, controls and regulations provided in this article.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 5.08.010 on 1/1/1987
4-1A-2: CONVICTIONS; AUTHORITY OF CITY
A. Grounds For Revocation: The city council, upon notice and hearing as provided in this article,
may revoke any license issued by the city upon the conviction of the licensee or any officer,
employee or partner of the licensee of any ordinances of the city relating to lewdness, profanity,
nudity and pornography, or of state law as it now exists or may hereafter be amended concerning
pornographic and harmful materials and performances at the licensed premises. The state law is
Utah Code § 76-10-1202 et seq., as amended. In addition, the city council may refuse to issue a
license of any kind to that licensee, its officers, partner or the convicted employee in the event of
such conviction of the licensee, his officers, employees or partner for a period of not to exceed
one year after that conviction.
B. New Licenses: The city council may, after notice of hearing as provided in this article, refuse to
issue a business license of any kind to any person, corporation or officer thereof or other
business association, including any partner of a partnership, for a period of one year after that
person, corporation or business association, or his or its officers, employees or partners, have
been convicted of any violation of the ordinances mentioned in this article or state law concerning
pornographic and harmful materials and performances.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=4:_BUSINESS_AND_LICENSE_REGULATIONS 11/49
C. Premises: The city council may, after notice of hearing, as provided in this article, refuse to issue
any business license for any business at the premises where a violation of the ordinances
mentioned in this article or state law concerning pornographic and harmful materials and
performances has occurred for a period of one year after such conviction.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 5.08.020, 5.08.030, 5.08.040 on 1/1/1987
4-1A-3: HEARING
A. Notice: The notice to be given shall be in accordance with CCNO 1-8.
B. Conduct: The hearing provided for in this section shall proceed in accordance with the provisions
of CCNO 1-8.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2011-15 on 9/27/2011
4-1A-4: OPERATION UNLAWFUL DURING REVOCATION
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation whose license has been revoked or refused pursuant to
the provisions of this article to operate any business in the city requiring a business license until the time
of revocation or refusal expires and a valid license is obtained.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 5.08.070 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
4-1A-5: PENALTY
Any person, firm or corporation attempting to operate a business, after the license therefor has been
revoked or refused under this article, and any owner of any interest in the premises where such license
has been revoked or refused, and the city council has determined that no other license will be issued for
that property, who allows any business to be operated therein requiring a city license, shall be guilty of a
class B misdemeanor and subject to penalty as provided in CCNO 1-4-1.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 5.08.080 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
4-2: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
4-2-1: DEFINITIONS
4-2-2: CLASSIFICATIONS
4-2-3: LICENSE REQUIRED
4-2-4: QUALIFICATIONS OF LICENSEE
4-2-5: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE
4-2-6: FEE FOR LICENSE
4-2-7: TERM
4-2-8: LICENSE PROVISIONS
4-2-9: CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP NOTIFICATION
4-2-10: NUISANCE ABATEMENT
4-2-11: ENTRY INTO LICENSED PREMISES
4-2-12: SALES SUBJECT TO PROVISIONS
4-2-13: PROHIBITED ACTS AND ACTIVITIES
4-2-14: REFUSAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=4:_BUSINESS_AND_LICENSE_REGULATIONS 12/49
4-2-15: PENALTY
4-2-1: DEFINITIONS
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following meanings unless a
different meaning clearly appears from the context:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Means and includes "beer", as defined in this chapter, and "liquor", as that
term is defined in the alcoholic beverage control act of Utah.
BEER: All products that contain sixty three one-hundredths of one percent (0.63%) of alcohol by volume
or at least one-half of one percent (0.5%) of alcohol by weight, but not more than four percent (4%) of
alcohol by volume or three and two-tenths percent (3.2%) by weight, and are obtained by fermentation,
infusion or decoction of any malted grain. Beer may or may not contain hops or other vegetable
products. "Beer" includes products referred to as malt liquor, malted beverages or malt coolers.
LICENSED PREMISES: Those areas designated by the persons licensed under this chapter for the
purpose of the sale of beer.
LICENSEE: Includes the person, firm, corporation or association to whom the license is issued and also
means and includes the licensee's manager, agents, servants and employees and all other persons
acting for him with his consent or knowledge.
NUISANCE: Any room, house, building, vehicle, structure or place where:
A. Alcoholic beverages are manufactured, kept, stored, sold, bartered or offered, or exposed for
sale in violation of the alcoholic beverage control act of Utah or any ordinance of the city; or
B. Persons under twenty one (21) years of age are permitted to purchase or drink any alcoholic
beverage in violation of this chapter.
RETAILER: Any person engaged in the sale or distribution of beer.
SELL OR TO SELL: Means and includes to solicit; to accept an order for; to keep or expose for sale; to
deliver for value or gratuitously; to peddle; to possess with intent to sell; to traffic in; for any
consideration promised or obtained directly or indirectly or under any pretext or by any means
whatsoever to procure or allow to be procured for any other person; and "sale" includes every act of
selling as defined in this section.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 5.12.010 on 1/1/1987
4-2-2: CLASSIFICATIONS
A. Retail beer licenses issued under this chapter shall be of two (2) kinds: class A licenses and
class B licenses. Each class of licenses shall carry the privileges described in this section. Each
class of licenses shall be separately numbered commencing from the number 1.
B. A class A beer license shall entitle the licensee to sell beer on the licensed premises in the
original container for consumption off the licensed premises in accordance with the Utah
alcoholic beverages control act, Utah Code § 32A-1-101 et seq. A class A beer licensee may
also deliver beer to the residence of its customers; provided, that the beer is transported only in
the original container and that the container is not opened by the licensee, its agents or
employees.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=4:_BUSINESS_AND_LICENSE_REGULATIONS 13/49
C. A class B license shall entitled the licensee to sell beer, either in its original containers or on tap,
for on premises consumption as part of the operation of a restaurant. Class B licensees may sell
beer only with the purchase of a meal at the restaurant. Class B licensees must also comply with
all state laws and regulations governing the sale of beer for on premises consumption and obtain
a license from the state pursuant to Utah Code § 32A-10-201. In the event the licensee's state
license is suspended or revoked, the city license shall also be suspended or revoked.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2001-14 on 7/10/2001
4-2-3: LICENSE REQUIRED
It is unlawful for any person, partnership, firm, association or corporation to sell beer at retail within the
corporation limits of the city without first having procured a license therefor from the city council as
provided in this chapter. A separate license shall be required for each place of sale and the license shall
at all times be conspicuously displayed in the place to which it shall refer or to which it shall be issued.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 5.12.030 on 1/1/1987
4-2-4: QUALIFICATIONS OF LICENSEE
No license under this chapter shall be granted to any person unless he is of good moral character and
over the age of twenty one (21) years. No license shall be granted to any person who has been
convicted of a felony or of any violation of any law or ordinance relating to intoxicating liquors or of drunk
driving, or who has pleaded guilty to or has forfeited his bail on a charge of having committed a felony,
or having violated any such law or ordinance; nor shall any license be granted to any partnership, any
member of which fails to meet the standards prescribed in this chapter; nor to any corporation, any
director or officer of which fails to meet such standards. No license shall be granted to any person who
does not meet the qualifications therefor prescribed by the alcoholic beverage control act of Utah.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 5.12.120 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
4-2-5: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE
A. Required; Form: Before any beer license is issued, the person desiring the license shall file a
written and verified application for the license. The application shall be on a form prescribed by
the city.
B. Content: Every application shall state:
1. The applicant's full name;
2. The applicant's current residence address;
3. The address of the premises for which the license is sought;
4. The type of business the applicant anticipates operating on those premises;
5. The class of license the applicant is applying for; and
6. The name of the person who will manage the business, if different from the applicant.
C. Release To Obtain Criminal History: In addition to the written application, each applicant for a
beer license under this chapter will provide the city with a release which allows the city to obtain
a criminal history of the applicant.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=4:_BUSINESS_AND_LICENSE_REGULATIONS 14/49
D. Partnerships: If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall provide the information
required in subsections B1 and B2 of this section for each partner. Each partner will also execute
the release described in subsection C of this section.
E. Corporations: If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall provide the information
required in subsections B1 and B2 of this section for each director and officer of the corporation.
Each director or office will also execute the release described in subsection C of this section.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2001-14 on 7/10/2001
4-2-6: FEE FOR LICENSE
A. Before any beer license is issued under this chapter, the person desiring a beer license shall
apply for a beer license. At the time the application is filed with the city, the applicant shall
deposit the entire license fee which would be due if the license were being issued on the date the
application is filed. The license fee shall immediately be deposited in the city treasury. If the
application is denied, the application fee shall be returned to the applicant. No license fee shall
be refunded after a license has been issued, and upon revocation of any beer license under this
chapter, the license fee paid for the license shall be forfeited to the city.
B. The first license fee shall be prorated as follows: The fee for the class of license applied for shall
be multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of the fraction shall be the number of months left until
licenses issued under this chapter are renewed and the denominator of the fraction shall be
twelve (12).
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2001-14 on 7/10/2001
4-2-7: TERM
All licenses issued under this chapter shall expire on December 31 of the year in which issued, unless
sooner canceled or revoked. No license shall be issued for a period longer than one year.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 5.12.060 on 1/1/1987
4-2-8: LICENSE PROVISIONS
A. Revocable Privilege: Any license issued under this chapter shall grant only a mere revocable
privilege to sell beer as provided in this chapter, and shall not confer any vested right of any kind
or nature.
B. Transferability: Licenses issued under this chapter shall not be transferable.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 5.12.070, 5.12.090 on 1/1/1987
4-2-9: CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP NOTIFICATION
If during the term of the license year after the license has been granted under this chapter there shall be
any change in the personnel of any licensed partnership or of the officers or director of any licensed
corporation, the licensee shall forthwith report any such change in personnel to the city office.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 5.12.110 on 1/1/1987
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=4:_BUSINESS_AND_LICENSE_REGULATIONS 15/49
4-2-10: NUISANCE ABATEMENT
Any "nuisance" found in existence, as defined in CCNO 4-2-1, may be abated in the manner described
by law generally dealing with abatement of nuisances.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 5.12.150 on 1/1/1987
4-2-11: ENTRY INTO LICENSED PREMISES
The person having charge of any premises for which a license has been issued under this chapter may
not refuse or fail to admit to the licensed premises, or obstruct the entry of, any law enforcement officer
who demands entry in order to enforce any provision of this chapter.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2001-14 on 7/10/2001
4-2-12: SALES SUBJECT TO PROVISIONS
It is unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, corporation or association to sell any alcoholic beverage,
except as such person, firm, partnership, corporation or association may be expressly permitted to do so
by this chapter.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 5.12.020 on 1/1/1987
4-2-13: PROHIBITED ACTS AND ACTIVITIES
A. It is unlawful to sell beer to any person intoxicated or under the influence of any alcoholic
beverage.
B. It is unlawful to sell beer to any person under the age of twenty one (21) years.
C. It is unlawful to sell beer between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and six o'clock
(6:00) A.M.
D. It is unlawful for any licensee to sell beer anywhere within the city except upon or within his
licensed premises.
E. It is unlawful to advertise the sale of beer except in full compliance with the alcoholic beverage
control act of Utah and regulations duly made thereunder by the alcoholic beverage control
commission; provided, that a simple statement that beer is sold under city license may be placed
in or upon the front window of the licensed premises.
F. It is unlawful for any licensee to violate any terms of the license issued.
G. It is unlawful for any licensee under a class A license to suffer or allow any person to consume
beer upon the licensed premises. It is unlawful for any persons to consume beer upon such
premises.
H. It is unlawful for any person to commit, keep or maintain a nuisance upon any licensed premises.
It is unlawful for any person to suffer a nuisance to be maintained upon licensed premises,
owned, occupied, operated or controlled by him or which may be in his charge.
I. It is unlawful for any licensee to purchase or acquire or to have or possess, or to suffer to be kept
upon the licensed premises, any beer except that lawfully acquired from a brewer or wholesaler
licensed under the provisions of the alcoholic beverage control act of Utah.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=4:_BUSINESS_AND_LICENSE_REGULATIONS 16/49
J. It is unlawful for any licensee to keep, store or possess, or to suffer any person to keep, store or
possess, any "liquor", as defined in the alcoholic beverage control act of Utah, upon the licensed
premises.
K. It is unlawful for any person to sell beer after the revocation of any license issued to him or during
a period of suspension of such license.
L. It is unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to consume or possess any
beer or any other alcoholic beverage at any place in the city.
M. No person shall sell, dispose of, furnish, or give away beer to any person who appears to be, or
is, intoxicated or under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or drug.
N. The sale of any alcoholic beverage other than the sale of beer as provided in this chapter is
strictly prohibited.
O. No license shall be granted to sell beer in any dance hall, theater or within five hundred feet
(500') of any church or school.
P. No person shall sell an alcoholic beverage at any public dance hall, dance pavilion or place
where public dances are held or in which the public is permitted to dance.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 5.12.100 on 1/1/1987
4-2-14: REFUSAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE
A. Refusal: Whenever an applicant fails to demonstrate that it meets all of the requirements for
licensure under this chapter or the Utah alcoholic beverage control act, the city council shall
refuse to issue a license. In addition, when the city council determines that the public interest so
requires, the city council may refuse to grant any license applied for. In such a case, the city
council shall state the reason for the refusal.
B. Suspension Or Revocation: Whenever the public interest so requires, the city council may
suspend or revoke a beer license issued under this chapter. Examples of circumstances which
may lead to the revocation or suspension of a license include, but are not limited to:
1. Failure to maintain any required state license for on premises beer sales;
2. Failure to comply with any provision of the Utah alcoholic beverage control act;
3. Failure of the applicant to comply with city ordinances, including this chapter, nuisance
ordinances, zoning ordinances and ordinances dealing with the hours of operation for the
licensee's business;
4. Failure to comply with any health laws or any orders or regulations of the Weber/Morgan
health department; or
5. Failure to conduct the licensed business in a quiet, peaceable and orderly manner.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=4:_BUSINESS_AND_LICENSE_REGULATIONS 17/49
C. Immediate Suspension: In an emergency situation, the chief of police may order an immediate
suspension of a license to protect the public health and welfare. In all such cases, the chief of
police shall make a written report of his action to the city council. This report shall describe the
license upon which the action was taken (including the name of the licensee and the address of
the licensed premises), the action which the chief of police took and the reasons for the action.
Emergency suspensions are valid only until the next regularly scheduled city council meeting.
During the next regularly scheduled council meeting, the city council shall hold a hearing on the
actions of the chief of police and may either continue the suspension, continue the hearing to
allow the licensee to present a case or reinstate the license. In all cases where the hearing is
continued, the city council shall decide whether to continue the suspension until the full hearing
on the matter.
D. Hearing Required: In nonemergency situations, no license issued pursuant to this chapter may
be suspended or revoked until the city council has held a hearing on the matter. The hearing
shall be held as soon as possible, taking into account the licensee's right to prepare for the
hearing and to have representation at the hearing. The city and the licensee shall both have an
opportunity to be heard at this hearing. Each party will have the opportunity to present witnesses
and other evidence at the hearing. Each party will also have the right to ask questions of the
opposing party's witnesses. The licensee shall also have the right to be represented at this
hearing, but the city shall have no obligation to provide representation to a licensee. After the city
and the licensee have presented all of their witnesses and evidence, the city council will vote on
the action, if any, to be taken against the licensee. The city council may revoke the license,
suspend the license or take no action. If the city council votes to revoke the license, the licensee
may not obtain another license within the city for at least five (5) years. If the city council votes to
suspend the license, it must also decide on the period of the suspension. Suspensions must be
at least three (3) months, but no longer than one year.
E. Hearing Procedures May Be Established: The city council may establish procedures by
resolution to govern the hearings described in this section.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2001-14 on 7/10/2001
4-2-15: PENALTY
A. Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a class B misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, subject to penalty as provided in CCNO 1-4-1.
B. In addition to the fines and terms of imprisonment described in subsection A of this section, any
licensee convicted of a violation of this chapter shall have its license revoked.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2001-14 on 7/10/2001
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
4-3: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES AND EMPLOYEES
4-3-1: TITLE
4-3-2: PURPOSE
4-3-3: APPLICABILITY
4-3-4: DEFINITIONS
4-3-5: CATEGORIES OF BUSINESSES; NUMBER OF LICENSES
4-3-6: OBSCENITY AND LEWDNESS; STATUTORY PROVISIONS
4-3-7: LOCATION AND ZONING RESTRICTIONS
4-3-8: LICENSE REQUIRED
4-3-9: EXEMPTIONS FROM LICENSE REQUIREMENTS
4-3-10: LEGITIMATE ARTISTIC MODELING
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=4:_BUSINESS_AND_LICENSE_REGULATIONS 18/49
4-3-11: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE
4-3-12: FEE FOR LICENSE
4-3-13: BOND REQUIRED
4-3-14: DEPARTMENTAL REVIEW
4-3-15: ISSUANCE CONDITIONS
4-3-16: PREMISES REQUIREMENTS
4-3-17: LICENSE PROVISIONS
4-3-18: OUTCALL SERVICES; OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS
4-3-19: DESIGN OF PREMISES
4-3-20: SEMINUDE DANCING
4-3-21: PROHIBITED ACTS AND ACTIVITIES
4-3-22: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
4-3-23: NUDITY; DEFENSES TO PROSECUTION
4-3-24: EXISTING BUSINESSES; COMPLIANCE TIME LIMITS
4-3-25: VIOLATION; INJUNCTION
4-3-26: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE
4-3-27: APPEAL PROCEDURES
4-3-28: PENALTY
4-3-1: TITLE
This chapter shall be known and may be referred to as the NORTH OGDEN CITY SEXUALLY
ORIENTED BUSINESS AND EMPLOYEE LICENSING ORDINANCE.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1989 Code § 5.10.010 on 1/1/1989
4-3-2: PURPOSE
It is the purpose and object of this chapter that the city establish reasonable and uniform regulations
governing the time, place and manner of operation of sexually oriented businesses and their employees
in the city. This chapter shall be construed to protect the governmental interests recognized by this
chapter in a manner consistent with constitutional protections provided by the United States and Utah
constitutions.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1989 Code § 5.10.020 on 1/1/1989
4-3-3: APPLICABILITY
This chapter imposes regulatory standards and license requirements on certain business activities which
are characterized as sexually oriented businesses, and certain employees of those businesses
characterized as sexually oriented business employees. Except where the context or specific provisions
require, this chapter does not supersede or nullify any other related ordinances.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1989 Code § 5.10.030 on 1/1/1989
4-3-4: DEFINITIONS
Definitions applicable to this chapter are set forth in CCNO 11-20-2.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 5.10.040 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
4-3-5: CATEGORIES OF BUSINESSES; NUMBER OF LICENSES
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=4:_BUSINESS_AND_LICENSE_REGULATIONS 19/49
A. Number: It is unlawful for any business premises to operate or be licensed for more than one
category of sexually oriented business, except that a business may have a license for both
outcall services and a seminude dancing agency on the same premises.
B. Categories: The categories of sexually oriented businesses are:
1. Outcall services;
2. Adult businesses;
3. Seminude entertainment businesses; and
4. Seminude dancing agency.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1989 Code § 5.10.100 on 1/1/1989
4-3-6: OBSCENITY AND LEWDNESS; STATUTORY PROVISIONS
A. Obscenity: Notwithstanding anything contained in this chapter, nothing in this chapter shall be
deemed to permit or allow the showing or display of any matter which is contrary to applicable
federal or state statutes or city ordinances prohibiting obscenity.
B. Lewdness: Notwithstanding anything contained in this chapter, nothing in this chapter shall be
deemed to permit or allow conduct or the showing or display of any matter which is contrary to
the provisions of state law; provided, however, that for the purpose of sexually oriented
businesses, the definition of "private parts" shall be construed to mean "nudity", as defined in
CCNO 11-20-2.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1989 Code § 5.10.050 on 1/1/1989
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
4-3-7: LOCATION AND ZONING RESTRICTIONS
It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business to do business at any location within the city not zoned
for such business. Sexually oriented businesses licensed as adult businesses or seminude
entertainment businesses pursuant to this chapter shall only be allowed in areas zoned for their use
pursuant to CCNO 11-22.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1989 Code § 5.10.060 on 1/1/1989
4-3-8: LICENSE REQUIRED
A. Sexually Oriented Businesses: It is lawful for any person to operate a sexually oriented business,
as specified herein, without first obtaining a general business license and a sexually oriented
business license. The sexually oriented business license shall specify the type of business for
which it is obtained.
B. Employees: It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business to employ or for any individual to be
employed by a sexually oriented business in the capacity of a sexually oriented business
employee, unless that employee first obtains a sexually oriented business employee license.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1989 Code § 5.10.070, 5.10.110 on 1/1/1989
4-3-9: EXEMPTIONS FROM LICENSE REQUIREMENTS
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=4:_BUSINESS_AND_LICENSE_REGULATIONS 20/49
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any:
A. Sex therapist or similar individual licensed by the state to provide bona fide sexual therapy or
counseling;
B. Licensed medical practitioner;
C. Licensed nurse;
D. Licensed massage therapist;
E. Psychiatrist;
F. Psychologist; or
G. Educator licensed by the state; provided, that the exemption provided in this section shall only
apply to the educator's activities in the classroom.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1989 Code § 5.10.080 on 1/1/1989
4-3-10: LEGITIMATE ARTISTIC MODELING
A. Contract Required: The city does not intend to unreasonably or improperly prohibit legitimate
modeling which may occur in a state of nudity for purposes protected by the first amendment or
similar state protections. The city does intend to prohibit prostitution and related offenses
occurring under the guise of nude modeling. Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, a
licensed outcall employee may appear in a state of nudity before a customer or patron; provided,
that a written contract for such appearance was entered into between the customer or patron and
the employee and signed at least twenty four (24) hours before the nude appearance. All of the
other applicable provisions of this chapter shall apply to such nude appearance.
B. Exemptions To License Requirement; Prohibited Acts: In the event of a contract for nude
modeling or appearance is signed more than forty eight (48) hours in advance of the modeling or
appearance, the individual to appear nude shall not be required to obtain a license pursuant to
this chapter. During such unlicensed nude appearance, it is unlawful to:
1. Appear nude or seminude in the presence of persons under the age of eighteen (18);
2. Allow, offer or agree to any touching of the contracting party or other person by the
individual appearing nude;
3. Allow, offer or agree to commit prostitution, solicitation of a minor, or committing activities
harmful to a minor;
4. Allow, offer, commit or agree to any sex act as validly defined by city ordinances or state
statute;
5. Allow, offer, agree or permit the contracting party or other person to masturbate in the
presence of the individual contracted to appear nude; and
6. Allow, offer or agree for the individual appearing nude to be within five feet (5') of any
other person while performing or while nude or seminude.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1989 Code § 5.10.090 on 1/1/1989
4-3-11: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=4:_BUSINESS_AND_LICENSE_REGULATIONS 21/49
A. Required; Disclosures: Before any applicant may be licensed to operate a sexually oriented
business or as a sexually oriented business employee pursuant to this chapter, the applicant
shall submit on a form to be supplied by the city license authority, the following:
1. The correct legal name of each applicant, corporation, partnership, or individual or entity
doing business under an assumed name.
2. If the applicant is a corporation, partnership, or limited partnership, or individual or entity
doing business under an assumed name, the information required below for individual
applicants shall be submitted for each partner and each principal of an applicant, and for
each officer, director, and any shareholder (corporate or personal) of more than ten
percent (10%) of the stock of an applicant. Any holding company, or any entity holding
more than ten percent (10%) of an applicant, shall be considered an applicant for
purposes of disclosure under this chapter. The shareholder disclosure requirements shall
only be applicable for outcall services licenses.
3. All corporations, partnerships or noncorporate entities included on the application shall
also identify each individual authorized by the corporation, partnership or noncorporate
entity to sign the checks for such corporation, partnership or noncorporate entity.
4. For all applicants or individuals, the application must also state:
a. Any other names or aliases used by the individual;
b. The age, date and place of birth;
c. Height;
d. Weight;
e. Color of hair;
f. Color of eyes;
g. Present business address and telephone number;
h. Present residence and telephone number;
i. Utah drivers license or identification number; and
j. Social security number.
5. Acceptable written proof that any individual is at least eighteen (18) years of age.
6. Attached to the form, as provided above, two (2) color photographs of the applicant
clearly showing the individual's face and the individual's fingerprints on a form provided by
the police department. For persons not residing in the city, the photographs and
fingerprints may be on a form from the law enforcement jurisdiction where the person
resides. Fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant directly
to the issuing agency.
7. For any individual applicant required to obtain a sexually oriented business employee
license as an escort or a seminude entertainer, a certificate from the Weber/Morgan
County health department, stating that the individual has, within thirty (30) days
immediately preceding the date of the original or renewal application, been examined and
found to be free of any contagious or communicable diseases.
8. A statement of the business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for three
(3) years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=4:_BUSINESS_AND_LICENSE_REGULATIONS 22/49
9. A statement detailing the license or permit history of the applicant for the five (5) year
period immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, including whether
such applicant previously operating or seeking to operate, in this or any other county, city,
state or territory has ever had a license, permit or authorization to do business denied,
revoked or suspended, or has had any professional or vocational license or permit
denied, revoked or suspended. In the event of any such denial, revocation or suspension,
state the date, the name of the issuing or denying jurisdiction, and state in full the reasons
for the denial, revocation or suspension. A copy of any order of denial, revocation or
suspension shall be attached to the application.
10. All criminal convictions or pleas of nolo contendere, except those which have been
expunged, and the disposition of all such arrests for the applicant, individual or other
entity subject to disclosure under this chapter, for five (5) years prior to the date of the
application. This disclosure shall include identification of all ordinance violations,
excepting minor traffic offenses (any traffic offenses designated as a felony shall not be
construed as a minor traffic offense), stating the date, place, nature of each conviction or
plea of nolo contendere, and sentence of each conviction or other disposition, identifying
the convicting jurisdiction and sentencing court, and providing the court identifying case
numbers or docket numbers. Application for a sexually oriented business or employee
license shall constitute a waiver of disclosure of any criminal conviction or plea of nolo
contendere for the purposes of any proceeding involving the business or employee
license.
11. In the event the applicant is not the owner of record of the real property upon which the
business or proposed business is or is to be located, the application must be
accompanied by a notarized statement from the legal or equitable owner of the
possessory interest in the property specifically acknowledging the type of business for
which the applicant seeks a license for the property. In addition to furnishing such
notarized statement, the applicant shall furnish the name, address and phone number of
the owner of record of the property, as well as the copy of the lease or rental agreement
pertaining to the premises in which the service is or will be located.
12. A description of the services to be provided by the business, with sufficient detail to allow
reviewing authorities to determine what business will be transacted on the premises,
together with a schedule of usual fees for services to be charged by the licensee, and any
rules, regulations or employment guidelines under or by which the business intends to
operate. This description shall also include:
a. The hours that the business or service will be open to the public, and the methods
of promoting the health and safety of the employees and patrons and preventing
them from engaging in illegal activity;
b. The methods of supervision preventing the employees from engaging in acts of
prostitution or other related criminal activities;
c. The methods of supervision preventing employees and patrons from charging or
receiving fees for services or acts prohibited by this chapter or other statutes or
ordinances; and
d. The methods of screening employees and customers in order to promote the
health and safety of employees and customers and prevent the commission of
acts of prostitution or other criminal activity.
B. False Or Misleading Information: It is unlawful to knowingly submit false or materially misleading
information in or with a sexually oriented business license application or to fail to disclose or omit
information for the purpose of obtaining a sexually oriented business or employee license.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=4:_BUSINESS_AND_LICENSE_REGULATIONS 23/49
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1989 Code § 5.10.120 on 1/1/1989
4-3-12: FEE FOR LICENSE
Each applicant for a sexually oriented business or employee license shall be required to pay regulatory
license fees to be established by resolution. An application is not complete until all appropriate fees have
been paid.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1989 Code § 5.10.130 on 1/1/1989
4-3-13: BOND REQUIRED
Each applicant for a sexually oriented business license shall post with the city a cash or corporate surety
bond payable to the city in the amount of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) or such other amount as may
be set by resolution. Any fines assessed against the business, officers or managers for violations of city
ordinances shall be taken from this bond, if not paid in cash, within ten (10) days after notice of the fine,
unless an appeal is filed as provided in CCNO 4-3-27. In the event the funds are drawn against the cash
or surety bond to pay such fines, the bond shall be replenished to two thousand dollars ($2,000.00)
within fifteen (15) days of the date of notice of any draw against it.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1989 Code § 5.10.140 on 1/1/1989
4-3-14: DEPARTMENTAL REVIEW
A. Time Limit: Upon receipt of an application, all departments required to review the application
shall determine within seven (7) days whether or not the application is incomplete in items
needed for processing. Incomplete applications shall immediately be returned to the applicant
with a specification of the items which are incomplete.
B. Time Defined: The time for processing applications specified in this section shall begin to run
from the receipt of a complete application, including posting of bond and payment of required
fees.
C. Issuance Pending Completion Of Review; Revocation:
1. In the event that a license for outcall services, seminude dancing agencies, adult
businesses or seminude entertainment businesses has not been disapproved within thirty
(30) days of the forty five (45) days allowed after an extension, the city shall issue the
license pending completion of the city's review.
2. Any license issued pursuant to subsection C1 of this section may be revoked by the city,
pursuant to the revocation procedures provided for herein, if the completed review
determines that the license should have been denied.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1989 Code § 5.10.160 on 1/1/1989
4-3-15: ISSUANCE CONDITIONS
The city shall approve the issuance of a license to the applicant within thirty (30) days after receipt of a
completed application, including bond and payment of fee, unless the official finds one or more of the
following:
A. The applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age;
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=4:_BUSINESS_AND_LICENSE_REGULATIONS 24/49
B. The applicant is overdue in payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against
the applicant or imposed on the applicant in relation to a sexually oriented business;
C. The applicant has falsely answered a material question or request for information as authorized
by this chapter;
D. The applicant has violated a provision of this chapter or similar provisions found in statutes or
ordinances from any jurisdiction within two (2) years immediately preceding the application. A
criminal conviction for a violation of a provision of this chapter or similar provisions from any
jurisdiction, whether or not being appealed, is conclusive evidence of a violation, but a conviction
is not necessary to prove a violation;
E. The premises to be used for the business have been disapproved by the Weber/Morgan County
health department, the fire department, the police department, the building officials, or the zoning
officials, as not being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances of the city. If any of the
foregoing reviewing agencies cannot complete their review within the thirty (30) day approval or
denial period, the agency or department may obtain from the city an extension of time of no more
than fifteen (15) days for their review. The total time for the city to approve or deny a license shall
not exceed forty five (45) days from the receipt of a completed application, including bond and
payment of all fees. Businesses located outside of the corporate boundaries of the city, but
requiring a license under this chapter, may be denied a license pursuant to this chapter if the
business does not have a valid business license to conduct business at the business location
from the appropriate jurisdiction for that location;
F. The required license fees have not been paid;
G. All applicable sales and use taxes have not been paid;
H. An applicant for the proposed business is in violation of or not in compliance with this chapter or
similar provisions found in statutes or ordinances from any jurisdiction;
I. An applicant has been convicted or pled nolo contendere to a crime:
1. Involving prostitution; exploitation of prostitution; aggravated promotion of prostitution;
aggravated exploitation of prostitution; solicitation of sex acts; sex acts for hire;
compelling prostitution; aiding prostitution; sale, distribution or display of material harmful
to minors; sexual performance by minors; possession of child pornography; lewdness;
indecent exposure; any crime involving sexual abuse or exploitation of a child; sexual
assault or aggravated sexual assault; rape; forcible sodomy; forcible sexual abuse;
harboring a runaway child; criminal attempt, conspiracy or solicitation to commit any of
the foregoing offenses or offenses involving similar elements from any jurisdiction,
regardless of the exact title of the offense; for which:
a. Less than two (2) years have elapsed from the date of conviction, if the conviction
is for a misdemeanor offense, or less than five (5) years if the convictions are for
two (2) or more misdemeanors within the five (5) years; or
b. Less than five (5) years have elapsed from the date of conviction, if the offense is
for a felony.
2. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification
pursuant to this section.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1989 Code § 5.10.160 on 1/1/1989
4-3-16: PREMISES REQUIREMENTS
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=4:_BUSINESS_AND_LICENSE_REGULATIONS 25/49
A. Licensed Premises: It is unlawful to conduct business under a license issued pursuant to this
chapter at any location other than the licensed premises. Any location to which telephone calls
are automatically forwarded by such business shall require a separate license.
B. Name: It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business to do business in the city under any name
other than the business name specified in the application.
C. Signage: Every sexually oriented business shall display a sign on the door of the business in
such a way to be visible to all persons entering the premises of the sexually oriented business.
This sign shall be not less than one square foot in size and the text of the sign shall be printed in
black letters, at least two inches (2") high, on a white background in a font which can be easily
read. The sign shall read as follows: "This establishment has been licensed by North Ogden City
as a sexually oriented business. Persons under the age of 18 years are not allowed to enter this
establishment". In the event persons under eighteen (18) years are prohibited from entering only
some areas of the business, the sign shall read: "This establishment has been licensed by North
Ogden City as a sexually oriented business. Persons under the age of 18 years are not allowed
to enter certain areas of this establishment".
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1989 Code § 5.10.150 on 1/1/1989
4-3-17: LICENSE PROVISIONS
A. Term: Sexually oriented business and employee licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be
valid from the date of issuance through July 1 of each succeeding year. The license fees shall
not be prorated for any portion of a year, but shall be paid in full for whatever portion of the year
the license is applied for.
B. Change Of Information: Any change in the information required to be submitted under this
chapter for either a sexually oriented business license or sexually oriented business employee
license shall be given, in writing, to the business license clerk and the police department within
fourteen (14) days after such change.
C. Transferability: Sexually oriented business licenses granted under this chapter shall not be
transferable. It is unlawful for a license held by an individual to be transferred. It is unlawful for a
license held by a corporation, partnership or other legal entity to transfer any part in excess of ten
percent (10%) thereof, without filing a new application and obtaining prior city approval. If any
transfer of the controlling interest in a business license occurs, the license is immediately null
and void, and the business shall not operate until a separate new license has been properly
issued by the city as provided in this chapter.
D. Display Of License: It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business location within the
boundaries of the city to fail to display the license granted pursuant to this chapter in a prominent
location within the business premises. It is unlawful for any individual licensed pursuant to this
chapter to fail to carry, at all times while engaged in licensed activities within the corporate
boundaries of the city, their employee license on their person. If the individual is nude, such
license shall be visibly displayed within the same room the employee is performing. When
requested by police, city licensing or other enforcement personnel or health official, it is unlawful
to fail to show the appropriate licenses while engaged in licensed activities within the corporate
boundaries of the city.
E. Statement In Advertisements: It is unlawful for any advertisement by the sexually oriented
business or employee to fail to state that the business or employee is licensed by the city, and
the advertisement shall include the city license number.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1989 Code § 5.10.180, 5.10.190, 5.10.200, 5.10.210, 5.10.220 on 1/1/1989
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=4:_BUSINESS_AND_LICENSE_REGULATIONS 26/49
4-3-18: OUTCALL SERVICES; OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS
It is lawful for any business or employee providing outcall services contracted for in the city to fail to
comply with the following requirements:
A. Contract: All businesses licensed to provide outcall services pursuant to this chapter shall
provide to each patron a written contract where pecuniary compensation is exchanged for such
services. The contract shall clearly state the type of services to be performed, the length of time
such services shall be performed, the cost of the service to the patron, and any special terms or
conditions relating to the services to be performed. The contract need not include the name of
the patron. The business licensee shall keep and maintain a copy of each written contract
entered into pursuant to this section for a period of not less than one year from the date of
provision of services thereunder. The contracts shall be numbered and entered into a register
listing the contract number, date, names of all employees involved in the contract, and pecuniary
compensation paid.
B. Office: All outcall services licensed pursuant to this chapter shall maintain an open office or
telephone at which the licensee or licensee's designated agent may be personally contacted
during all hours outcall employees are working. The address and phone number of the license
location shall appear and be included in all patron contracts and published advertisements. For
outcall services which premises are licensed within the corporate limits of the city, private rooms
or booths where the patron may meet with the outcall employee shall not be provided at the open
office or any other location by the service, nor shall patrons meet outcall employees at the
business premises.
C. Advertising: Outcall services shall not advertise in such a manner that would lead a reasonably
prudent person to conclude that specified sexual activities would be performed by the outcall
employee.
D. Employee Licensing Required: All employees of outcall services who provide outcall services
within the city shall be licensed in accordance with this chapter, regardless of the primary
location of the business.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1989 Code § 5.10.240 on 1/1/1989
4-3-19: DESIGN OF PREMISES
A. Adult Business:
1. Diagram; Construction: Any applicant for a license as an adult business shall also submit
a diagram, drawn to scale, of the premises of the establishment. The design and
construction, prior to granting a license or opening for business, shall conform to the
following:
a. The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an
unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which
any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms;
b. Restrooms may not contain any video reproduction equipment or any of the
business merchandise. Signs shall be posted requiring only one person being
allowed in the restroom per stall, and only one person in any stall at a time, and
requiring that patrons shall not be allowed access to manager's station areas;
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=4:_BUSINESS_AND_LICENSE_REGULATIONS 27/49
c. For businesses which exclude minors from the entire premises, all windows, doors
and other apertures to the premises shall be darkened or otherwise constructed to
prevent anyone outside the premises from seeing the inside of the premises.
Businesses which exclude minors from less than all of the premises shall be
designed and constructed so that minors may not see into the area from which
they are excluded; and
d. The diagram required shall not necessarily be a professional engineer's or
architect's blueprint; however, the diagram must show marked internal
dimensions, all overhead lighting fixtures and rating for illumination capacity.
2. Manager's View Unobstructed: It shall be the duty of the licensee and the licensee's
employees to ensure that the views from the manager's station in subsection A1a of this
section remain unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks, or any
other materials, at all times that any patron is present in the premises, and to ensure that
no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as
an area in which patrons will not be permitted.
3. Lighting Fixtures; Illumination: The premises shall at all times be equipped and operated
with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which
patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one foot-candle,
measured at floor level. It shall be the duty of the licensee and the licensee's employee
present on the premises to ensure that the illumination described herein is maintained at
all times that any patron is present in the premises.
B. Seminude Entertainment Business:
1. Prohibited Conditions; Barrier: It is unlawful for a business premises licensed for
seminude entertainment to:
a. Permit a bed, sofa, mattress or similar item in any room on the premises, except
that a sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the public or in any office to
which patrons are not admitted, and except that in an adult theater such items
may be on the stage as part of a performance;
b. Allow any door on any room used for the business, except for the door to an office
to which patrons shall not be admitted, outside doors and restroom doors to be
lockable from the inside;
c. Provide any room in which the employee or employees and the patron or patrons
are alone together without a separation by a solid physical barrier at least three
feet (3') high and six inches (6") wide. The patron or patrons shall remain on one
side of the barrier and the employee or employees shall remain on the other side
of the barrier.
2. Adult Theaters; Barrier: Adult theaters shall also require that the performance area shall
be separated from the patrons by a minimum of three feet (3'), which separation shall be
delineated by a physical barrier at least three feet (3') high.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1989 Code § 5.10.250, 5.10.260 on 1/1/1989
4-3-20: SEMINUDE DANCING
A. License Required: It is unlawful for any individual or entity to furnish, book or otherwise engage
the services of a professional dancer, model or performer to appear in a state of seminudity for
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=4:_BUSINESS_AND_LICENSE_REGULATIONS 28/49
pecuniary compensation in or for any seminude entertainment business or adult theater licensed
pursuant to this chapter, unless such agency is licensed pursuant to this chapter.
B. Employee License Required: It is unlawful for any individual or entity to furnish, book or
otherwise engage or permit any person to perform as a professional dancer, model or performer
in a state of seminudity, either gratuitously or for compensation, in and for any business licensed
pursuant to this chapter, unless such person is licensed pursuant to this chapter.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1989 Code § 5.10.280 on 1/1/1989
4-3-21: PROHIBITED ACTS AND ACTIVITIES
A. Specified: It is lawful for any employee or operator to:
1. Allow persons under the age of eighteen (18) years on the licensed premises, except that
in adult businesses which exclude minors from less than all of the business premises,
minors shall not be permitted in excluded areas;
2. Allow, offer or agree to conduct any outcall services with persons under the age of
eighteen (18) years;
3. Allow, offer or agree to allow any alcohol to be stored, used or consumed on or in the
licensed premises;
4. Allow the outside doors to the premises to be locked while any customer is in the
premises;
5. Allow, offer or agree to gambling on the licensed premises;
6. Allow, offer or agree to any sexually oriented business employee touching or being
touched by any patron or customer, except that outcall employees and customers may
touch, except that any touching of specified anatomical areas, whether clothed or
unclothed, is prohibited;
7. Allow, offer or agree to illegal possession, use, sale or distribution of controlled
substances on the licensed premises;
8. Allow sexually oriented business employees to possess, use, sell or distribute controlled
substances while engaged in the activities of the business;
9. Allow, offer or agree to commit prostitution, solicitation of prostitution, solicitation of a
minor, or committing activities harmful to a minor, to occur on the licensed premises or, in
the event of an outcall employee or business, the outcall employee committing, offering or
agreeing to commit prostitution, attempting to commit prostitution, soliciting prostitution,
soliciting a minor, or committing activities harmful to a minor;
10. Allow, offer or agree to any "specified sexual activity", as validly defined by city
ordinances or state statute, in the presence of any customer or patron;
11. Allow, offer or agree to any outcall employee appearing before any customer or patron in
a state of nudity;
12. Allow, offer or agree to allow a patron or customer to masturbate in the presence of the
sexually oriented business employee or on the premises of a sexually oriented business;
and
13. Allow, offer or agree to commit an act of "lewdness", as defined in CCNO 11-20-2.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=4:_BUSINESS_AND_LICENSE_REGULATIONS 29/49
B. Performers: It is unlawful for any professional dancer, model or performer, while performing in
any business licensed pursuant to this chapter, to:
1. Touch in any manner any other person;
2. Throw any object or clothing off the stage area;
3. Accept any money, drink or any other object directly from any person;
4. Allow another person to touch such performer or to place any money or object on the
performer or within the costume or person of the performer; or
5. Place anything within the costume or adjust or move the costume while performing so as
to render the performer in a state of nudity.
C. Patrons: It is unlawful for any person, or any patron of any nude entertainment business, to touch
in any manner any performer while in a state of nudity or seminudity; to place any money or
object on or within the costume or person of any performer; to cross over the barrier separating
the patrons from the stage during a nude performance; to bring into the premises any alcoholic
beverage for on premises consumption; or to give or offer to give to any such performer any
drinks, money or object while such performer is performing; except that money may be placed on
the stage which shall not be picked up by the performer except by hand.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1989 Code § 5.10.230, 5.10.290, 5.10.300 on 1/1/1989
4-3-22: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
A. It is unlawful for any business licensed pursuant to this chapter to allow the sale, storage, supply
or consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises.
B. It is unlawful for any person to possess or consume any alcoholic beverage on the premises of
any sexually oriented business.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1989 Code § 5.10.270 on 1/1/1989
4-3-23: NUDITY; DEFENSES TO PROSECUTION
It is a defense to prosecution or violation under this chapter that a person appearing in a state of nudity
did so in a modeling class operated:
A. By a proprietary school licensed by the state, or a college, junior college or university supported
entirely or partly by taxation;
B. By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which
credits are transferable to a college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1989 Code § 5.10.310 on 1/1/1989
4-3-24: EXISTING BUSINESSES; COMPLIANCE TIME LIMITS
The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all persons and businesses described herein,
whether the activities regulated by this chapter were established before or after the effective date hereof,
and regardless of whether such persons and businesses are currently licensed to do business in the
city.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=4:_BUSINESS_AND_LICENSE_REGULATIONS 30/49
A. Outcall Services: All such persons and businesses requiring outcall service licenses shall have
forty five (45) days from the effective date hereof, or until their current license expires, whichever
is first in time, to comply with the provisions of this chapter;
B. Seminude Dancing Agencies: All seminude dancing agency licenses shall have seventy five (75)
days from the effective date hereof, or until their license must be renewed, whichever is first, to
comply with the provisions of this chapter; and
C. Adult Businesses And Seminude Entertainment Businesses: All adult businesses and seminude
entertainment businesses shall have one hundred thirty five (135) days from the effective date
hereof, or until their current license must be renewed, whichever is first, to comply with the
provisions of this chapter.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1989 Code § 5.10.320 on 1/1/1989
4-3-25: VIOLATION; INJUNCTION
An entity or individual who operates or causes a sexually oriented business to be operated without a
valid license, or who employs or is employed as an employee of a sexually oriented business, or who
operates such a business or functions as such an employee in violation of the provisions of this chapter,
is subject to a suit for injunction in addition to the civil and criminal violations provided herein, and any
other remedy available at law or in equity.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1989 Code § 5.10.330 on 1/1/1989
4-3-26: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE
A. Conditions Warranting: The city may issue a notice suspending or revoking a sexually oriented
business or employee license granted under this chapter if a licensee or an employee of the
licensee has:
1. Violated or is not in compliance with this chapter;
2. Refused to allow any inspection of the premises of the sexually oriented business
specifically authorized by this chapter or by any other statute or ordinance;
3. Failed to replenish the bond as provided in this chapter (such a suspension shall extend
until the bond has been replenished);
4. Given materially false or misleading information in obtaining the license;
5. Knowingly operated the sexually oriented business or worked under the employee license
during the period when the business licensee or employee licensee's license was
suspended;
6. Committed an offense which would be grounds for denial of a license for which the time
period required has not elapsed;
7. On two (2) or more occasions within a twelve (12) month period, a person or persons
committed in or on, or solicited for on the licensed premises, or an outcall employee
solicited or committed on or off the premises, an offense which would be grounds for
denial of a license for which a conviction has been obtained, and the person or persons
were employees, whether or not licensed, of the sexually oriented business at the time
the offenses were committed; and
8. A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city for ad valorem taxes, or sales taxes related
to the sexually oriented business.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=4:_BUSINESS_AND_LICENSE_REGULATIONS 31/49
B. Effective: Suspension or revocation shall take effect within fifteen (15) days of the issuance of
notice, unless an appeal is filed as provided by this chapter.
C. Appeal No Effect On Revocation: The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no
effect on the revocation of the license.
D. Effect Of Revocation: When a license issued pursuant to this chapter is revoked, the revocation
shall continue for one year from its effective date, and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually
oriented business or employee license for one year from the date of such revocation.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1989 Code § 5.10.340, 5.10.350 on 1/1/1989
4-3-27: APPEAL PROCEDURES
The denial, suspension or revocation of any license issued pursuant to this chapter may be appealed in
accordance with CCNO 1-8.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2011-15 on 9/27/2011
4-3-28: PENALTY
A. Misdemeanor: In addition to revocation or suspension of a license, as provided in this chapter,
each violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a class B misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, subject to penalty as provided in CCNO 1-4-1. Each day of a violation shall be
considered a separate offense.
B. Acts And Conduct Of Employees:
1. Every act or omission by an employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of the sexually oriented business licensee
and/or operator if such act or omission occurs either with the authorization, knowledge or
approval of the licensee and/or operator or as a result of the licensee's and/or operator's
negligent failure to supervise the conduct of the employee, and the sexually oriented
business licensee shall be punishable in the same manner as if the licensee committed
the act or caused the omission.
2. A sexually oriented business licensee and/or operator shall be responsible for the conduct
of all employees while on the licensed premises, and any act or omission by any
employee constituting a violation of the provisions this chapter shall be deemed the act or
omission of the licensee and/or operator for the purposes of determining whether the
licensee's license shall be revoked, suspended or renewed.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 5.10.370 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
4-4: RESIDENTIAL SOLICITATION
4-4-1: PURPOSE
4-4-2: DEFINITIONS
4-4-3: NO OTHER CITY LICENSE OR APPROVAL REQUIRED
4-4-4: EXEMPTIONS FROM CHAPTER
4-4-5: SOLICITATION PROHIBITED
4-4-6: REGISTRATION OF SOLICITORS
4-4-7: APPLICATION FORM
4-4-8: WRITTEN DISCLOSURES
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=4:_BUSINESS_AND_LICENSE_REGULATIONS 32/49
4-4-9: WHEN REGISTRATION BEGINS
4-4-10: ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATES
4-4-11: FORM OF CERTIFICATE AND IDENTIFICATION BADGE
4-4-12: MAINTENANCE OF REGISTRY
4-4-13: NONTRANSFERABILITY OF CERTIFICATES
4-4-14: DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION
4-4-15: APPEAL
4-4-16: DECEPTIVE SOLICITING PRACTICES PROHIBITED
4-4-17: "NO SOLICITATION" NOTICE
4-4-18: DUTIES OF SOLICITORS
4-4-19: TIME OF DAY RESTRICTIONS
4-4-20: BUYER'S RIGHT TO CANCEL
4-4-21: PENALTIES
4-4-1: PURPOSE
Residents of the city have an inalienable interest in their personal safety, well being, and privacy in their
residences, as well as their ability to provide or receive information regarding matters of personal belief,
political or charitable activities, and goods and services lawfully in commerce. The city has a substantial
interest in protecting the well being, tranquility, personal safety, and privacy of its citizens, which
includes the ability to protect citizens from unwanted intrusions upon residential property. The city also
has a substantial interest in protecting citizens from fraud or otherwise unfair consumer sales practices
as well as criminal activity.
There must be a balance between these substantial interests of the city and its citizens, and the effect of
the regulations in this chapter on the rights of those who are regulated. Based on the collective
experiences of city officials derived from regulating business activity, protecting persons and property
from criminal conduct, responding to the inquiries of citizens regarding door to door solicitation, the
experience of its law enforcement officers and those affected by door to door canvassing and
solicitation, as well as judicial decisions outlining the boundaries of constitutional protections afforded
and denied persons seeking to engage in door to door solicitation, the city adopts this chapter to
promote the city's substantial interests in:
A. Respecting citizens' decisions regarding privacy in their residences;
B. Protecting persons from criminal conduct;
C. Providing equal opportunity to advocate for and against religious belief, political position, or
charitable activities; and
D. Permitting truthful and nonmisleading door to door solicitation regarding lawful goods or services
in intrastate or interstate commerce.
The city finds that the procedures, rules and regulations set forth in this chapter are narrowly tailored to
preserve and protect the city interests referred to herein while at the same time balancing the rights of
those regulated.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2006-09 on 9/5/2006
4-4-2: DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
ADVOCATING: Speech or conduct intended to inform, promote, or support religious belief, political
position, or charitable activities.
APPEALS OFFICER: The city council or designee of the city responsible for receiving the information
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=4:_BUSINESS_AND_LICENSE_REGULATIONS 33/49
from the city and appellant regarding the denial or suspension of a certificate and issuing a decision as
required by this chapter.
APPELLANT: The person or entity appealing the denial or suspension of a certificate, either personally
as an applicant or registered solicitor, or on behalf of the applicant or registered solicitor.
APPLICANT: An individual who is at least eighteen (18) years of age and not a corporation, partnership,
limited liability company, or other lawful entity who applies for a certificate permitting door to door
solicitation.
APPLICATION FORM: A standardized form provided by the city to an applicant to be completed and
submitted as part of registration.
BCI: An original or copy, dated no older than one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the date of the
application, of either: a) a Utah department of public safety bureau of criminal identification verified
criminal history report personal to the applicant; or b) verification by the Utah department of public safety
bureau of criminal identification that no criminal history rising to the level of a disqualifying status exists
for the applicant.
BUSINESS: A commercial enterprise licensed by the city as a person or entity under this title, having a
fixed or temporary physical location within the city.
CERTIFICATE: A temporary, annual, or renewal certificate permitting door to door solicitation in the city
applied for or issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter.
CHARITABLE ACTIVITIES: Advocating by persons or entities that either are, or support, a charitable
organization.
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION: Includes any person, joint venture, partnership, limited liability
company, corporation, association, group, or other entity:
A. That is:
1. A benevolent, educational, voluntary health, philanthropic, humane, patriotic, religious or
eleemosynary, social welfare or advocacy, public health, environmental or conservation,
or civic organization;
2. For the benefit of a public safety, law enforcement, or firefighter fraternal association; or
3. Established for any charitable purpose; and
B. That is tax exempt under applicable provisions of the internal revenue code of 1986, as
amended, and qualified to solicit and receive tax deductible contributions from the public for
charitable purposes.
C. Charitable organization includes a chapter, branch, area, or office, or similar affiliate or any
person soliciting contributions within the state for a charitable organization that has its principal
place of business outside the city or state of Utah.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=4:_BUSINESS_AND_LICENSE_REGULATIONS 34/49
COMPETENT INDIVIDUAL: A person claiming or appearing to be at least eighteen (18) years of age
and of sufficiently sound mind and body to be able to engage in rational thought, conversation, and
conduct.
COMPLETED APPLICATION: A fully completed application form, a BCI, two (2) copies of the original
identification relied on by the applicant to establish proof of identity, and the tendering of fees.
CRIMINALLY CONVICTED: The final entry of a conviction, whether by a plea of no contest, guilty, entry
of a judicial or jury finding of guilt, which has not been set aside on appeal or pursuant to a writ of
habeas corpus. The criminal conviction is that offense of which the applicant or registered solicitor was
convicted, without regard to the reduced status of the charge after completion of conditions of probation
or parole, and charges dismissed under a plea in abeyance or diversion agreement.
DISQUALIFYING STATUS: Anything specifically defined in this chapter as requiring the denial or
suspension of a certificate, and any of the following:
A. The applicant or registered solicitor has been criminally convicted of:
1. felony homicide,
2. physically abusing, sexually abusing, or exploiting a minor,
3. the sale or distribution of controlled substances, or
4. sexual assault of any kind;
B. Criminal charges currently pending against the applicant or registered solicitor for:
1. felony homicide,
2. physically abusing, sexually abusing, or exploiting a minor,
3. the sale or distribution of controlled substances, or
4. sexual assault of any kind;
C. The applicant or registered solicitor has been criminally convicted of a felony within the last ten
(10) years;
D. The applicant or registered solicitor has been incarcerated in a federal or state prison within the
past five (5) years;
E. The applicant or registered solicitor has been criminally convicted of a misdemeanor within the
past five (5) years involving a crime of:
1. moral turpitude, or
2. violent or aggravated conduct involving persons or property;
F. A final civil judgment has been entered against the applicant or registered solicitor within the last
five (5) years indicating that:
1. the applicant or registered solicitor had either engaged in fraud, or intentional
misrepresentation, or
2. that a debt of the applicant or registered solicitor was nondischargeable in bankruptcy
pursuant to 11 USC section 523(a)(2), (a)(4), (a)(6), or (a)(19);
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=4:_BUSINESS_AND_LICENSE_REGULATIONS 35/49
G. The applicant or registered solicitor is currently on parole or probation to any court, penal
institution, or governmental entity, including being under house arrest or subject to a tracking
device;
H. The applicant or registered solicitor has an outstanding arrest warrant from any jurisdiction; or
I. The applicant or registered solicitor is currently subject to a protective order based on physical or
sexual abuse issued by a court of competent jurisdiction.
DOOR TO DOOR SOLICITATION: The practice of engaging in or attempting to engage in conversation
with any person at a residence, whether or not that person is a competent individual, while making or
seeking to make or facilitate a home solicitation sale, or attempting to further the sale of goods and/or
services.
ENTITY: Includes a corporation, partnership, limited liability company, or other lawful entity,
organization, society or association.
FEES: The cost charged to the applicant or registered solicitor for the issuance of a certificate and/or
identification badge, which shall not exceed the reasonable costs of processing the application and
issuing the certificate and/or identification badge.
FINAL CIVIL JUDGMENT: A civil judgment that would be recognized under state law as a judgment to
which collateral estoppels would apply.
GOODS: One or more tangible items, wares, objects of merchandise, perishables of any kind,
subscriptions, or manufactured products offered, provided, or sold.
HOME SOLICITATION SALE: To make or attempt to make a sale of goods or services by a solicitor at a
residence by means of door to door solicitation, regardless of:
A. The means of payment or consideration used for the purchase;
B. The time of delivery of the goods or services; or
C. The previous or present classification of the solicitor as a solicitor, peddler, hawker, itinerant
merchant, or similar designation.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=4:_BUSINESS_AND_LICENSE_REGULATIONS 36/49
LICENSING OFFICER: The city employee(s) or agent(s) responsible for receiving from an applicant or
registered solicitor the completed application and either granting, suspending, or denying the applicant's
certificate.
NO SOLICITATION SIGN: A reasonably visible and legible sign that states "No Soliciting", "No
Solicitors", "No Salespersons", "No Trespassing", or words of similar import.
POLITICAL POSITION: Any actually held belief, or information for, against, or in conjunction with any
political, social, environmental, or humanitarian belief or practice.
REGISTERED SOLICITOR: Any person who has been issued a current certificate by the city.
REGISTRATION: The process used by the city licensing officer to accept a completed application and
determine whether or not a certificate will be denied, granted, or suspended.
RELIGIOUS BELIEF: Any sincerely held belief, or information for, against, or in conjunction with, any
theistic, agnostic, or atheistic assumption, presumption or position, or religious doctrine, dogma, or
practice regardless of whether or not the belief or information is endorsed by any other person or public
or private entity.
RESIDENCE: Any living unit contained within any building or structure that is occupied by any person as
a dwelling consistent with the zoning laws of the city, together with the lot or other real property on which
the living unit is located. This does not include the sidewalk, public street or public rights of way.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON OR ENTITY: That person or entity responsible to provide the following to an
applicant, registered solicitor, and the competent individual in a residence to whom a sale of goods or
services is made or attempted to be made by means of a home solicitation sale:
A. Maintaining a state sales tax number, a special events sales tax number, computing the sales
taxes owing from any sale of goods or services, paying the sales taxes, and filing any required
returns or reports;
B. Facilitating and responding to requests from consumers who desire to cancel the sale pursuant
to applicable contractual rights or law; and
C. Refunding any monies paid or reversing credit card charges to those persons who timely rescind
any sale pursuant to applicable contractual rights or law.
SALE OF GOODS OR SERVICES: The conduct and agreement of a solicitor and the competent
individual in a residence regarding a particular good(s) or service(s) that entitles the consumer to rescind
the same within three (3) days under any applicable federal, state, or local law.
SERVICES: Those intangible goods or personal benefits offered, provided, or sold to a competent
individual of a residence.
SOLICITING OR SOLICIT OR SOLICITATION: Any of the following activities:
A. Seeking to obtain sales or orders for the exchange of goods, wares, merchandise or perishables
of any kind, for any kind of remuneration or consideration, regardless of whether advance
payment is sought;
B. Seeking to obtain prospective customers to apply for or to purchase insurance, subscriptions to
publications, or publications;
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=4:_BUSINESS_AND_LICENSE_REGULATIONS 37/49
C. Seeking to obtain contributions of money or any other thing of value for the benefit of any person
or entity;
D. Seeking to obtain orders or prospective customers for goods or services;
E. Seeking to engage an individual in conversation at a residence for the purpose of promoting or
facilitating the receipt of information regarding religious belief, political position, charitable
conduct, or a home solicitation sale;
F. Other activities falling within the commonly accepted definition of soliciting, such as hawking or
peddling.
SOLICITOR OR SOLICITORS: A person(s) engaged in door to door solicitation.
SUBMITTED IN WRITING: The information for an appeal of a denial or suspension of a certificate
submitted in any type of written statement to the city offices by certified, registered, priority, overnight or
delivery confirmation mail, facsimile, or hand delivery.
SUBSTANTIATED REPORT: An oral, written, or electronic report:
A. That is submitted to and documented by the city;
B. By any of the following:
1. A competent individual who is willing to provide law enforcement or other city employees
with publicly available identification of their name, address, and any other reliable means
of contact;
2. City law enforcement or licensing officer; or
3. Any other regularly established law enforcement agency at any level of government;
C. That provides any of the following information regarding a registered solicitor:
1. Documented verification of a previously undisclosed disqualifying status of a registered
solicitor;
2. Probable cause that the registered solicitor has committed a disqualifying status which
has not yet been determined to be a disqualifying status;
3. Documented, eyewitness accounts that the registered solicitor has engaged in repeated
patterns of behavior that demonstrates failure by the registered solicitor to adhere to the
requirements of this chapter; or
4. Probable cause that continued licensing of the registered solicitor creates exigent
circumstances that threaten the health, safety, or welfare of any individuals or entities
within the city.
WAIVER: The written form provided to applicant by the city wherein applicant agrees that the city may
obtain a name/date of birth BCI background check on the applicant for licensing purposes under this
chapter, and which contains applicant's notarized signature.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2006-09 on 9/5/2006
Amended by Ord. 2008-08 on 5/12/2008
4-4-3: NO OTHER CITY LICENSE OR APPROVAL REQUIRED
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=4:_BUSINESS_AND_LICENSE_REGULATIONS 38/49
A. Registered solicitors and persons exempt from registration need not apply for, nor obtain, any
other license, permit, or registration from the city to engage in door to door solicitation.
B. Any business licensed by the city under another city ordinance that uses employees,
independent contractors, or agents for door to door solicitation in an effort to provide any tangible
or intangible benefit to the business, shall be required to have such solicitors obtain a certificate,
unless otherwise exempt from registration.
C. Those responsible persons or entities associated with registered solicitors need not apply for, nor
obtain, any other license, permit, or registration from the city, provided they do not establish a
temporary or fixed place of business in the city.
D. Nothing herein is intended to interfere with or supplant any other requirement of federal, state, or
other local government law regarding any license, permits, or certificate that a registered solicitor
is otherwise required to have or maintain.
E. Violation of any subsection of this section shall be considered a class B misdemeanor and may
also be charged as a violation of Utah Code § 76-8-410.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-11 on 10/12/2010
4-4-4: EXEMPTIONS FROM CHAPTER
The following are exempt from registration under this chapter:
A. Persons specifically invited to a residence by a competent individual prior to the time of the
person's arrival at the residence;
B. Persons whose license, permit, certificate or registration with the state of Utah permits them to
engage in door to door solicitation to offer goods or services to an occupant of the residence;
C. Persons delivering goods to a residence pursuant to a previously made order or persons
providing services at a residence pursuant to a previously made request by a competent
individual;
D. Persons advocating or disseminating information for, against, or in conjunction with, any religious
belief, or political position regardless of whether goods, services, or any other consideration is
offered or given, with or without any form of commitment, contribution, donation, pledge, or
purchase; and
E. Persons representing a charitable organization. The charitable exemption shall apply to students
soliciting contributions to finance extracurricular social, athletic, artistic, scientific or cultural
programs, provided that the solicitation has been approved in writing by the school
administration, and that such student solicitors carry current picture student identification from
the educational institution for which they are soliciting.
Those persons exempt from registration are not exempt from the duties and prohibitions outlined in this
chapter while advocating or soliciting.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2006-09 on 9/5/2006
4-4-5: SOLICITATION PROHIBITED
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=4:_BUSINESS_AND_LICENSE_REGULATIONS 39/49
Unless otherwise authorized, permitted, or exempted pursuant to the terms and provisions of this
chapter, the practice of being in and upon a private residence within the city by solicitors, for the purpose
of home solicitation sales or to provide goods or services, is prohibited and is punishable as set forth in
this chapter.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2006-09 on 9/5/2006
4-4-6: REGISTRATION OF SOLICITORS
Unless otherwise exempt under this chapter, all persons desiring to engage in door to door solicitation
within the city, prior to doing so, shall submit a completed application to the licensing officer and obtain a
certificate.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2006-09 on 9/5/2006
4-4-7: APPLICATION FORM
The licensing officer shall provide a standard application form for use for the registration of solicitors.
Upon request to the licensing officer, or as otherwise provided, any person or entity may obtain in
person, by mail, or facsimile, a copy of this application form. Each application form shall require
disclosure and reporting by the applicant of the following information, documentation, and fee:
A. Review Of Written Disclosures: An affirmation that the applicant has received and reviewed the
disclosure information required by this chapter.
B. Contact Information:
1. Applicant's true, correct and legal name, including any former names or aliases used
during the last ten (10) years;
2. Applicant's telephone number, home address and mailing address, if different;
3. If different from the applicant, the name, address, and telephone number of the
responsible person or entity; and
4. The address by which all notices to the applicant required under this chapter is to be sent.
C. Proof Of Identity: In person verification by the licensing officer of the applicant's true identity by
use of any of the following, which bear a photograph of said applicant:
1. A valid driver's license issued by any state;
2. A valid passport issued by the United States;
3. A valid identification card issued by any state;
4. A valid identification issued by a branch of the United States military.
Upon verification of identity, the original identification submitted to establish proof of
identity shall be returned to the applicant.
D. Proof Of Registration With Department Of Commerce: The applicant shall provide proof that
either the applicant, or the responsible person or entity, has registered with the Utah state
department of commerce.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=4:_BUSINESS_AND_LICENSE_REGULATIONS 40/49
E. Special Events Sales Tax Number: The applicant shall provide a special events sales tax number
for either the applicant, or for the responsible person or entity for which the applicant will be
soliciting.
F. Marketing Information:
1. The goods or services offered by the applicant, including any commonly known,
registered or trademarked names;
2. Whether the applicant holds any other licenses, permits, registrations, or other
qualifications required by federal or state law to promote, provide, or render advice
regarding the offered goods or services.
G. BCI Background Check: The applicant shall provide:
1. An original or a copy of a BCI background check.
2. A signed copy of a waiver whereby applicant agrees to allow the city to obtain a
name/date of birth BCI background check on applicant for purposes of enforcement of
this chapter.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=4:_BUSINESS_AND_LICENSE_REGULATIONS 41/49
H. Responses To Questions Regarding "Disqualifying Status": The applicant shall be required to
affirm or deny each of the following statements on the application form:
1. Has the applicant been criminally convicted of:
a. felony homicide,
b. physically abusing, sexually abusing, or exploiting a minor,
c. the sale or distribution of controlled substances, or
d. sexual assault of any kind;
2. Are any criminal charges currently pending against the applicant for:
a. felony homicide,
b. physically abusing, sexually abusing, or exploiting a minor,
c. the sale or distribution of controlled substances, or
d. sexual assault of any kind;
3. Has the applicant been criminally convicted of a felony within the last ten (10) years;
4. Has the applicant been incarcerated in a federal or state prison within the past five (5)
years;
5. Has the applicant been criminally convicted of a misdemeanor within the past five (5)
years involving a crime of:
a. moral turpitude, or
b. violent or aggravated conduct involving persons or property;
6. Has a final civil judgment been entered against the applicant within the last five (5) years
indicating that:
a. the applicant had either engaged in fraud, or intentional misrepresentation, or
b. a debt of the applicant was nondischargeable in bankruptcy pursuant to 11 USC
section 523(a)(2), (a)(4), (a)(6), or (a)(19);
7. Is the applicant currently on parole or probation to any court, penal institution, or
governmental entity, including being under house arrest or subject to a tracking device;
8. Does the applicant have an outstanding arrest warrant from any jurisdiction; or
9. Is the applicant currently subject to a protective order based on physical or sexual abuse
issued by a court of competent jurisdiction.
I. Fee: The applicant shall pay such fees as determined applicable by the city, which shall not
exceed the reasonable cost of processing the application and issuing the certificate and/or
identification badge.
J. Execution Of Application: The applicant shall execute the application form, stating upon oath or
affirmation, under penalty of perjury that based on the present knowledge and belief of the
applicant, the information provided is complete, truthful and accurate.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2006-09 on 9/5/2006
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=4:_BUSINESS_AND_LICENSE_REGULATIONS 42/49
4-4-8: WRITTEN DISCLOSURES
The application form shall be accompanied by written disclosures notifying the applicant of the following:
A. The applicant's submission of the application authorizes the city to verify information submitted
with the completed application including:
1. The applicant's address;
2. The applicant's and/or responsible person's or entity's state tax identification and special
use tax numbers, if any;
3. The validity of the applicant's proof of identity;
B. The city may consult any publicly available sources for information on the applicant, including,
but not limited to, databases for any outstanding warrants, protective orders, or civil judgments;
C. Establishing proof of identity is required before registration is allowed;
D. Identification of the fee amount that must be submitted by applicant with a completed application;
E. The applicant must submit a "BCI" background check as defined in CCNO 4-4-2 with a
completed application;
F. To the extent permitted by state and/or federal law, the applicant's BCI background check shall
remain a confidential, protected, private record not available for public inspection;
G. The city will maintain copies of the applicant's application form, proof of identity, and identification
badge. These copies will become public records available for inspection on demand at the city
offices whether or not a certificate is denied, granted, or renewed;
H. The criteria for disqualifying status, denial, or suspension of a certificate under the provisions of
this chapter;
I. That a request for a temporary certificate will be granted or denied the same business day that a
completed application is submitted.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2006-09 on 9/5/2006
4-4-9: WHEN REGISTRATION BEGINS
The licensing officer shall not begin the registration process unless the applicant has submitted a
completed application. The original identification submitted to establish proof of identity shall be returned
after the licensing officer verifies the applicant's identity. A copy of the identification may be retained by
the licensing officer. If an original BCI background check is submitted by the applicant, the licensing
officer shall make a copy of the BCI and return the original to the applicant.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2006-09 on 9/5/2006
4-4-10: ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATES
The licensing officer shall review the completed application submitted by the applicant and issue a
certificate in accordance with the following:
A. Temporary Certificate:
1. A temporary certificate shall issue allowing the applicant to immediately begin door to
door solicitation upon the following conditions:
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=4:_BUSINESS_AND_LICENSE_REGULATIONS 43/49
a. Applicant's submission of a completed application;
b. Applicant's submission of the required fee;
c. Applicant establishes proof of identity;
d. The applicant's representations on the application form do not affirmatively show a
disqualifying status;
e. The BCI does not affirmatively show a disqualifying status; and
f. The applicant has not previously been denied a certificate by the city, or had a
certificate revoked for grounds that still constitute a disqualifying status under this
chapter.
2. A temporary certificate will automatically expire after twenty five (25) calendar days from
issuance, or upon grant or denial of an annual certificate, whichever period is shorter.
B. Annual Certificate: Within twenty five (25) calendar days of the issuance of a temporary
certificate the city shall:
1. Take any and all actions it deems appropriate to verify the truthfulness and completeness
of the information submitted by the applicant, including, but not limited to, those disclosed
with the application form.
2. Issue written notice to the applicant and the responsible person or entity, if any, that the
applicant either:
a. Will be issued an annual certificate, eligible for renewal one year from the date of
issuance of the temporary certificate; or
b. Will not be issued an annual certificate for reasons cited in CCNO 4-4-14.
C. Renewal Certificate: An annual certificate shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance of
the temporary certificate and shall expire at twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on the anniversary
date of issuance. Any annual certificate that is not suspended, revoked, or expired may be
renewed upon the request of the registered solicitor and the submission of a new completed
application and payment of the fee, unless any of the conditions for the denial, suspension or
revocation of a certificate are present as set forth in CCNO 4-4-14; or a disqualifying status is
present.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2006-09 on 9/5/2006
4-4-11: FORM OF CERTIFICATE AND IDENTIFICATION BADGE
A. Certificate Form: Should the licensing officer determine that the applicant is entitled to a
certificate, the licensing officer shall issue a certificate to the applicant. The certificate shall list
the name of the registered solicitor and the responsible person or entity, if any, and the date on
which the certificate expires. The certificate shall be dated and signed by the licensing officer.
The certificate shall be carried by the registered solicitor at all times while soliciting in the city.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=4:_BUSINESS_AND_LICENSE_REGULATIONS 44/49
B. Identification Badge: With both the temporary and annual certificates, the city shall issue each
registered solicitor an identification badge that shall be worn prominently on his or her person
while soliciting in the city. The identification badge shall bear the name of the city and shall
contain:
1. the name of the registered solicitor;
2. address and phone number of the registered solicitor, or the name, address, and phone
number of the responsible person or entity is provided;
3. a recent photograph of the registered solicitor; and
4. the date on which the certificate expires.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2006-09 on 9/5/2006
4-4-12: MAINTENANCE OF REGISTRY
The licensing officer shall maintain and make available for public inspection a copy or record of every
completed application received and the certificate or written denial issued by the city. The applicant's
BCI background check shall remain a confidential, protected, private record not available for public
inspection. The licensing officer may furnish to the head of the city's law enforcement agency a listing of
all applicants, those denied, and those issued a certificate.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2006-09 on 9/5/2006
4-4-13: NONTRANSFERABILITY OF CERTIFICATES
Certificates shall be issued only in the name of the applicant and shall list the responsible party or entity,
if any. The certificate shall be nontransferable. A registered solicitor desiring to facilitate or attempt to
facilitate home solicitation sales with different: a) goods or services; or b) responsible person or entity,
from those designated in the originally submitted completed application, shall submit a written change
request to the licensing officer. A new certificate based on the amended information shall issue for the
balance of time remaining on the solicitor's previous certificate before the amendment was filed. Before
the new certificate is given to the registered solicitor, the registered solicitor shall obtain a revised
identification badge from the city, after payment of the fee for the identification badge.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2006-09 on 9/5/2006
4-4-14: DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION
A. Denial: Upon review, the licensing officer shall refuse to issue a certificate to an applicant for any
of the following reasons:
1. Denial Of Temporary Certificate:
a. The application form is not complete;
b. The applicant fails to:
i. establish proof of identity,
ii. provide a BCI, or
iii. pay the fees;
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=4:_BUSINESS_AND_LICENSE_REGULATIONS 45/49
c. The completed application or BCI indicates that the applicant has a disqualifying
status; or
d. The applicant has previously been denied a certificate by the city, or has had a
certificate revoked for grounds that still constitute a disqualifying status under this
chapter.
2. Denial Of Annual Certificate:
a. The information submitted by the applicant at the time of the granting of the
temporary certificate is found to be incomplete or incorrect;
b. Since the submission of the completed application, the applicant is subject to a
previously undisclosed or unknown disqualifying status;
c. Failure to complete payment of the fees;
d. Since the submission of the application, the city has received a substantiated
report regarding the past or present conduct of the applicant;
e. Since the submission of the application, the city or other governmental entity has
either criminally convicted or obtained a civil injunction against the applicant for
violating this chapter or similar federal, state, or municipal laws in a manner rising
to the level of a disqualifying status; or
f. Since the submission of the application, a final civil judgment has been entered
against the applicant indicating that:
i. the applicant had either engaged in fraud, or intentional misrepresentation,
or
ii. a debt of the applicant was nondischargeable in bankruptcy pursuant to 11
USC section 523(a)(2), (a)(4), (a)(6), or (a)(19).
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=4:_BUSINESS_AND_LICENSE_REGULATIONS 46/49
3. Denial Of Annual Certificate Renewal:
a. The information submitted by the applicant when seeking renewal of a certificate
is found to be incomplete or incorrect;
b. Since the submission of the renewal application, the applicant is subject to a
previously undisclosed or unknown disqualifying status;
c. Failure to complete payment of the fees;
d. Since the submission of the application or granting of a certificate, the city has
received a substantiated report regarding the past or present conduct of the
solicitor;
e. The city or other governmental entity has either criminally convicted or obtained a
civil injunction against the applicant for violating this chapter or similar federal,
state, or municipal laws in a manner rising to the level of a disqualifying status; or
f. Since the submission of the application, a final civil judgment has been entered
against the applicant indicating that:
i. the applicant had either engaged in fraud, or intentional misrepresentation,
or
ii. a debt of the applicant was nondischargeable in bankruptcy pursuant to 11
USC section 523(a)(2), (a)(4), (a)(6), or (a)(19).
B. Suspension Or Revocation: The city shall either suspend or revoke a certificate when any of the
reasons warranting the denial of a certificate occurs.
C. Notice Of Denial Or Suspension: Upon determination of the licensing officer to deny an
applicant's completed application or to suspend a registered solicitor's certificate, the city shall
cause written notice to be sent to the applicant or registered solicitor by the method indicated in
the completed application. The notice shall specify the grounds for the denial or suspension, the
documentation or information the city relied on to make the decision, the availability of the
documentation for review by applicant upon one business day's notice to the city, and the date
upon which the denial or suspension of the certificate shall take effect. It shall further state that
the applicant or registered solicitor shall have ten (10) business days from the receipt of the
notice of denial or suspension to appeal the same. The denial or suspension of the certificate
shall be effective no sooner than two (2) calendar days from the date the notice is sent, unless
that suspension is because of exigent circumstances outlined in CCNO 4-4-2, in which case, the
suspension is effective immediately. The denial or suspension shall remain effective unless and
until the order is rescinded, overturned on appeal, or determined by a court to be contrary to
equity or law. Failure to appeal the suspension of a certificate automatically results in its
revocation.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2006-09 on 9/5/2006
4-4-15: APPEAL
An applicant or registered solicitor whose certificate has been denied or suspended shall have the right
to appeal to the city council or its designee. Any appeal must be submitted by the applicant, the
responsible person or entity, or legal counsel for either who:
a. documents the relationship with the applicant or responsible person or entity; or
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=4:_BUSINESS_AND_LICENSE_REGULATIONS 47/49
b. is licensed or authorized by the state of Utah to do so, and makes the assertion of an agency
relationship.
The following procedures and requirements shall apply:
A. Any appeal must be submitted in writing to the city recorder with a copy to the licensing officer
within ten (10) business days of the decision from which the appeal is taken. Such appeal shall
describe in detail the nature of the appeal, the action complained of and the grounds for appeal.
B. Upon request of the applicant or registered solicitor, within one business day, the city will make
available any information upon which it relied in making the determination to either deny or
suspend the certificate.
C. The appeals officer shall review, de novo, all written information submitted by the applicant or
registered solicitor to the licensing officer, any additional information relied upon by the licensing
officer as the basis for denial, suspension or revocation, and any additional information supplied
by the city, applicant or registered solicitor. Any additional information submitted by any party to
the appeal to the appeals officer shall be simultaneously submitted to the opposing party. If
desired, any party shall have three (3) business days to submit rebuttal documentation to the
appeals officer regarding the additional information submitted by the opposing party.
D. The appeals officer will render a decision no later than fifteen (15) calendar days from the date
the appeal was taken, unless an extension of time is agreed upon by the parties. In the event
that any party to the appeal submits rebuttal information as allowed in this section, the fifteen
(15) calendar days shall be extended to include the additional three (3) days for rebuttal.
1. The denial or suspension of the certificate shall be reversed by the appeals officer if upon
review of the written appeal and information submitted, the appeals officer finds that the
licensing officer made a material mistake of law or fact in denying or suspending the
applicant's or registered solicitor's certificate.
2. If the written appeal and information submitted indicates that the licensing officer properly
denied or suspended the certificate of the applicant or registered solicitor, the denial or
suspension of the certificate shall be affirmed and constitute a determination that the
suspended certificate is revoked.
3. The decision of the appeals officer shall be delivered to the applicant or registered
solicitor by the means designated in the completed application, or as otherwise agreed
upon when the appeal was filed.
E. After the ruling of the appeals officer, the applicant or solicitor is deemed to have exhausted all
administrative remedies with the city.
F. Nothing herein shall impede or interfere with the applicant's, solicitor's, or city's right to seek relief
in a court of competent jurisdiction.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2006-09 on 9/5/2006
4-4-16: DECEPTIVE SOLICITING PRACTICES PROHIBITED
A. No solicitor shall intentionally make any materially false or fraudulent statement in the course of
soliciting.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=4:_BUSINESS_AND_LICENSE_REGULATIONS 48/49
B. A solicitor shall immediately disclose to the consumer during face to face solicitation:
1. the name of the solicitor;
2. the name and address of the entity with whom the solicitor is associated; and
3. the purpose of the solicitor's contact with the person and/or competent individual. This
requirement may be satisfied through the use of the badge and an informational flyer.
C. No solicitor shall use a fictitious name, an alias, or any name other than his or her true and
correct name.
D. No solicitor shall represent directly or by implication that the granting of a certificate of
registration implies any endorsement by the city of the solicitor's goods or services or of the
individual solicitor.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2006-09 on 9/5/2006
4-4-17: "NO SOLICITATION" NOTICE
A. Any occupant of a residence may give notice of a desire to refuse solicitors by displaying a "No
Solicitation" sign which shall be posted on or near the main entrance door or on or near the
property line adjacent to the sidewalk leading to the residence.
B. The display of such sign or placard shall be deemed to constitute notice to any solicitor that the
inhabitant of the residence does not desire to receive and/or does not invite solicitors.
C. It shall be the responsibility of the solicitor to check each residence for the presence of any such
notice.
D. The provisions of this section shall apply also to solicitors who are exempt from registration
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2006-09 on 9/5/2006
4-4-18: DUTIES OF SOLICITORS
A. Every person soliciting or advocating shall check each residence for any "No Soliciting" sign or
placard or any other notice or sign notifying a solicitor not to solicit on the premises, such as, but
not limited to, "No Solicitation" signs. If such sign or placard is posted such solicitor shall desist
from any efforts to solicit at the residence or dwelling and shall immediately depart from such
property. Possession of a certificate of registration does not in any way relieve any solicitor of
this duty.
B. It is a violation of this chapter for any person soliciting or advocating to knock on the door, ring
the doorbell, or in any other manner attempt to attract the attention of an occupant of a residence
that bears a "No Solicitation" sign or similar sign or placard for the purpose of engaging in or
attempting to engage in advocating, a home solicitation sale, door to door soliciting, or soliciting.
C. It is a violation of this chapter for any solicitor through ruse, deception, or fraudulent concealment
of a purpose to solicit, to take action calculated to secure an audience with an occupant at a
residence.
D. Any solicitor who is at any time asked by an occupant of a residence or dwelling to leave shall
immediately and peacefully depart.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=4:_BUSINESS_AND_LICENSE_REGULATIONS 49/49
E. The solicitor shall not intentionally or recklessly make any physical contact with, or touch another
person without the person's consent.
F. The solicitor shall not follow a person into a residence without their explicit consent.
G. The solicitor shall not continue repeated soliciting after a person and/or competent individual has
communicated clearly and unequivocally their lack of interest in the subject, goods or services of
the solicitor.
H. The solicitor shall not use obscene language or gestures.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2006-09 on 9/5/2006
4-4-19: TIME OF DAY RESTRICTIONS
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether licensed or not, to solicit at a residence before nine o'clock
(9:00) A.M. or after nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. Mountain Time, unless the solicitor has express prior
permission from the resident to do so.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2006-09 on 9/5/2006
4-4-20: BUYER'S RIGHT TO CANCEL
In any home solicitation sale, unless the buyer requests the solicitor to provide goods or services without
delay in an emergency, the seller or solicitor shall present to the buyer and obtain buyer's signature to a
written statement which informs the buyer of the right to cancel within the third business day after
signing an agreement to purchase. Such notice of "buyer's right to cancel" shall be in the form required
by Utah Code § 70C-5-103, 1953, or a current version thereof or any state or federal law modifying or
amending such provision.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2006-09 on 9/5/2006
4-4-21: PENALTIES
Any person who violates any term or provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor
and shall be punished by a fine of not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or a jail sentence
of not to exceed six (6) months.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2006-09 on 9/5/2006
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=5:_HEALTH_AND_SANITATION 1/14
5: HEALTH AND SANITATION
5-1: REFUSE AND INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE STORAGE
5-2: NUISANCES
5-3: NOISE RESTRICTIONS ON USES OR ACTIVITIES
5-4: FIREWORKS
5-5: CONSTRUCTION SITE CLEANLINESS
5-6: WATERCOURSE DISRUPTION
5-7: PROTECTIVE GROUND COVER
5-8: VACANT AND DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
5-1: REFUSE AND INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE STORAGE
5-1-1: ACCUMULATION PROHIBITED
5-1-2: INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE STORAGE
5-1-3: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
5-1-4: PENALTY
5-1-1: ACCUMULATION PROHIBITED
A. Specified; Authority: It is unlawful for the owner or occupant of any real property or estate, or its
agent, to cause or permit upon such property, or right of way adjacent thereto, the accumulation
of, or, after notice as provided in this chapter, to fail to properly maintain, eradicate or remove
any injurious and noxious weeds, garbage, refuse, dead trees, tree stumps, abandoned or
inoperable vehicles, boats or trailers, fail to maintain protective ground cover, or any unsightly or
deleterious objects or structures pursuant to the powers granted to the city by Utah Code 10-11.
B. Public Nuisance Declared: It is declared that the above listed objects shall constitute a public
nuisance when they create a fire hazard, a source of pollution to water, air or land, or they create
a breeding place or habitation for insects, rodents or other forms of life deleterious to human
habitation, or are unsightly or deleterious to their surroundings.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2011-15 on 9/27/2011
Amended by Ord. 2015-22 on 9/1/2015
5-1-2: INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE STORAGE
A. Inoperable Defined: For the purposes of this chapter, a motor vehicle, boat, recreational vehicle
or trailer shall be deemed inoperable if it is not currently licensed, as required by state code, and
operable for the use for which it was intended. The same shall be deemed abandoned if it has
been left unattended for a period of seven (7) days or more upon any public or private property.
B. Fence Required: Any inoperable or abandoned vehicle must be stored in an enclosed structure
or behind an opaque six foot (6') fence, which is intended to shield the vehicle from view from
any adjoining public or private property.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2011-15 on 9/27/2011
5-1-3: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
The enforcement procedures for this chapter are found in CCNO 1-9, or any other relevant municipal or
state code provision. This Title in no way limits any remedy available to North Ogden City authorized
under any local, state, or federal rule, regulation, code, or other provision
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=5:_HEALTH_AND_SANITATION 2/14
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-11 on 10/12/2010
Amended by Ord. 2015-22 on 9/1/2015
5-1-4: PENALTY
Any person who violates this chapter or any provision thereof shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor,
subject to penalty as provided in CCNO 1-4-1 and may also be charged under Utah Code § 26-23-3.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-11 on 10/12/2010
Amended by Ord. 2015-22 on 9/1/2015
5-2: NUISANCES
5-2-1: STATE PROVISIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
5-2-1: STATE PROVISIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
Except insofar as the application thereof is clearly impractical or inappropriate, in view of the context of
purposes or penalty as provided, all of the definitions, requirements, regulations, prohibitions, provisions,
penalties and sections of the state nuisance provisions, Utah Code § 76-10-801 et seq., as amended,
are hereby adopted by the city.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
5-3: NOISE RESTRICTIONS ON USES OR ACTIVITIES
5-3-1: HORNS AND SIGNALING DEVICES
5-3-2: TRUCK IDLING
5-3-3: MOTOR VEHICLE OPERATION
5-3-4: SOUND AMPLIFICATION DEVICES; MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS
5-3-5: CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT OR ACTIVITY
5-3-6: COMMERCIAL POWER EQUIPMENT
5-3-7: DOMESTIC POWER EQUIPMENT
5-3-8: REFUSE COLLECTION AND COMPACTING
5-3-9: LOADING/UNLOADING OPERATIONS
5-3-10: MUFFLERS REQUIRED FOR ENGINE EXHAUST
5-3-11: FIRING RANGES
5-3-12: SPECIAL PERMIT FOR RELIEF
5-3-13: PENALTY
5-3-1: HORNS AND SIGNALING DEVICES
No person shall, at any time, sound any horn or audible signal device on any automobile, motorcycle,
bus or other vehicle, except as a danger signal or traffic warning as provided under the Utah motor
vehicle act; create by means of any such signaling device any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; or
sound any such device for an unnecessary or unreasonable period of time.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-11 on 10/12/2010
5-3-2: TRUCK IDLING
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=5:_HEALTH_AND_SANITATION 3/14
No person shall operate an engine of any standing motor vehicle with a weight in excess of ten thousand
(10,000) pounds manufacturer's gross vehicle weight (GWA) for a period in excess of ten (10) minutes
when such vehicle is parked on a residential premises, on a premises next to a residential premises, or
on a public street next to a residential premises; provided, however, that vehicles confined and operated
within an enclosed structure, or vehicles being used directly in construction activity or the operation of
construction equipment, shall not be subject to the provisions of this section.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-11 on 10/12/2010
5-3-3: MOTOR VEHICLE OPERATION
No person shall operate or cause to be operated any motor vehicle unless the exhaust system of the
vehicle is:
A. Free from defects that affect sound reduction;
B. Equipped with a muffler or other noise dissipative device; or
C. Not equipped with any cutout, bypass or similar device.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-11 on 10/12/2010
5-3-4: SOUND AMPLIFICATION DEVICES; MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS
A. Affecting Residential Premises: No person shall operate a sound amplification device or musical
instrument:
1. Between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. in a way that is
exceeds 65 dBc at the property line of a residential premises, except on the 4th of July when the
hours shall be extended to eleven o’clock (11:00) P.M.; or
2. In a way that at any time is offensive to a reasonable person from inside a residential premises,
when all exterior doors and windows of such dwelling unit are closed.
B. Operation In A Motor Vehicle: No person shall operate a sound amplification device within a motor vehicle
parked or operated on a public street, which is offensive to a reasonable person or which causes a person
to be aware of vibration accompanying the sound either:
1. At a distance of thirty feet (30') from the motor vehicle; or
2. Within another motor vehicle on a public street, at any distance, when all doors and windows of
such other vehicle are closed.
C. Public Parks: No person shall operate a sound amplification device within a public park, which exceeds 75
dBc at a distance of seventy five feet (75') from the device, unless operated pursuant to a special permit
issued under CCNO 5-3-12 of this chapter or related to Amphitheater use under CCNO 8-6-5.
D. Commercial Operation On Public Street Without Permit: No person shall operate a sound amplification
device in a fixed or movable position or mounted upon any vehicle, in or upon a public street, for the
purpose of commercial advertising, giving instructions, directions, talks, addresses, lectures, or
transmission of music to any persons or assemblages of persons in violation of other sound
levels/restrictions, unless a permit is first obtained under CCNO 5-3-12 of this chapter.
E. Projection From Building On Public Street: No person shall operate in any building a sound amplification
device or musical instrument, the sound wherefrom is cast directly upon a public street and where such
device is maintained and operated for advertising purposes or for the purpose of attracting the attention of
the passing public unless a special permit issued under CCNO 5-3-12 of this chapter.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=5:_HEALTH_AND_SANITATION 4/14
F. Amphitheater Usage: Any activity in or around the Barker Park Amphitheater which has received a special
events permit from the Parks and Recreation Department shall be exempt from the rules in this chapter,
but must comply with Title 8 Chapter 6 Section 5 of this code.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-11 on 10/12/2010
Amended by Ord. 2018-11 on 6/19/2018
5-3-5: CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT OR ACTIVITY
The operation of construction equipment or the performance of construction activity, except as required
for emergency work, shall only be allowed between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M. on weekdays and Saturdays. No construction equipment or construction noise
activity shall take place on Sundays.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-11 on 10/12/2010
5-3-6: COMMERCIAL POWER EQUIPMENT
The operation of any commercial power equipment shall only be allowed between the hours of seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M., and only when in compliance with established noise
levels of this chapter.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-11 on 10/12/2010
5-3-7: DOMESTIC POWER EQUIPMENT
The operation of any domestic power equipment shall only be allowed between the hours of seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-11 on 10/12/2010
5-3-8: REFUSE COLLECTION AND COMPACTING
Garbage, refuse or other solid waste collection shall only be allowed between the hours of six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M., when such collection takes place on any residential premises
or on any premises next to, or across the street or alley from, a residential premises.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-11 on 10/12/2010
5-3-9: LOADING/UNLOADING OPERATIONS
Except as otherwise provided for solid waste collection in CCNO 5-3-8, loading, unloading, opening,
closing, or otherwise handling boxes, crates, containers, building materials, liquids, garbage cans,
refuse, or similar objects, or the pneumatic or pumped loading or unloading of bulk materials in liquid,
gaseous, powder or pellet form, or the compacting of refuse by persons engaged in the business of
scavenging or garbage collection, whether private or public, shall not be allowed between the hours of
ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M., the sound wherefrom is clearly audible across
the property line of a residential premises.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-11 on 10/12/2010
5-3-10: MUFFLERS REQUIRED FOR ENGINE EXHAUST
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=5:_HEALTH_AND_SANITATION 5/14
No person shall discharge into the open air the exhaust of any stationary internal combustion engine,
motorboat or motor vehicle, except through a muffler or other device, which will effectively prevent loud
or explosive noises therefrom.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-11 on 10/12/2010
5-3-11: FIRING RANGES
The operation of a firing range shall only be allowed between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and
ten o'clock (10:00) P.M., Monday through Saturday, the sound wherefrom is clearly audible at the
property line of the premises of the firing range.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-11 on 10/12/2010
5-3-12: SPECIAL PERMIT FOR RELIEF
A. Application: Applications for a permit for relief from the noise level designated in this chapter may
be made to the city council.
B. Information Required: Applications for a permit shall supply information, including, but not limited
to:
1. The nature and location of the noise source for which such application is made;
2. The reason for which the permit is requested, including the hardship that will result to the
applicant, his/her client or the public if the permit is not granted;
3. The level of noise that will occur during the period of the permit;
4. The ordinance provision for which the permit shall apply;
5. A description of interim noise control measures to be taken for the applicant to minimize
noise and the impacts occurring wherefrom; and
6. A specific schedule of the noise control measures that shall be taken to bring the source
into compliance with this chapter within a reasonable time.
C. Conditions Specified: Any permit granted under this section shall contain all conditions upon
which said permit has been granted and shall specify a reasonable time that the permit shall be
effective, which shall be no longer than one year.
D. Proof Required For Approval: No permit shall be approved unless the applicant presents
adequate proof that:
1. Compliance with this chapter would impose an undue hardship on the applicant without
equal or greater benefits to the public and additional time is necessary for the applicant to
alter or modify his activity or operation to comply with this chapter; or
2. The activity, operation or noise source will be of temporary duration, and cannot be done
in a manner that would comply with this section; and
3. No other reasonable alternative is available to the applicant; and
4. Noise levels occurring during the period of the permit will not constitute a danger to public
health.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=5:_HEALTH_AND_SANITATION 6/14
E. Considerations For Determination: In making the permit determination, the city council shall
consider:
1. The character and degree of injury to, or interference with, the health and welfare or the
reasonable use of property that is caused or threatened to be caused;
2. The social and economic value of the activity for which the permit is sought; and
3. The ability of the applicant to apply the best practical noise control measures.
F. Minimization Of Effects: The city council, in granting such a special permit, may prescribe any
conditions or requirements it deems necessary to minimize adverse effects upon the community
or the surrounding neighborhood.
G. Revocation: The permit may be revoked by the city council, or the city council's designee, if there
is:
1. Violation of one or more conditions of the permit;
2. Material misrepresentation of fact in the permit application; or
3. Material change in any of the circumstances relied on by the city council in granting the
permit.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-11 on 10/12/2010
5-3-13: PENALTY
Violation of any subsection of this chapter shall be considered a class C misdemeanor and may also be
charged under Utah Code § 76-9-102.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-11 on 10/12/2010
5-4: FIREWORKS
5-4-1: STATE PROVISIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE
5-4-2: PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE
5-4-3: RULES ADOPTED AND INCORPORATED
5-4-4: DISCHARGE OF FIREWORKS AND OPEN FIRE PITS
5-4-5: PENALTY
5-4-1: STATE PROVISIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE
Except insofar as the application thereof is clearly impractical or inappropriate, in view of the context of
purposes or penalty as provided, all of the definitions, requirements, regulations, prohibitions, provisions,
penalties and sections of the state fireworks provisions, Utah Code §§ 11-3-1 et seq., and 53-7-201 et
seq., as amended, are hereby adopted by the city.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-11 on 10/12/2010
5-4-2: PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=5:_HEALTH_AND_SANITATION 7/14
No person shall store, handle, sell or offer for retail sale any firework or other pyrotechnic device
authorized to be sold or discharged under this chapter without first having submitted an application for
and having obtained a special fireworks permit. All such applications shall be examined by, and permits
issued by the North View fire department fire chief, or his designated assistant. A copy of the state sales
tax license shall accompany each application. A reasonable fee shall be assessed for the issuance of
the permit, which must be paid before such permit may be issued. Such fee shall be established by the
city council by resolution.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-11 on 10/12/2010
5-4-3: RULES ADOPTED AND INCORPORATED
The state fire prevention board, pursuant to Utah administrative rulemaking act, Utah Code § 63-46a-1
et seq., is authorized by the Utah fireworks act, Utah Code § 11-3-1 et seq., and the fire prevention and
fireworks act, Utah Code § 53-7-201 et seq., to adopt rules establishing minimum safety standards,
reasonable under the circumstances, for the retail storage, retail handling and retail sale of common
fireworks. All regulations adopted pursuant to the board's rulemaking authority are incorporated in this
chapter as though set forth in full.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-11 on 10/12/2010
5-4-4: DISCHARGE OF FIREWORKS AND OPEN FIRE PITS
There shall be no discharge of fireworks or use of open fire pits which are not specifically for recreational
fires or fires for cooking food north of 3300 N. or east of Mountain Road. The attached map is
incorporated by reference.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-11 on 10/12/2010
Amended by Ord. 2018-10 on 6/19/2018
5-4-5: PENALTY
Except as otherwise provided by state law, violation of any provision of this chapter shall be considered
a class B misdemeanor. This chapter may be enforced by employees of the North View Fire District as
determined by the Fire Chief.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2018-10 on 6/19/2018
5-5: CONSTRUCTION SITE CLEANLINESS
5-5-1: TOILET, TRASH BINS AND SANITATION
5-5-2: EXCEPTIONS
5-5-1: TOILET, TRASH BINS AND SANITATION
The general contractor, or owner-builder if there is no general contractor, of every subdivision,
residential or commercial building construction site, shall:
A. Toilet, Trash Bins: Maintain on the premises of each building lot or construction site, and not on a
street, sidewalk or other public property right of way, from the first day through the last day of
construction:
1. A portable toilet facility meeting the health requirements of the law; and
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=5:_HEALTH_AND_SANITATION 8/14
2. A commercial trash bin which shall be used for refuse on the site and which shall be
emptied when full;
B. Sanitation: Keep the construction site in a condition of cleanliness and healthfulness by:
1. Preventing the accumulation of garbage or refuse, including lumber, bricks, stones, etc.,
in disorderly stacks or piles;
2. Maintaining the premises in such a manner that mice, rats, rodents or other animals do
not inhabit the premises;
3. Preventing garbage, refuse, dirt, rocks or building materials from encroaching onto
sidewalks, streets, public property or the private property of neighbors without the written
consent of the owner; and
4. Preventing the blowing of paper or other items onto neighboring properties.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 8.02.010 on 1/1/1987
5-5-2: EXCEPTIONS
Exceptions to the requirements of a portable toilet facility and a commercial trash bin may be granted in
writing by the building inspector upon a showing that such facilities are otherwise reasonably accessible
and that the building construction site is free of the conditions more fully described in CCNO 5-5-1B.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 8.02.020 on 1/1/1987
5-6: WATERCOURSE DISRUPTION
5-6-1: BEFOULING WATERS
5-6-2: INTERFERING WITH WATER FLOW
5-6-3: TAKING WATER OUT OF TURN OR EXCESSIVE AMOUNTS
5-6-4: OBSTRUCTION OF WATERGATES
5-6-1: BEFOULING WATERS
A person is guilty of a class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in
CCNO 1-4-1, if he:
A. Constructs or maintains a corral, sheep pen, goat pen, stable, pigpen, chicken coop or other
offensive yard or outhouse where the waste or drainage therefrom shall flow directly into the
waters of any stream, well or spring used for domestic purposes; or
B. Deposits, piles, unloads or leaves any manure heap, offensive rubbish or the carcass of any
dead animal where the waste or drainage therefrom will flow directly into the waters of any
stream, well or spring used for domestic purposes; or
C. Dips or washes sheep in any stream or constructs, maintains or uses any pool or dipping vat for
dipping or washing sheep in such close proximity to any stream used by the inhabitants of the
city for domestic purposes as to make the waters thereof impure or unwholesome; or
D. Constructs or maintains any corral, yard or vat to be used for the purpose of shearing or dipping
sheep within twelve (12) miles of the city, where the refuse or filth from the corral or yard would
naturally find its way into any stream of water used by the inhabitants of the city for domestic
purposes; or
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=5:_HEALTH_AND_SANITATION 9/14
E. Establishes and maintains any corral, camp or bedding place for the purpose of herding, holding
or keeping any cattle, horses, sheep, goats or hogs within seven (7) miles of the city, where the
refuse or filth from the corral, camp or bedding place will naturally find its way into any stream of
water used by the inhabitants of the city for domestic purposes.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 8.28.010 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
5-6-2: INTERFERING WITH WATER FLOW
Every person who in any way interferes with or alters the flow of water in any stream, ditch or lateral
while under the control or management of any water commissioner is guilty of a class B misdemeanor
and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in CCNO 1-4-1.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 8.28.020 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
5-6-3: TAKING WATER OUT OF TURN OR EXCESSIVE AMOUNTS
Every person who, in violation of any right of any other person, wilfully turns or uses the water, or any
part thereof, of any canal, ditch, pipeline or reservoir, except at a time when the use of the water has
been duly distributed to the person, or wilfully uses any greater quantity of the water than has been duly
distributed to him, or in any way changes the flow of water when lawfully distributed for irrigation or other
useful purposes, except when duly authorized to make the change, or wilfully and maliciously breaks or
injures any dam, canal, pipeline, watergate, ditch or other means of diverting or conveying water for
irrigation or other useful purposes, is guilty of a class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to
penalty as provided in CCNO 1-4-1.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 8.28.030 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
5-6-4: OBSTRUCTION OF WATERGATES
Every person who rafts or floats logs, timber or wood down any river or stream and allows the logs,
timber or wood to accumulate at or obstruct the watergates owned by any person or irrigation company
taking or diverting the water of the river or stream for irrigation or manufacturing purposes is guilty of a
class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in CCNO 1-4-1.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 8.28.040 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
5-7: PROTECTIVE GROUND COVER
5-7-1: INSTALLED
5-7-2: MAINTENANCE
5-7-3: ALTERNATIVES
5-7-4: BOND
5-7-5: ENFORCEMENT
5-7-6 Penalty
5-7-1: INSTALLED
A. In order to obviate the nuisance described in CCNO 5-2-1 relating to weeds and other noxious
growth, "protective ground cover", as defined in CCNO 8-5-3, shall be installed on the front and
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=5:_HEALTH_AND_SANITATION 10/14
side yards of every lot, including the right-of-ways adjacent thereto, not containing pavement,
sidewalks, or other similar materials, within eighteen (18) months after the issuance of an
occupancy permit. All back yards of every residential lot shall be covered by protective ground
cover within two and one-half (2½) years from the date of the issuance of an occupancy permit.
B. Where an occupancy permit has been issued prior to the effective date hereof, "protective
ground cover", as defined in CCNO 8-5-3, shall be installed on or before August 31, 1994, on all
portions of every residential lot, including the parking strip, not containing pavement, sidewalks or
other similar type materials.
C. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the planting, installation or maintenance of a flower or
vegetable garden, orchard, pasture, playground or other open space not prohibited by ordinance.
No vegetable garden shall be planted or maintained in the parking strip.
D. Violation of any subsection of this section shall be considered a class B misdemeanor.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-11 on 10/12/2010
Amended by Ord. 2014-08 on 4/22/2014
Amended by Ord. 2015-22 on 9/1/2015
5-7-2: MAINTENANCE
The owner of property upon which protective ground cover has been installed under CCNO 5-7-1 shall
cause the protective ground cover to be adequately maintained, including within the right-of-ways
adjacent thereto, and in that connection shall observe the following minimum standards:
A. With respect to living protective ground cover, provide sufficient water and care to the protective
ground cover which will ensure that the ground cover does not die and maintains the color or hue
it would achieve if the proper quantity of water was applied to the protective ground cover;
provided, however, that in the event the mayor, pursuant to Utah Code § 10-7-12, declares by
proclamation that a scarcity of water should limit the use of water for all purposes other than
specified domestic uses, the provisions of this subsection will be suspended during the term
covered by such proclamation.
B. If the protective ground cover is grass or similar turf, periodically mow or cut the turf so as not to
exceed a height of more than six inches (6").
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 15-93 § 2, 1993 on 1/1/1993
Amended by Ord. 2015-22 on 9/1/2015
5-7-3: ALTERNATIVES
Protective ground cover not authorized for planting may not be installed unless approved by a city official
designated for that purpose. All appeals from the decision of said official shall be to the administrative
hearing officer in accordance with CCNO 11-4-4. In no event, however, shall an alternative protective
ground cover be approved by the designated official which: a) fails to maintain storm runoff detention
capabilities of the area to be landscaped to substantially the same degree that would be accomplished if
authorized protective ground cover were installed; or b) which is injurious to the health, safety, welfare
(including aesthetics), and property values of the surrounding residences.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2011-11 on 5/24/2011
Amended by Ord. 2015-22 on 9/1/2015
5-7-4: BOND
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=5:_HEALTH_AND_SANITATION 11/14
If, in the opinion of city officials, weather, scarcity of water, or other circumstance does not permit the
installation of protective ground cover within the time periods described in CCNO 5-7-1, a cash bond in
the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00), to guarantee the completion of the installation of protective
ground cover, shall be provided to the city before the expiration of the required time period in question.
In such case, the city shall specify, in writing, the date upon which installation of protective ground cover
shall be completed.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 15-93 § 2, 1993 on 1/1/1993
5-7-5: ENFORCEMENT
This Title shall be enforced according to the procedures outlined in CCNO 1-9 or any other relevant
municipal or state code. This code in no way limits any remedy available to North Ogden City
authorized under any local, state, or federal rule, regulation, code, or other provision.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 15-93 § 2, 1993 on 1/1/1993
Amended by Ord. 2015-22 on 9/1/2015
5-7-6 Penalty
Any person who violates this chapter or any provision thereof shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor,
subject to penalty as provided in CCNO 1-4-1 and may also be charged under Utah Code § 26-23-3.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2015-22 on 9/1/2015
5-8: VACANT AND DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
5-8-1: APPLICABILITY
5-8-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT
5-8-3: DEFINITIONS
5-8-4: REGISTRATION OF VACANT BUILDINGS REQUIRED
5-8-5: SECURING AND MAINTENANCE OF VACANT BUILDINGS
5-8-6: DISCONNECTION OF WATER AND GAS
5-8-7: ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
5-8-8: FAILURE TO MAINTAIN
5-8-9: PENALTY
5-8-1: APPLICABILITY
This article shall apply to all vacant buildings or structures within the city now existing or hereafter
becoming vacant.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2016-21 on 7/19/2016
5-8-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT
It is the purpose and intent of this article to protect the public health, safety, and welfare by establishing
a registration process for vacant buildings and requiring responsible parties to implement a vacant
building plan for such buildings to remedy any public nuisance, prevent deterioration, unsightly blight
and consequent adverse impact on the value of nearby property, and to establish minimum maintenance
standards for vacant buildings. To such ends, it is the specific purpose and intent of this article:
A. To minimize the period of time a building is boarded;
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=5:_HEALTH_AND_SANITATION 12/14
B. To provide alternative procedures for the abatement of dangerous buildings, which, if adequately
secured and maintained against entry in accordance with the requirements of this article, will not
constitute an immediate danger to the life, limb, health, property or safety of the public;
C. To prevent vacant buildings from becoming a public nuisance; and
D. To improve the aesthetic appearance of vacant buildings, in order to protect surrounding
properties
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2016-21 on 7/19/2016
5-8-3: DEFINITIONS
BOARDED BUILDING: A building in which all or some of the utilities have been disconnected and all
windows and doors are boarded against entry at the ground and second level (if a second level exists).
Entry doors may be locked or boarded and windows adjacent to entry doors are boarded against entry.
BOARDING/BOARD: The secured covering of openings to a building or structure to prevent entrance
pursuant to the provisions and standards of this article due to the nonoccupancy of the building or
structure.
CLOSED TO OCCUPANCY: A building in which no person may eat, sleep, live or otherwise reside or
occupy the building or any portion thereof. Buildings closed to occupancy may only be entered by the
owner, owner's agent or other authorized persons to do repair work.
DANGEROUS BUILDING: any building or structure deemed to be dangerous under the provisions of the
Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings (1997). Specifically, any building which
because of inadequate maintenance, deterioration, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or
arrangement, chemical residues, inadequate light, air, or sanitation facilities, or otherwise, is determined
by the health department, building officials, fire marshal, or code enforcement official to be unsafe for
habitation or use.
EMERGENCY CONDITIONS: One or more conditions which exist in a building or on a property that
create a likelihood of imminent danger to life or safety if anyone were to enter or occupy the property or
building.
UNBOARDED/UNSECURED BUILDING: A building whose window(s) and/or door(s) are missing or
broken and other openings are not secured against unauthorized persons entering the building.
VACANT/SECURED BUILDING: A building having utility meters that may be locked off but the meters
and service lines are in place. All windows are secured and glazed and the doors are secured by means
of a lock.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2016-21 on 7/19/2016
5-8-4: REGISTRATION OF VACANT BUILDINGS REQUIRED
A. A building which has been vacant for more than six (6) months is required to be registered with
the code enforcement office of North Ogden City.
1. The registration shall include the owner’s name, address, email, and phone number.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2016-21 on 7/19/2016
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=5:_HEALTH_AND_SANITATION 13/14
5-8-5: SECURING AND MAINTENANCE OF VACANT BUILDINGS
A. Vacant buildings shall be maintained with appropriate exterior coverings and treatments to
prevent excessive weathering, decay, damage, or deterioration.
1. Paint, stains, and other treatments shall not be allowed to deteriorate such that any wood
or metal be unprotected and exposed to the weather, unless originally designed to
weather naturally.
2. Any signs, or items attached to the exterior of the building shall be removed, or properly
secured and maintained to prevent a dilapidated appearance.
B. Vacant buildings shall be secured against entry from anyone who has not been expressly given
access.
1. All broken windows and doors which face public streets shall be replaced with new
windows and doors, and shall not be secured by boarding. Plexi-glass, acrylic sheets, or
other transparent items may be used in place of glass provided they are of sufficient
thickness and properly secured to the building to prevent entry.
2. Broken windows and doors which do not face public streets may be boarded up and
secured with screws or nails every 6 inches.
C. Vacant Buildings which are Closed to Occupancy by the health department, building department,
fire marshal, or code enforcement officials shall not be occupied until a proper inspection has
been undertaken by the building department.
D. Vacant Buildings shall not be allowed to deteriorate and become Dangerous Building.
1. All regular maintenance of protective ground cover, and other vegetation must continue
despite the vacant nature of the home.
2. All roofing and exterior surfaces shall be replaced when worn or damaged.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2016-21 on 7/19/2016
5-8-6: DISCONNECTION OF WATER AND GAS
A. Buildings and structures which remain vacant for longer than two (2) years shall disconnect or
lockout the water and gas services to prevent damage to the property and adjoining properties,
or wasting of resources in the event of a leak at the vacant property. Electricity may remain
connected for security purposes.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2016-21 on 7/19/2016
5-8-7: ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
A. All buildings or portions thereof which are determined after inspection by the building official to be
dangerous as defined in this code are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be
abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal.
B. When the building official has inspected or caused to be inspected any building and has found
and determined that such building is dangerous building, the building official shall commence
proceedings to cause the repair, rehabilitation, or demolition of the building.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=5:_HEALTH_AND_SANITATION 14/14
C. Notice and Order. The building official shall issue a notice and order directed to the record owner
of the building in accordance with CCNO 1-9.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2016-21 on 7/19/2016
5-8-8: FAILURE TO MAINTAIN
A. Notice; Action By City: If the building official determines that a vacant building is not being
maintained in accordance with CCNO 5-8-5, either in whole or in part, the building official shall
send a notice to the owner or the owner's agent by first class mail, prepaid, requiring compliance
with the building maintenance standards within ten (10) days. If the maintenance work is not
performed within the required time, the building official may cause the maintenance work to be
done by city personnel or by a contractor hired by the city. Such notice may occur whether or not
the vacant building is registered with the City, and may be sent in conjunction with a notice to
register the building as a vacant building under CCNO 5-8-4.
B. Charges To Property Owner: If the building official causes maintenance work to be done
pursuant to subsection A of this section:
1. The city shall charge the property owner:
a. An administrative fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) to partially recover the
city's costs in administering or contracting for the maintenance of the building
and/or premises; and
b. The actual costs of maintaining the building and/or the premises.
2. The costs shall be collected as provided under CCNO 1-4 and CCNO 1-9.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2016-21 on 7/19/2016
5-8-9: PENALTY
A. Any person who violates this chapter or any provision thereof shall be guilty of a class B
misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in CCNO 1-4-1 and may also be charged under
Utah Code § 26-23-3. Each day shall be a separate violation.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2016-21 on 7/19/2016
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=6:_PUBLIC_SAFETY 1/53
6: PUBLIC SAFETY
6-1: ANIMAL CONTROL
6-2: OFFENSES
6-1: ANIMAL CONTROL
6-1-1: DEFINITIONS
6-1-2: ADMINISTRATION
6-1-3: ANIMAL LICENSING AND PERMITS
6-1-4: RESTRAINT, ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE, AND IMPOUNDMENT
6-1-5: RABID ANIMALS AND ANIMAL BITES
6-1-6: DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS ANIMALS
6-1-7: NUISANCE ANIMALS AND ABATEMENT
6-1-8: CRUELTY TO AND MISTREATMENT OF ANIMALS
6-1-9: SALE OF ANIMALS
6-1-10: PROHIBITED ACTS AND ACTIVITIES
6-1-11: WILD ANIMALS
6-1-12: VIOLATIONS
6-1-1: DEFINITIONS
When used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings regardless of whether
the term is capitalized unless the context clearly indicates that the term should have another meaning:
ACTIVE POLICE SERVICE DOG: A dog trained and actively in service with a licensed police officer to
aid the police, including, but not limited to, tracking criminals, detecting controlled substances and
detecting explosive devices.
ANIMAL: Any living being which has the power of voluntary movement except human beings.
ANIMAL BOARDING ESTABLISHMENT: Any facility or establishment which temporarily takes in
animals for the benefit of any person.
ANIMAL GROOMING PARLOR: Any establishment maintained for the purpose of offering
cosmetological services for animals for profit.
ANIMAL SHELTER: A facility owned and/or operated by a governmental entity or any humane society
which is incorporated or registered as a foreign corporation within the state of Utah and which keeps and
cares for seized, stray, homeless, quarantined, abandoned or unwanted animals.
AT LARGE: Refers to an animal which is on or off the premises of its owner not under the control of the
owner or his agent by leash, cord, chain or other means of physical restraint which is reasonable for the
specific animal.
ATTACK:
A. An animal's attempt to bite a human being or another animal,
B. Any other action committed by an animal which places a human being or another animal in
danger of imminent bodily injury, or
C. An attempt by an animal to place a human being or another animal in danger of imminent bodily
injury.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=6:_PUBLIC_SAFETY 2/53
BITE: An actual puncture, tear, or abrasion of the skin inflicted by the teeth of an animal.
CAT: Any type of feline which is typically domesticated, regardless of age.
COMMERCIAL ANIMAL: Any animal including, but not limited to, dog, cat, rodent, fish, or bird kept for
sale by a pet store or other permitted use in a commercial zone.
DANGEROUS ANIMAL:
A. Any animal which is of a wild or predatory nature,
B. Any animal which is an unreasonable danger to human life, health or property if not kept,
maintained or confined in a safe and secure manner. An animal may be classified as a wild or
dangerous animal under this subsection based on the animal's size, growth propensity, vicious
nature or other characteristics,
C. Any animal which, as a result of its natural or wild condition, cannot be vaccinated effectively for
rabies,
D. Alligators and crocodiles,
E. Bears,
F. Any member of the feline family except common domestic cats,
G. Any member of the canine family except common domestic dogs,
H. Porcupines,
I. All subhuman primates,
J. Raccoons,
K. Skunks,
L. Venomous fish and piranha,
M. Venomous snakes and lizards,
N. Bats,
O. Snakes, venomous or not, and
P. Weasels.
DOG: Any Canis familiaris which is over six (6) months of age. Any Canis familiaris under three (3)
months of age is a puppy.
DOG BREEDER: A person who breeds purebred dogs, either for profit, as a hobby or for any other
reason and who sells, barters or gives away the puppies in the litter(s).
DOMESTICATED ANIMALS: Animals accustomed to living with or around human beings and may
include animals kept for benefit or enjoyment.
Domesticated animals may include, but are not restricted to:
A. Horses,
B. Cattle,
C. Goats,
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=6:_PUBLIC_SAFETY 3/53
D. Chickens,
E. Geese,
F. Ducks,
G. Peacocks,
H. Sheep,
I. Minks, and
J. Ferrets.
K. Dogs, cats, fish and birds are domesticated animals if they are kept for benefit or enjoyment.
ENCLOSURE: A fence or structure of at least six feet (6') in height, forming or causing an enclosure
suitable to confine an animal in conjunction with other measures which may be taken by the owner or
keeper such as tethering of the animal.
EXOTIC ANIMALS: Any animals which:
A. Are not normally kept as household pets or domesticated animals; and
B. Are not native to North America.
FERAL: Any untamed animal, wild, not domesticated or cultivated. Having escaped domestication and
become wild.
GUARD DOG: A working dog used to guard any property or premises.
HOLDING FACILITY: Any pet shop, kennel, grooming parlor, riding school, stable, animal shelter,
veterinary hospital, humane establishment or other facility which holds animals.
HOUSEHOLD PETS: Animals which are usually kept as pets and which are kept in residential areas
solely for personal pleasure. Household pets shall not include: horses, swine of any kind, cattle, goats,
fowl, dangerous animals as defined herein and wild animals as defined herein. Animals that are usually
kept as household pets are domesticated animals if they are kept for benefit or enjoyment. Household
pets include:
A. Dogs,
B. Cats,
C. Fish,
D. Gerbils,
E. Hamsters,
F. Rabbits,
G. Guinea pigs,
H. Nonpoisonous snakes,
I. Turtles less than one foot (1') long,
J. Nonpoisonous lizards less than one foot (1') long,
K. Parrots,
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=6:_PUBLIC_SAFETY 4/53
L. Parakeets,
M. Budgerigars,
N. Ferrets,
O. Hedgehogs,
P. Mice, and
Q. Rats.
HUMANE SOCIETY: A society (such as the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals) whose
purpose is to protect animals, provide for the welfare of animals, provide shelters for animals and/or
prevent abuse of or cruelty to animals.
IMPOUNDED: Taken into custody of the police department or animal control authorities.
KENNEL: Any property upon which two (2) or more dogs over six (6) months of age are kept.
LEASH: Any chain, rope or other device used to restrain an animal. In order to qualify as a leash, the
chain, rope or other device:
A. Must actually be capable of restraining the animal;
B. Must not harm the animal; and
C. Must not exceed fifteen feet (15') in length or be less than four feet (4') in length.
LITTER ANIMAL: An animal, which is part of a litter born to a household pet in a residential zone.
NUISANCE ANIMAL: Any animal which:
A. Causes any damage to the property of anyone other than its owner;
B. Is a vicious dog or "vicious animal" as defined herein and kept contrary to CCNO 6-1-6;
C. Is a "dangerous animal" (as defined herein), which is kept by any person other than a publicly
licensed and supervised zoo or zoological garden, a duly authorized and licensed circus or
educational institution;
D. Causes unreasonable fouling of the air by odors;
E. Causes unsanitary conditions in enclosures or surroundings;
F. Defecates on any public sidewalk, park, building, or private property without the consent of the
owner of such private property unless the person owning, having a proprietary interest in, or
having care, charge, control or custody of such animal shall remove any such defecation to a
proper trash receptacle;
G. Barks, whines, howls or makes other disturbing noises in an excessive, continuous, or untimely
or unreasonable manner, which disturbs any person or neighborhood;
H. Molests passersby or chases passing vehicles, including automobiles, trucks, bicycles, scooters
or other motorized or unmotorized vehicles;
I. Attacks other animals;
J. Is determined by the animal control officer to be a public nuisance by virtue of being offensive or
dangerous to public health, welfare or safety; or
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=6:_PUBLIC_SAFETY 5/53
K. By virtue of the number maintained are determined to be offensive or dangerous to the public
health, welfare, or safety.
OWNER: The person who owns an animal or any person having care, charge, custody or control of the
animal.
PERSON: A natural person or any legal entity, including, but not limited to, corporations, firms, limited
liability companies, partnerships or trusts.
PET SHOP: Any establishment where dogs, cats, birds or other commercial animals are for sale as pets.
PROVOKED OR PROVOCATION: Any deliberate act by a person towards any animal done with intent
to tease, torment, abuse, assault or otherwise cause a reaction from the animal, provided that any act
done with the intent to prevent or discourage an animal from attacking a human being or other animal
shall not be considered provocation.
QUARANTINE: The isolation of an animal in an enclosure so that the animal is unable to contact other
animals or unauthorized persons, provided that the methods used to prevent that contact may not harm
the animal.
RIDING SCHOOL OR STABLE: Any establishment which offers boarding and/or riding instruction for
any horse, pony, donkey, mule, burrow or other equine animal or which offers such animals for hire.
SERVICE ANIMAL: Any guide dog, signal dog, or other animal individually trained to provide assistance
to an individual with a disability. Although licensing as a service animal is not required, the possession of
a bona fide license as a service animal issued by an accredited licensing agency provides prima facie
evidence that an animal is a service animal unless otherwise determined by the available evidence.
SERVICE ANIMAL IN TRAINING: Any animal undergoing a bona fide training program under the
direction of a qualified trainer with the intent to qualify such animal as a service animal under the
Americans with disabilities act.
STRAY: Any animal which is "at large" as defined herein.
THERAPY ANIMAL: Any dog trained and qualified to work with a healthcare professional as part of a
treatment plan. Although licensing of such dog as a recognized therapy dog is not required, the
possession of a bona fide license as a therapy dog unless otherwise determined by the preponderance
of the available evidence. Note that therapy dogs have no particular protection under the ADA. Therapy
dog owners who wish to take a therapy animal to a facility like a hospital or nursing home, must first
seek out and receive the permission of administrators at the facility they wish to visit.
THERAPY ANIMAL IN TRAINING: Any dog undergoing a bona fide therapy training program under the
direction of a qualified trainer with the intent to qualify such animal as a therapy dog.
VICIOUS ANIMAL: Any animal which:
A. Is dangerously aggressive,
B. Approaches any person in a vicious or terrorizing manner upon the streets, sidewalks, or other
public grounds or places,
C. Has a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack, cause injury to, or otherwise
endanger the safety of persons or other animals,
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=6:_PUBLIC_SAFETY 6/53
D. Has a disposition to mischief which might reasonably lead to attacks on humans or other animals
without provocation, or
E. Any animal which has, without provocation, bitten or in any other manner attacked or
endangered the safety of persons, other animals or property shall be considered a vicious
animal.
WILD ANIMAL: Any animal (except for dangerous animals) which:
A. Is native to the North Ogden area,
B. Exists in North Ogden in a state of nature, and
C. Has no owner.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2007-1 on 1/9/2007
Amended by Ord. 2009-02 on 2/24/2009
Amended by Ord. 2013-12 on 8/27/2013
6-1-2: ADMINISTRATION
A. Animal Control Supervisor And Animal Control Officers:
1. The office of animal control supervisor is hereby created. The chief of police is appointed
to be the city's animal control supervisor until another person is appointed to the position
by resolution of the city council. The chief of police, with the consent of the city council,
may designate an officer to act as the city's animal control supervisor.
2. The animal control supervisor may appoint such other animal control officers as he shall
deem necessary and for which the city council has allocated funding.
3. Animal control officers shall be considered employees of the police department.
4. Each animal control officer shall:
a. Be either:
i. A law enforcement officer as defined in Utah Code §§ 53-13-102 and 53-
13-103,
ii. A special function officer as defined in Utah Code §§ 53-13-102 and 53-13-
105, or
iii. Certifiable as a law enforcement officer or special function officer within
twelve (12) months of accepting a position as an animal control officer,
b. Take an oath of office,
c. Have authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter,
d. Be primarily engaged in the enforcement of this chapter and/or state laws relating
to the control of animals.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=6:_PUBLIC_SAFETY 7/53
5. The animal control supervisor, animal control officer or police officer shall have authority
to apprehend and impound any animal found in violation of this chapter, including:
a. Animals for which a license is required which are found without a license, and
b. Animals which are at large.
6. In enforcing this chapter, the animal control supervisor, animal control officers and other
peace officers are authorized to enter into the open premises of any person to take
possession of any animal involved in the violation of this chapter. Nothing in this
subsection, however, shall:
a. Dispense with the need for an arrest or search warrant which would otherwise be
required, or
b. Prevent an animal control officer from pursuing an animal into closed premises
when the pursuit has been continuous and the officer has reasonable cause to
believe the animal was off the premises in violation of this chapter.
7. Police officers may also enforce the provisions of this chapter.
B. Duties Of Animal Control Supervisor And Animal Control Officers:
1. The animal control supervisor shall:
a. Enforce the terms of this chapter and perform other responsibilities assigned to
him by the mayor,
b. Keep adequate records of all animals impounded and all monies collected,
c. See that all animals and holding facilities in the city are licensed, controlled and
permitted in accordance with any applicable ordinances, regulations and/or laws
and that all holding facilities are reasonably maintained and cleaned,
d. Establish, in cooperation with other cities, governmental agencies, humane
organizations or others, adequate measures for rabies vaccination and control.
2. The animal control supervisor may delegate any of the duties described in this subsection
to a responsible animal control officer.
3. Each animal control officer shall:
a. Enforce this section in all respects pertaining to animal control within the city,
including the care and impounding of animals and prevention of cruelty to animals.
b. Carry out all duties prescribed in this chapter or delegated to the officer by the
animal control supervisor or the mayor.
C. Animal Shelter:
1. The city shall provide suitable premises and facilities for the keeping of impounded
animals. The city council may designate any animal shelter maintained by another
governmental agency or humane organization as the city's official shelter.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=6:_PUBLIC_SAFETY 8/53
D. Interference With Officer Prohibited:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with the animal control supervisor, any
animal control officer or any other peace officer in the discharge of the duties imposed
upon him by this chapter.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to take any animal out of the custody of the animal
control supervisor, any animal control officer, or any other peace officer by stealth, fraud
or force.
3. A violation of this subsection shall be a class B misdemeanor.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2007-1 on 1/9/2007
6-1-3: ANIMAL LICENSING AND PERMITS
A. License Required:
1. All dogs over six (6) months of age that reside in the city must be licensed each year. This
includes dogs residing in the city that are being kept or used as therapy or service
animals and active police service dogs as defined in CCNO 6-1-1.
2. All animal licenses issued by the city shall expire on December 31 of each year.
3. All new dogs within the city limits must be licensed.
4. Violation of this subsection A shall be a class C misdemeanor.
B. Fees:
1. The city shall issue animal licenses upon payment of the fees established by the city
council by resolution.
2. Whenever a dog owner moves into the city or a person obtains a dog which will reside in
the city the owner will be required to license the dog according to the following. If the dog
is licensed between January 1 and June 30 a full year fee will be charged. For dogs
licensed between July 1 and December 31 a half year fee will be charged. Half year fees
apply only to new dogs.
3. The city will allow a reduction in animal license fees for dogs which have been spayed,
neutered and microchipped, provided that the credit will not be granted unless the owner
of the animal presents a certificate from a veterinarian certifying that the dog has been
spayed, neutered or microchipped or other proof acceptable to the city. The city council
shall set the amount of the discounts by resolution.
4. All license fees shall be paid at the city offices or another place approved by the city's
finance director.
5. No refunds of license fees shall be made for any reason, unless they are approved by the
animal control officer.
6. Owners who fail to license their dogs by March 1 of each year shall be subject to a late
fee. The amount of the late fee shall be set by resolution of the city council.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=6:_PUBLIC_SAFETY 9/53
C. Application For License:
1. Before obtaining a license for an animal, the owner of the animal shall complete an
application for license. The application shall be submitted on forms prepared by the city
and shall contain:
a. The name, address and telephone number of the owner,
b. The number of dogs residing at that address,
c. The name, breed, color and sex of each dog residing at that address,
d. Whether the dog has been spayed, neutered and/or microchipped, and
e. Rabies vaccination expiration date.
2. The applicant shall supply proof that the animal to be licensed has up to date rabies
vaccinations.
3. The applicant shall present proof of his or her identity and age at the time he or she
submits the application to the city.
4. The city shall not issue animal licenses to persons younger than eighteen (18) years of
age, unless that person is an emancipated minor.
D. Tags:
1. Upon payment of the license fee and any other fees or assessments, the city shall issue a
license tag to the owner of the animal.
2. Every owner shall provide each of his or her dogs with a collar to which the tag may be
affixed and shall ensure that the dog constantly wears the collar and the tag.
3. If an owner loses the license tag, the city will issue a replacement tag as follows:
a. The owner shall certify that the tag was lost,
b. The owner shall present a receipt showing that he or she paid the license fee for
that year, and
c. The owner shall pay a replacement tag fee set by resolution of the city council.
4. Animal license tags are not transferable from one animal to another.
E. Tag Removal Or Transfer Prohibited:
1. It shall be unlawful to deprive a licensed dog of its collar and tag. It shall also be unlawful
to place a license tag on an unlicensed dog. Violation of this subsection shall be an
infraction.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=6:_PUBLIC_SAFETY 10/53
F. Prohibited Acts: The following actions are prohibited:
1. Keeping any animal other than a household pet (as defined in CCNO 6-1-1) within the
residential areas of the city unless such animal is a qualifying service, therapy dog or
"active police service dog" as defined in CCNO 6-1-1 and obtains and possesses an
appropriate permit and business license as described hereunder:
a. A permit as described in subsection L, "Other Animal Related Businesses
Including Service Dog And Therapy Dog Related Businesses", of this section; and
b. A business license as described in CCNO 4-1.
c. Recognized therapy animal related businesses are limited to use of therapy dogs
and may only be kept and/or operated by a professional person who is currently
and properly licensed by the Utah division of occupational and professional
licensing as a clinical social worker, psychiatrist, medical doctor, marriage and
family therapist, physician's assistant, or nurse practitioner. Proof of such current
licensing shall be required at the time of application for a permit and for any permit
renewal under this subsection.
d. Keeping of therapy dogs or therapy dogs in training or operation of a therapy
animal related business by any persons who do not meet the above stated
professional licensing requirements shall be strictly governed by other animal
ordinances contained in this code as they apply generally to animal owners
including limits on animal ownership numbers.
2. Keeping "domesticated animals" (as defined in CCNO 6-1-1) outside of the RE-20 and R-
1-8(AG) zones of the city.
3. Keeping any dangerous animal in the city, except as permitted in subsection I of this
section or CCNO 6-1-6A.
4. Capturing any "wild animal" (as defined in CCNO 6-1-1) in the city, except that residents
may trap wild animals that have become a nuisance under the supervision of an animal
control officer.
5. Keeping swine (including potbellied pigs) at any location in the city.
6. Keeping any "wild animal" (as defined in CCNO 6-1-1) in the city.
7. Operating an animal boarding establishment without first obtaining:
a. An animal board permit as described in subsection G of this section; and
b. A business license as described in CCNO 4-1.
8. Keeping, care for, ownership, or possession of three (3) or more dogs over six (6) months
of age in the city without a kennel permit as described in subsection H of this section
unless otherwise authorized under the exceptions described in subsection F14 or M of
this section. Furthermore, it is unlawful at any household address for any person or
persons to keep or possess a total of five (5) or more dogs over six (6) months of age
including any combination of pets (limited to 2 pets per household address), any licensed
therapy dogs and active police service dogs. In the event any person or persons at any
household address owns, possesses or keeps any dogs as pets, such pet dogs shall
count when calculating the total number of dogs (pet dogs, therapy dogs and active police
service dogs) that may be permitted at any household or address.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=6:_PUBLIC_SAFETY 11/53
9. Operating a pet shop without first obtaining:
a. A pet shop permit as described in subsection I of this section; and
b. A business license as described in CCNO 4-1.
10. Operating an animal grooming parlor without first obtaining:
a. An animal grooming parlor permit as described in subsection J of this section; and
b. A business license as described in CCNO 4-1.
11. Operating a riding school or stable without first obtaining:
a. A riding school or stable permit as described in subsection K of this section; and
b. A business license as described in CCNO 4-1.
12. Breeding dogs in a residential area without first obtaining:
a. A dog breeder permit as described in subsection L of this section; and
b. A business license as described in CCNO 4-1 if the dogs will be sold for a profit.
13. Operating any other animal related business without obtaining:
a. A permit as described in subsection L of this section; and
b. A business license as described in CCNO 4-1.
14. Keeping, care for, ownership, or possession of a combined total of five (5) or more
therapy dogs or therapy dogs in training and dogs kept, cared for, owned or possessed as
pets, over six (6) months of age in any zone in the city without a kennel permit as
described in subsection H of this section.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=6:_PUBLIC_SAFETY 12/53
G. Animal Boarding Establishments:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain an animal boarding
establishment unless the person first obtains a regulatory permit from the North Ogden
building and zoning department in addition to all other required licenses. The application
shall include:
a. The name, address and phone number of the person applying for the permit;
b. The address of the location where the business will be operated;
c. The kinds of animals which the person anticipates boarding;
d. The maximum number of each kind of animal which the boarding establishment
will be able to house at any one time;
e. A copy of the building or site plans for the animal boarding establishment;
f. The number of employees the boarding establishment anticipates having.
2. All applications for permits to operate animal boarding establishments shall be submitted
with the required permit fee, on a printed form provided by the North Ogden building and
zoning department.
3. The city council shall review all applications for permits for animal boarding
establishments and shall grant the permit if it finds:
a. The animal boarding establishment is an appropriate use in the area proposed for
the use;
b. The facilities (including the number of employees and sanitary facilities) proposed
for the animal boarding establishment are sufficient for the number of animals the
person is proposing to board;
c. The animal boarding establishment is unlikely to become a nuisance.
4. In granting a permit for an animal boarding establishment, the city council may attach
conditions to the permit regarding the types of animals which may be boarded at the
establishment, the maximum number of animals which may be boarded at any one time
and other conditions which the council believes are appropriate for the operation of the
particular business.
5. The city shall have the authority to suspend or revoke the license of any operator of an
animal boarding establishment that is operating in violation of its permit, that is
mistreating animals, that has failed to provide adequate facilities for the animals in its
care, which has become a nuisance or for other good cause.
6. A permit issued under this section may be used only by the person to whom the permit is
issued and for the premises for which the permit is issued. If the animal boarding facility is
transferred to another owner, the new owner must apply for a new permit. If the permit
holder desires to move the animal boarding facility to a new location, the permit holder
must obtain a new permit for the new location.
7. Permits issued under this subsection G are good for one year and the permit holder shall
file a new application each year. The city council need not consider renewal applications
unless the permit holder has significantly changed his operations.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=6:_PUBLIC_SAFETY 13/53
8. Nothing in this subsection G shall relieve the operator of an animal boarding
establishment from the obligation to comply with all business license laws, zoning
ordinances, health regulations or other applicable laws, statutes, ordinances, rules or
regulations.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=6:_PUBLIC_SAFETY 14/53
H. Kennels:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain a kennel unless the person first
obtains a regulatory permit from the North Ogden building and zoning department, all
other required licenses and a conditional use permit as described in the city's zoning
ordinance.
2. The application for a kennel permit from the North Ogden building and zoning department
shall include:
a. The name, address and phone number of the person applying for the permit;
b. The address of the location where the business will be operated;
c. The services (training, boarding and/or letting for hire) which the kennel will offer
to its customers;
d. The kennel's proposed hours of operation;
e. If the kennel will offer boarding services:
i. The maximum number of dogs the kennel will board at any one time; and
ii. A plan of the facilities which the kennel will use to board the dogs, which
must include a separate cage of reasonable size for each dog and a
covered shelter for each dog;
f. If the kennel will offer training services:
i. A description of all training services the kennel will offer (such as basic
obedience training, attack training, or training for certified aid animals);
ii. The maximum number of people and dogs who will be allowed in each
class; and
iii. A plan of the facility that the operator will use for training classes.
3. All applications for permits to operate kennels shall be submitted with the required permit
fee, on a printed form provided by the North Ogden building and zoning department.
4. The city council will review applications to operate a kennel within the city and shall
approve the application if it finds that:
a. The kennel is an appropriate use in the proposed location;
b. The kennel's facilities are adequate for the proposed operations; and
c. The kennel is unlikely to become a nuisance.
5. In granting a permit to operate a kennel, the city council may set conditions regarding:
a. The kennel's proposed hours of operation;
b. If the kennel will offer boarding services, the maximum number of dogs the kennel
may board at any one time; and
c. If the kennel will offer training services, the maximum number of people and dogs
who will be allowed in each class.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=6:_PUBLIC_SAFETY 15/53
6. The city council may suspend or revoke the license of any kennel operator for failing to
operate the kennel in compliance with the conditions in the permit, if the kennel becomes
a nuisance or for other good cause.
7. A permit issued under this subsection H may be used only by the person to whom the
permit is issued and for the premises for which the permit is issued. If the kennel is
transferred to another owner, the new owner must apply for a new permit. If the permit
holder desires to move the kennel to a new location, the permit holder must obtain a new
permit for the new location.
8. Permits issued under this subsection H are good for one year and the permit holder shall
file a new application each year. The city council need not consider renewal applications
unless the permit holder has significantly changed his operations.
9. Nothing in this subsection H shall relieve the operator of a kennel from the obligation to
comply with all business license laws, zoning ordinances, health regulations or other
applicable laws, statutes, ordinances, rules or regulations.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=6:_PUBLIC_SAFETY 16/53
I. Pet Shops:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain a pet shop unless the person
first obtains a regulatory permit from the North Ogden building and zoning department, in
addition to all other required licenses. The application shall include:
a. The name, address and phone number of the person applying for the permit;
b. The address of the location where the business will be operated;
c. The kinds of animals which will be sold, including the number of animals of each
type that the operator anticipates having in the store at any one time;
d. The hours of operation of the pet shop;
e. A description of the kinds of commercial animals which will be sold at the pet
shop; and
f. A plan of the pet shop, including plans for complying with all health and sanitary
requirements.
2. All applications for permits to operate pet shops shall be submitted with the required
permit fee, on a printed form provided by the North Ogden building and zoning
department.
3. The city council shall review all applications for pet shop permits and shall grant the
permit if it finds that:
a. The pet shop is an appropriate use in the location proposed;
b. The facilities are adequate for the proposed pet shop;
c. The pet shop is unlikely to become a nuisance.
4. In granting a permit to operate a pet shop, the city council may set conditions regarding:
a. The pet shop's proposed hours of operation;
b. The number of each type of animal which the pet shop may have at any given
time;
c. The kinds of commercial animals which may be sold in the pet shop; and
d. The facilities to be used to ensure that the pet shop does not become a health
hazard.
5. The city council may suspend or revoke the license of any pet shop operator for failing to
operate the pet shop in compliance with the conditions in the permit, if the pet shop
becomes a nuisance, if the pet shop becomes a health hazard, or for other good cause.
6. A permit issued under this subsection I may be used only by the person to whom the
permit is issued and for the premises for which the permit is issued. If the pet shop is
transferred to another owner, the new owner must apply for a new permit. If the permit
holder desires to move the pet shop to a new location, the permit holder must obtain a
new permit for the new location.
7. Permits issued under this subsection I are good for one year and the permit holder shall
file a new application each year. The city council need not consider renewal applications
unless the permit holder has significantly changed his operations.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=6:_PUBLIC_SAFETY 17/53
8. Nothing in this subsection I shall relieve the operator of a pet shop from the obligation to
comply with all business license laws, zoning ordinances, health regulations or other
applicable laws, statutes, ordinances, rules or regulations.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=6:_PUBLIC_SAFETY 18/53
J. Animal Grooming Parlors:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain an animal grooming parlor
unless the person first obtains a regulatory permit from the North Ogden building and
zoning department, in addition to all other required licenses. The application shall include:
a. The name, address and phone number of the person applying for the permit;
b. The address of the location where the business will be operated;
c. The kinds of animals which will be groomed in the animal grooming parlor;
d. The number of grooming stations the applicant anticipates including in the parlor;
e. The hours of operation of the grooming parlor;
f. The applicant's plans for complying with all health and sanitary requirements.
2. All applications for permits to operate animal grooming parlors shall be submitted with the
required permit fee, on a printed form provided by the North Ogden building and zoning
department.
3. The city council shall review all applications for animal grooming parlor permits and shall
grant the permit if it finds that:
a. The animal grooming parlor is an appropriate use in the location proposed;
b. The facilities are adequate for the proposed animal grooming parlor; and
c. The animal grooming parlor is unlikely to become a nuisance.
4. In granting a permit to operate an animal grooming parlor, the city council may set
conditions regarding:
a. The grooming parlor's proposed hours of operation; and
b. The facilities to be used to ensure that the animal grooming parlor does not
become a health hazard.
5. The city council may suspend or revoke the license of any animal grooming parlor
operator for failing to operate the grooming parlor in compliance with the conditions in the
permit, if the grooming parlor becomes a nuisance or a health hazard, or for other good
cause.
6. A permit issued under this subsection J may be used only by the person to whom the
permit is issued and for the premises for which the permit is issued. If the grooming parlor
is transferred to another owner, the new owner must apply for a new permit. If the permit
holder desires to move the grooming parlor to a new location, the permit holder must
obtain a new permit for the new location.
7. Permits issued under this subsection J are good for one year and the permit holder shall
file a new application each year. The city council need not consider renewal applications
unless the permit holder has significantly changed his operations.
8. Nothing in this subsection J shall relieve the operator of an animal grooming parlor from
the obligation to comply with all business license laws, zoning ordinances, health
regulations or other applicable laws, statutes, ordinances, rules or regulations.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=6:_PUBLIC_SAFETY 19/53
K. Riding Schools Or Stables:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain a riding school or stable, unless
the person first obtains a regulatory permit from the North Ogden building and zoning
department, in addition to all other required licenses. The application shall include:
a. The name, address and phone number of the person applying for the permit;
b. The address of the location where the business will be operated;
c. The number of horses the applicant anticipates keeping at the riding school or
stable;
d. The kinds of classes and other services that the applicant anticipates offering
through the riding school or stable;
e. A plan of the riding school or stable, including the stables where the horses will be
housed; and
f. he hours of operation of the riding school or stable.
2. All applications for permits to operate riding schools and stables shall be submitted with
the required permit fee, on a printed form provided by the North Ogden building and
zoning department.
3. The city council shall review all applications for riding school or stable permits and shall
grant the permit if it finds that:
a. The riding school or stable is an appropriate use in the location proposed;
b. The facilities are adequate for the proposed riding school or stable; and
c. The proposed riding school or stable is unlikely to become a nuisance.
4. In granting a permit to operate a riding school or stable, the city council may set
conditions regarding:
a. The riding school or stable's proposed hours of operation;
b. The number of horses the riding school or stable may keep on the property;
c. The number of people who may be permitted in any single class; and
d. The facilities to be used to ensure that the riding school or stable does not
become a health hazard.
5. The city council may suspend or revoke the license of any riding school or stable operator
for failing to operate the riding school or stable in compliance with the conditions in the
permit, if the riding school or stable becomes a nuisance or a health hazard, or for other
good cause.
6. A permit issued under this subsection K may be used only by the person to whom the
permit is issued and for the premises for which the permit is issued. If the riding school or
stable is transferred to another owner, the new owner must apply for a new permit. If the
permit holder desires to move the riding school or stable to a new location, the permit
holder must obtain a new permit for the new location.
7. Permits issued under this subsection K are good for one year and the permit holder shall
file a new application each year. The city council need not consider renewal applications
unless the permit holder has significantly changed his operations.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=6:_PUBLIC_SAFETY 20/53
8. Nothing in this subsection K shall relieve the operator of a riding school or stable from the
obligation to comply with all business license laws, zoning ordinances, health regulations
or other applicable laws, statutes, ordinances, rules or regulations.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=6:_PUBLIC_SAFETY 21/53
L. Other Animal Related Businesses Including Service Dog And Therapy Dog Related Businesses:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain any business involving the
keeping or use of live animals unless the person first obtains a regulatory permit from the
North Ogden building and zoning department, in addition to all other required licenses.
The application shall include:
a. The name, address and phone number of the person applying for the permit;
b. The address of the location where the business will be operated;
c. The nature of the business;
d. The kinds of classes and services that the applicant anticipates offering through
the business;
e. The number and types of animals that the business will use and the ways in which
the animals will be used in the business;
f. A plan of the business showing the facilities for keeping the animals; and
g. The hours of operation of the business.
h. In the case of a therapy animal related business, a copy of the required
professional licensing certificate of the applicant.
2. All applications for permits to operate animal related businesses shall be submitted with
the required permit fee, on a printed form provided by the North Ogden building and
zoning departments.
3. The city council shall review all applications for animal related business permits and shall
grant the permit if it finds that:
a. The animal related business is an appropriate use in the location proposed;
b. The facilities are adequate for the proposed animal related business; and
c. The proposed business is unlikely to become a nuisance.
4. In granting a permit to operate an animal related business, the city council may set
conditions regarding:
a. The animal related business's proposed hours of operation;
b. The number and type of animals the animal related business may keep on the
property. In the case of an animal therapy business, such limit shall be four (4)
dogs or less;
c. The facilities to be used to ensure that the animal related business does not
become a health hazard.
5. The city council may suspend or revoke the license of any animal related business
operator for failing to operate the business in compliance with the conditions in the permit,
if the business becomes a nuisance or a health hazard, in the case of a therapy related
animal business, for expiration, withdrawal, revocation, or suspension of the applicant's
required professional licensing and for other good cause.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=6:_PUBLIC_SAFETY 22/53
6. A permit issued under this subsection L may be used only by the person to whom the
permit is issued and for the premises for which the permit is issued. If the animal related
business is transferred to another owner, the new owner must apply for a new permit and
comply with all requirements of this section. If the permit holder desires to move the
business to a new location, the permit holder must obtain a new permit for the new
location.
7. Permits issued under this subsection L are good for one year and the permit holder shall
file a new application each year. The city council need not consider renewal applications
for general animal related businesses unless the permit holder has significantly changed
his operations. However, the city council must consider renewal applications for any
therapy animal related business.
8. Nothing in this subsection L shall relieve the operator of a general animal related
business from the obligation to comply with all business license laws, zoning ordinances,
health regulations or other applicable laws, statutes, ordinances, rules or regulations
except that owners of service animal related businesses may be authorized to operate
such business in any zone.
M. Exemptions:
1. Research facilities where bona fide medical or related research is conducted, humane
shelters and other animal facilities established by state or local government agencies or
which are licensed under federal law shall be exempt from the licensing and permit
requirements of this section.
2. Active police service dogs shall be exempt from the limitation of pets per household
address as described in subsection F8 of this section.
N. Inspections: All establishments required to obtain permits under this section shall be subject to
periodic inspections by the animal control supervisor or his delegate. The inspector shall make a
report of each inspection. The inspector shall give a copy of the inspection to the holder of the
permit and shall file the original report with the city. Inspection reports shall be public documents.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=6:_PUBLIC_SAFETY 23/53
O. Suspension Or Revocation Of Permits Or Licenses:
1. A permit or license issued under this section may be suspended or revoked or a permit
application rejected for any one or more of the following grounds:
a. Falsification of facts in any permit or license application or in the case of a service
animal related business, suspension, expiration, termination or withdrawal of the
applicant's required professional licensing;
b. Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or any other law or regulation
governing the keeping of the permitted or licensed animals, including, but not
limited to, noise laws, nuisance laws, building codes, or zoning ordinances;
c. Conviction on a charge of cruelty to animals or mistreatment of animals,
regardless of whether the animals involved in the charge are the same animals
permitted or licensed;
d. Other good cause determined by the city council.
2. If an inspection of the premises of any person holding a permit or license under this
section reveals a violation of this chapter, the person conducting the inspection shall
notify the permit or license holder of the violations by leaving a copy of the inspection
report or other written notice with the permit or license holder. If the permit or license
holder is not available, the person conducting the inspection may leave the notice with
any responsible person over sixteen (16) years of age at the facility. If no responsible
person is available, the inspector may serve the notice on the permit or license holder by
sending the notice by certified mail to the last known address of the permit or license
holder. The written notice shall:
a. Describe the specific nature of the violations the inspector found;
b. Establish a specific and reasonable period of time for the permit or license holder
or the operator of the facility to correct the violations; and
c. State that failure to comply with the notice and the terms of this chapter may result
in revocation or suspension of the permit or license.
3. If the permit or license holder fails to correct the violations in the time specified in the
notice, the inspector shall notify the permit or license holder of the city's intention to
revoke or suspend the license or permit. The notice shall:
a. Give the date, time and place that the city council will consider the matter. The
time of the hearing shall be no less than fourteen (14) days from the date of the
notice;
b. Inform the permit or license holder of his or her right to be present at the hearing;
c. Inform the permit or license holder that if he or she does not appear at the
hearing, the city may revoke or suspend the permit or license in the permit or
license holder's absence;
d. Inform the permit or license holder of his or her right to be represented by counsel
at the hearing;
e. Inform the permit or license holder of his or her right to question witnesses
presented by the city; and
f. Inform the permit or license holder of his or her right to call witnesses and present
other evidence on his or her own behalf during the hearing.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=6:_PUBLIC_SAFETY 24/53
4. At the time and place set for the hearing, the city council shall hold a hearing on whether
the permit or license should be suspended or revoked. The city may present witnesses
and evidence on the issue and the permit or license holder shall also have an opportunity
to present witnesses and evidence. At the close of the hearing, the city council shall vote
on whether to suspend or revoke the license and the majority vote of the council shall be
controlling.
5. If the council votes to suspend the permit or license, it shall set a minimum time of the
suspension, which shall be at least six (6) months, and the council shall order that the
license may not be reinstated until the specified time has run and all of the violations have
been corrected.
6. A person whose permit or license has been revoked may not reapply for a new license or
permit for at least two (2) years.
7. Notwithstanding the procedures for suspension or revocation above, the animal control
supervisor or animal control officer may, without warning or a hearing, suspend any
permit or license issued under this chapter if he finds that the condition of the premises of
the permit or license holder constitute a substantial and immediate threat to the health,
welfare or safety of the residents of the city.
a. If the animal control supervisor or animal control officer suspends any permit or
license under this subsection O7:
i. The animal control supervisor or animal control officer shall impound the
animals and take other steps to mitigate the threat; and
ii. The city council shall review the action as soon as practicable and the
permit or license holder shall be given notice of the hearing.
b. If the city council finds that the animal control supervisor's actions were justified, it
shall:
i. Order that the permit or license holder pay all costs of impounding the
animals;
ii. Order that the permit or license holder pay all remediation costs incurred
by the city;
iii. Order that the animals either:
(1) Continue to be impounded until the permit or license holder's
premises comply with the provisions of this chapter and any other
applicable law, including health and building codes;
(2) Be abated; or
(3) Be made available for sale or adoption to third parties.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=6:_PUBLIC_SAFETY 25/53
P. Litter Animals:
1. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this chapter, the owner of a household pet kept in
a residential zone which delivers a litter may sell or give away the litter animals under the
following conditions:
a. The owner shall have three (3) months to dispose of all of the litter animals which
exceed the number of animals the owner may lawfully keep.
b. The owner may sell the litter animals or give them away.
c. The owner may use reasonable methods to advertise the availability of the litter
animals, provided that no advertising method may result in a violation of the city's
sign or zoning ordinances.
2. No person shall use the provisions of this subsection P to avoid obtaining a business
license or a regulatory license described in this section.
a. A person shall be presumed to be using this subsection P to avoid obtaining a
business or regulatory license if he sells or gives away more than two (2) litters in
a single year.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2012-8 on 2/28/2012
Amended by Ord. 2013-12 on 8/27/2013
6-1-4: RESTRAINT, ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE, AND IMPOUNDMENT
A. Restraint: All animals (except wild animals) shall be kept from running loose by physical, electric
wire or electric wireless restraint. Every owner of any animal shall keep the animal securely
confined on the person's premises, except that an owner may have an animal on the streets or
public places in the city if controlled by human restraint on a leash. Violation of this provision
shall be a class C misdemeanor.
1. A second violation of this subsection A shall be a class B misdemeanor.
2. Three (3) or more violations of this subsection A shall be a class B misdemeanor and
require a mandatory court appearance.
B. Permit For Driving Animals On The Streets Of The City: The animal control supervisor or animal
control officer may issue permits for the driving of cattle, horses, mules, sheep, goats or swine on
the streets of the city if he determines that the health, safety, welfare, peace, quiet and property
of the city's residents will not be endangered or damaged by the animals. No person shall drive
any animals on the streets of the city without a permit.
C. Female Dogs In Heat: The owner of any female dog in heat shall, in addition to restraining the
dog as described in subsection A of this section, cause the dog to be constantly confined in a
building or secure enclosure sufficient to prevent the dog from attracting other dogs to the area
by scent or otherwise becoming a nuisance. Violation of this subsection shall be an infraction.
D. Animals At Large:
1. Any animal found in the streets or public places of the city in violation of subsection A of
this section shall be deemed to be at large.
2. Any animal on the property of a person other than its owner without that person's
permission shall also be deemed to be at large.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=6:_PUBLIC_SAFETY 26/53
E. Duty To Impound: It shall be the duty of every animal control officer, every police officer and the
animal control supervisor to apprehend and, if appropriate, impound the following animals:
1. Any animal found at large in the city;
2. Any animal being kept or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter;
3. Any animal which is required under the terms of this section to have a license tag which is
not wearing the license tag;
4. Sick or injured animals when the owner of the animal cannot be located;
5. Abandoned animals;
6. Animals which have not been vaccinated for rabies as required in this chapter;
7. . Animals which must be held for quarantine under the provisions of this chapter;
8. Vicious animals which are not properly confined as required by this chapter; and
9. Any animal which is required to be impounded under the provisions of this chapter.
F. Records Of Impounded Animals: For each animal impounded, the animal control supervisor or
his delegate shall keep records of the following:
1. The species or breed, color and sex of each animal;
2. The reason for impounding the animal;
3. The date the animal was impounded;
4. The location where the animal was found;
5. The name of the officer impounding the animal;
6. If the animal is required to be licensed under this chapter, whether the animal was
licensed and the number of the license;
7. The name and address of the animal's owner, if known;
8. All fees incurred on behalf of the animal during its impoundment;
9. The disposition made of the animal;
10. The date of disposition;
11. The name and address of the person retrieving or purchasing the animal, if the animal is
retrieved or purchased; and
12. All fees paid to the shelter on account of the animal.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=6:_PUBLIC_SAFETY 27/53
G. Owner Notification: No later than two (2) working days after impounding any animal, the animal
control supervisor or his delegate shall notify the owner (if known) of the impoundment. This
notice may be given using any method reasonably likely to provide actual notice to the owner of
the animal. The notice shall contain:
1. A description of the impounded animal;
2. A description of the reason the animal was impounded;
3. A description of the maintenance fees and any other fees the owner must pay in order to
retrieve the animal;
4. The date upon which the city may dispose of the animal if the owner has not retrieved the
animal; and
5. The disposition which the city may make of the animal if the owner does not retrieve the
animal.
H. Maintenance And Other Fees:
1. The city council shall set maintenance fees for impounded animals by resolution.
Maintenance fees shall accrue at the set rate for every day the animal is impounded.
Before any impounded animal may be retrieved by its owner, the owner shall pay all of
the maintenance fees incurred by the animal during the entire period of its impoundment.
In exceptional cases, the city may consider payment plans for the payment of these fees.
2. In addition to the maintenance fees described in subsection H1 of this section, the owner
shall pay any additional fees incurred on behalf of the animal, such as for medical care,
special dietary needs, extraordinary cleaning, or other unusual costs.
3. If the animal was required to be licensed under this chapter and did not have a license at
the time it was impounded, the owner shall also apply for a license and pay the license
fees and any applicable late fees before retrieving the animal.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=6:_PUBLIC_SAFETY 28/53
I. Disposition Of Impounded Animals:
1. The city shall not dispose of any impounded animal before three (3) days have passed,
except:
a. To release the animal to its owner.
b. To destroy or sell an animal when the owner has relinquished his or her rights to
the animal.
c. To alleviate overcrowding in the kennel.
d. Due to excessive barking, animal breeds, animal size, animal behavior, medical
condition or general welfare of the animal.
2. If the city is aware of the identity of the animal's owner, the city may not dispose of the
animal until three (3) days have passed since notice under subsection G of this section
was sent to the owner, unless the owner gives his or her permission to destroy or sell the
animal prior to the expiration of the three (3) day period.
3. The time limits established in subsections I1 and I2 of this section shall not apply to any
animal which, in the opinion of the animal control supervisor or animal control officer,
should be destroyed immediately for humane reasons or to protect the public from
imminent danger to persons or property.
4. Any animal which is not retrieved within the time periods set in subsection I1 of this
section may be sold, destroyed or relinquished to any shelter or rescue center contracted
by the city as described in subsections I5 and I6 of this section.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=6:_PUBLIC_SAFETY 29/53
5. Animals which are not retrieved within the time periods set in subsection I1 of this section
may be sold to any person desiring to purchase the animal or relinquish the animal to the
city contracted shelter.
a. The animal control supervisor or animal control officer shall set the sales price of
the animal, which need not be based on the fees and costs incurred by the city in
impounding the animal.
b. The purchaser shall pay the purchase price in full before receiving the animal, but
need not pay any other fees or costs associated with the animal before receiving
the animal.
c. If the animal is required to be licensed under this chapter, the purchaser shall also
pay the applicable license fees, provided that the purchaser need not pay the
license fees if the purchaser resides outside the city and intends to keep the
animal outside the city.
d. Upon payment of the purchase price and any other fees, the purchaser shall
receive title to the animal free and clear of the claims of the former owner and any
person claiming title to the animal through the former owner.
e. Before any dog or cat may be sold under this subsection I5, the animal control
supervisor or animal control officer shall ensure that the dog has been spayed or
neutered and the costs of spaying or neutering shall be added to the price of the
dog or cat.
f. All animals which are not retrieved within the time periods set in subsection I1 of
this section may be destroyed in any humane manner.
g. Seriously ill animals for which the city can find no owner must be destroyed. They
may not be sold under subsection I2 of this section.
h. The carcasses of animals destroyed under this subsection I shall be disposed of in
any sanitary manner selected by the animal control supervisor.
6. The animal control supervisor or his delegate shall have discretion in deciding whether to
destroy a particular animal or attempt to sell it. If the animal control supervisor or animal
control officer initially decides to attempt to sell an animal, he or she may later decide to
have the animal destroyed.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-11 on 10/12/2010
6-1-5: RABID ANIMALS AND ANIMAL BITES
A. Proclamation Of Mayor: The mayor is hereby authorized, upon reasonable apprehension of
danger from dogs or other animals with rabies, to issue a proclamation requiring the animal
control supervisor or animal control officer to impound all dogs and other animals found running
at large in the city.
1. The proclamation shall take effect immediately upon publication in a newspaper of
general circulation in the city and posting in at least three (3) public places in the city.
2. After the issuing of the mayor's proclamation, the animal control supervisor and animal
control officers shall have no discretion to release animals found running at large, but
shall impound all such animals.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=6:_PUBLIC_SAFETY 30/53
3. Animals impounded under this subsection A shall not be released until such time as a
veterinarian shall certify that the animal is rabies free.
B. Rabies Vaccination Required For Dogs And Cats: The owner or person having care, custody or
control of any dog, cat or ferret over six (6) months of age shall have the animal vaccinated for
rabies within ten (10) days after the animal reaches six (6) months of age.
1. Dogs, cats and ferrets shall be vaccinated as recommended by a veterinarian, according
to the type of vaccine used.
2. Any person who permits any dog, cat or ferret over six (6) months of age to habitually be
on the person's property, or who habitually feeds a dog, cat or ferret over six (6) months
of age, or who habitually lodges a dog, cat or ferret over six (6) months of age within the
person's house, yard or premises, shall be presumed to be the animal's owner and shall
be responsible for obtaining the vaccinations described in this subsection B.
3. All vaccinations referred to in this subsection B shall be performed by a licensed
veterinarian using a rabies vaccine approved by the Weber-Morgan health department.
4. This provision shall not apply to licensed veterinarians or licensed animal holding facilities
or kennels which temporarily maintain animals belonging to others on their premises.
5. Violation of this subsection B shall be a class C misdemeanor.
C. Duties Of Veterinarian And Tag Requirements:
1. It shall be the duty of any veterinarian vaccinating an animal for rabies to complete a
certificate of rabies vaccination. The certificate shall be completed in duplicate and shall
include the following information:
a. The animal owner's name and address;
b. A description of the animal, breed, sex, markings, age, name and other identifying
information;
c. The date of the vaccination;
d. The rabies vaccination tag number;
e. The type of rabies vaccine administered to the animal;
f. The manufacturer's serial number, lot number or other identifying information
regarding the vaccine; and
g. The expiration date of the rabies vaccination.
2. The veterinarian shall give one copy of the certificate to the owner of the animal and shall
retain one copy of the certificate. The owner and the veterinarian shall both retain their
copies of the certificate until the time the next vaccination is required under this section.
3. In addition to a copy of the certificate, the veterinarian shall present the owner with a
metal or durable plastic rabies vaccination tag. This tag shall be serially numbered and
securely attached to the collar or harness of the animal. Any animal which is not wearing
a rabies tag shall be deemed to be unvaccinated and may be impounded and dealt with
according to the terms of this chapter. In lieu of the rabies tag, body markings may be
used to indicate that the animal has been vaccinated, provided that the body marking has
been approved by the animal control supervisor or animal control officer.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=6:_PUBLIC_SAFETY 31/53
D. Obligation To Present Certificate On Demand: The owner of an animal required to be vaccinated
for rabies under this section shall present the certificate described in subsection C of this section
(or substantially equivalent proof of rabies vaccination) upon demand of any peace officer,
animal control officer or the animal control supervisor. Failure to present the certificate or other
proof of vaccination shall be a class C misdemeanor. In addition, if the owner fails to present
proof of vaccination as required in this subsection, the animal shall be deemed to be
unvaccinated and must be vaccinated or impounded according to the provisions of this chapter.
E. Exception For Transient Animals: The provisions of this section regarding rabies vaccinations
shall not apply to any animal which remains in the city for less than thirty (30) days, provided that
the owner of such animals must keep the animals under his or her strict supervision by use of a
tether or other enclosure.
F. Compliance With State Regulations: In addition to the provisions of this section, all animals
brought into the city shall comply with all state and/or federal animal health and animal import
regulations.
G. Impoundment Of Animals Without Valid Rabies Vaccination:
1. All animals found in the city without a valid rabies tag or whose owners fail or refuse to
provide a current certificate or other proof of vaccination shall be impounded.
2. In addition to complying with all of the requirements of CCNO 6-1-4I of this chapter on
retrieving an animal, the owner of an animal impounded for failing to have a rabies
vaccination shall present acceptable proof that the animal has received all required rabies
vaccinations.
3. In the alternative, the owner of an animal impounded under this subsection G may reclaim
the animal by complying with all of the requirements of CCNO 6-1-4I of this chapter
regarding retrieval of animals and signing a written commitment to have the animal
vaccinated within seventy two (72) hours of the release of the animal.
a. An owner signing a commitment to have the animal vaccinated under this
subsection must return within four (4) days and present proof that the animal
received the vaccination within the seventy two (72) hour period.
b. Failure by the owner to present this proof shall be a class B misdemeanor.
c. In addition, if the owner fails to produce proof that the animal has been
vaccinated, the animal shall be reimpounded and shall not be released until the
owner presents proof that the animal has been vaccinated or makes
arrangements to have the animal vaccinated at the place of impoundment. The
owner shall bear all costs of having the animal reimpounded and of having a
qualified veterinarian vaccinate the animal at the animal shelter.
4. Any animal impounded under the terms of this subsection G and not reclaimed within
seventy two (72) hours shall be destroyed. The animal control supervisor or animal
control officer shall not sell animals impounded under this subsection G.
H. Reporting Of Rabid Animals: Any person having knowledge of an animal known to have been
exposed to rabies, reasonably suspected of having rabies, or a person or animal bitten by an
animal reasonably suspected of having rabies shall notify the animal control supervisor or animal
control officer, the Weber-Morgan health department or the state health department.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=6:_PUBLIC_SAFETY 32/53
I. Biting Animals: If a person has been bitten by any animal, the animal control officer or a police
officer shall verify the current status of the rabies vaccination. The animal shall be held until it is
determined whether the animal has been vaccinated for rabies.
1. If the owner is unable to demonstrate that the animal has been vaccinated for rabies, the
animal shall be quarantined, at the owner's expense, for at least ten (10) days in order to
determine whether the animal has rabies. This confinement may be:
a. At the city's designated animal control shelter,
b. At a veterinary hospital or other place approved by the animal control supervisor
or animal control officer,
c. At the owner's home, if the owner can meet all of the qualifications for having a
home contractual quarantine.
2. If the animal is found to be rabid:
a. The animal shall be immediately destroyed and the head shall be sent to the Utah
state health laboratory for examination; and
b. Any person bitten by the animal shall be notified so that they can commence
treatments.
3. If the animal dies for any reason during the ten (10) day quarantine period, the head shall
be sent to the Utah state health laboratory for examination and determination whether the
animal was rabid. If the state health laboratory determines that the animal was rabid, the
city shall notify those persons bitten so that they can begin treatment.
4. If the animal is determined not to be rabid, the animal may be returned to its owner,
unless it is determined to be a vicious animal, in which case it shall be dealt with
according to the provisions of this chapter.
5. The owner of every animal suspected of having rabies which bites a person or another
animal shall surrender the animal upon demand to the animal control supervisor or an
animal control officer and cooperate in determining whether the animal is rabid. Failure to
surrender the animal or cooperate in determining whether the animal is rabid shall be a
class B misdemeanor.
6. A physician or other medical professional who treats a person bitten by any animal shall
report that fact to the animal control supervisor, animal control officer or the Weber-
Morgan health department within twenty four (24) hours of the time he renders the first
treatment. The medical professional shall report the name, address and sex of the person
bitten, the type and location of the bite and the location where the attack took place. If the
medical professional knows the name and address of the owner of the animal that
inflicted the bite, the medical professional shall report those facts as well. The medical
professional shall also provide any other information to the city which the medical
professional has and which may assist the city in determining whether the animal has
received all of the required vaccinations and whether the animal is a vicious animal.
7. Any person treating an animal bitten, injured or mauled by another animal shall report the
incident to the animal control supervisor or animal control officer. The report shall contain
the name and address of the owner of the injured animal, any information the person has
regarding the animal which caused the injury and, if known, the location of the attack.
8. Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the city from charging the owner
of an animal which bites a person with any appropriate criminal charge.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=6:_PUBLIC_SAFETY 33/53
J. Rabid Animals Attacking Other Animals: If any animal is bitten by another animal which is rabid
or reasonably suspected of having rabies, the animal control supervisor or the animal control
officer must be notified immediately. The animal control supervisor or animal control officer shall
then direct the disposition of the bitten animal and the biting animal, which may include
quarantine of the animal for six (6) months (at the owner's expense) or destruction of the animal.
If the bitten animal is a stray, it may be destroyed immediately. The head of any animal
destroyed under this subsection shall be sent to the Utah state health laboratory for examination.
K. Destruction Of Rabid Animals: All animals determined to be rabid shall be promptly destroyed by
the animal control supervisor or any animal control officer.
L. Disposition Of Nonrabid Strays: Any stray or unclaimed animal quarantined under this section
may be destroyed or sold in the same manner as any other animal impounded under this
chapter.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-11 on 10/12/2010
6-1-6: DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS ANIMALS
A. Keeping Of Dangerous Animals Prohibited: It is unlawful for any persons other than a publicly
licensed and supervised zoo or zoological garden, a duly authorized and licensed circus or
educational institution to keep and maintain or permit to be kept or maintained any "dangerous
animal" (as defined in CCNO 6-1-1) within the city limits.
B. Vicious Dogs And Animals To Be Muzzled: It is unlawful for the owner of any "vicious animal" (as
defined in CCNO 6-1-1) to keep such animal without taking all reasonable and necessary steps
to prevent the animal from causing any injury to any person or to permit or suffer the same to go
or be off the premises of the owner unless such animal is safely muzzled or otherwise restrained
as necessary so as to prevent it from injuring any person or property. Violation of this subsection
shall be considered a class B misdemeanor.
C. Killing Authorized During Attack: Any animal making a vicious and unprovoked attack on any
person or other animal may be killed by any person while it is making such an attack.
D. Animals Attacking Other Animals Or Humans:
1. Attacking Animals Or Humans: It is unlawful for the owner of any animal to allow such
animal to attack, chase, or worry any humans, any animal having commercial value, any
species of hoofed protected wildlife or to attack fowl. As used in this subsection "worry"
means to harass by tearing, biting or shaking with the teeth.
2. Owner Liability: The owner of an animal which attacks another animal or human as
described in subsection D1 of this section shall also be liable for any property damaged or
to the owner of any animal(s) which is injured or destroyed.
3. Defenses: The following shall be considered in mitigation of the penalties and/or damages
for a violation of this subsection D:
a. That the animal was properly restrained on the owner's premises;
b. That the animal was deliberately or maliciously provoked.
4. Dangerous Animals A Nuisance: Any dangerous or vicious animal kept in violation of this
section is a class B misdemeanor and a nuisance and may be abated as described in
CCNO 6-1-7.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=6:_PUBLIC_SAFETY 34/53
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-11 on 10/12/2010
6-1-7: NUISANCE ANIMALS AND ABATEMENT
A. Nuisance Animals Prohibited: Any owner of any animal(s) causing a nuisance as defined in
CCNO 6-1-1 shall be guilty as follows:
1. The owner of an animal that causes any damage to the property of anyone other than its
owner shall be guilty of an infraction;
2. The owner of a vicious dog or "vicious animal" as defined herein and kept contrary to
CCNO 6-1-6 shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor;
3. The owner of a "dangerous animal" (as defined herein), which is kept by any person other
than a publicly licensed and supervised zoo or zoological garden, a duly authorized and
licensed circus or educational institution shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor;
4. The owner of an animal that causes unreasonable fouling of the air by odors shall be
guilty of an infraction;
5. The owner of an animal that causes unsanitary conditions in enclosures or surroundings
shall be guilty of an infraction;
6. The owner of an animal that defecates on any public sidewalk, park, building, or private
property without the consent of the owner of such private property unless the person
owning, having a proprietary interest in, or having care, charge, control or custody of such
animal shall remove any such defecation to a proper trash receptacle shall be guilty of an
infraction;
7. The owner of an animal that barks, whines, howls or makes other disturbing noises in an
excessive, continuous, or untimely or unreasonable manner, which disturbs any person or
neighborhood shall be guilty of an infraction class C misdemeanor for the first offense.
a. A second offense of this subsection A7 shall be considered a class B
misdemeanor.
8. The owner of an animal that molests passersby or chases passing vehicles, including
automobiles, trucks, bicycles, scooters or other motorized or unmotorized vehicles shall
be guilty of an infraction;
9. The owner of an animal that attacks other animals shall be guilty of a class B
misdemeanor;
10. The owner of an animal that is determined by the animal control officer to be a public
nuisance by virtue of being offensive or dangerous to public health, welfare or safety shall
be guilty of a class B misdemeanor; or
11. The owner of animals that, by virtue of the number maintained, are determined to be
offensive or dangerous to the public health, welfare, or safety shall be guilty of an
infraction.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=6:_PUBLIC_SAFETY 35/53
B. Abatement Of Nuisance Animals:
1. Notice: When it reasonably appears to the animal control supervisor or any animal control
officer that any animal is a "nuisance animal" as defined in CCNO 6-1-1, he or she shall
notify the owner of the animal of a hearing with regards to the matter. The notice shall
contain a description of the facts supporting the conclusion that the animal is a nuisance
animal.
2. Petition: The animal control supervisor or animal control officer shall file with the city's
justice court a petition to have the animal declared a nuisance animal and abated. The
petition shall set forth:
a. All facts supporting the allegation that the animal is a nuisance; address of the
owner of the animal.
3. Notice Of Hearing: Upon receipt of the petition from the animal control supervisor or
animal control officer the justice court shall set a hearing in the matter and notify the
owner. The hearing shall be held not less than ten (10) days after the date of the notice. A
notice of the hearing shall be sent to the owner by certified or registered mail and shall
contain:
a. The date, time and place of the hearing;
b. A description of the alleged facts supporting the contention that the animal is a
nuisance;
c. A statement that the owner may attend the hearing, may be represented by
counsel and may present evidence in his or her own behalf and may cross
examine witnesses presented by the city;
d. A statement that if the owner does not appear at the hearing, the court will:
i. Accept the allegations of the animal control supervisor or animal control
officer as true;
ii. Find that the animal is a nuisance;
iii. Order the destruction of the animal; and
iv. Order the owner to pay the costs of impounding and keeping the animal
prior to the hearing and the costs of destroying the animal.
4. Agreement: At any time the owner of the animal may enter into a written agreement
stipulating that the animal is a nuisance and a method of abating the animal. The
agreement and the method of abating the nuisance shall be approved by the animal
control supervisor or animal control officer. If the parties agree that the animal is a
nuisance, but are unable to agree on a method of abating the nuisance, the court may
decide the appropriate method of abating the animal as provided in this subsection B.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=6:_PUBLIC_SAFETY 36/53
5. Hearing: At the time and place described in the notice, the justice court shall hold a
hearing on the issue of whether the animal is a nuisance and whether destruction or
removal of the animal is necessary to abate the nuisance.
a. If the owner fails to appear at the hearing, the court shall find that the animal is a
nuisance and order its destruction as set forth herein.
b. If the owner appears at the hearing, the court may consider any evidence
presented by the owner or the city which it may consider relevant to determine
whether the animal is a nuisance.
c. The city shall bear the burden of proving that the animal is a nuisance and the
measures which are necessary to abate the nuisance. Both issues shall be
decided based upon a preponderance of the evidence.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=6:_PUBLIC_SAFETY 37/53
6. Findings: Within ten (10) days of the conclusion of the hearing, the justice court shall
make findings regarding the animal as described in this subsection.
a. The justice court shall first make a finding regarding whether the animal is a
nuisance.
i. If the court finds that the animal is not a nuisance:
(1) The court need not make any further findings regarding disposition
of the animal.
(2) A finding that the animal is not a nuisance under this subsection
shall not preclude a finding that the animal was running at large,
barking excessively or otherwise in violation of the law.
ii. If the court finds that the animal is a nuisance:
(1) It shall also enter a finding regarding the measures necessary to
abate the nuisance.
b. In ruling on the abatement of nuisance animals, the court shall proceed as follows:
i. The court may find that the nuisance may be abated by restricting the
animal to the premises of the owner. In that case, the court shall order that
the animal shall be restricted to the premises of the owner, and the owner's
failure to confine the animal to those premises shall be a contempt of court.
ii. The court may find that the nuisance may be abated by removing the
animal from the city. In that case, the court shall order that the animal be
removed from the city and any person returning the animal to the city with
knowledge of the court's order shall be liable for contempt of court.
iii. The court may find that the nuisance may only be abated by destroying the
animal. The court shall find that an animal must be destroyed if:
(1) the evidence presented during the hearing establishes that the
animal has made two (2) or more unprovoked attacks on persons,
regardless of whether the persons attacked were the owners,
members of the owner's household, or any other person,
(2) the first attack is deemed severe enough to warrant destruction in
the judgment of the animal control officer. In that case, the court
shall issue a written order for the destruction of the animal and shall
deliver the order to the animal control supervisor. The animal
control supervisor shall destroy the animal within five (5) days of
the date he or she receives the order unless the destruction is
stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction. The owner shall pay the
costs of destroying the animal.
7. No Bar To Criminal Proceedings: Nothing contained in this subsection B shall prevent or
bar the city from proceeding with criminal prosecution of the owner in addition to seeking
a determination that the animal is a nuisance.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-11 on 10/12/2010
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=6:_PUBLIC_SAFETY 38/53
6-1-8: CRUELTY TO AND MISTREATMENT OF ANIMALS
A. Physical Abuse Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person to wilfully or maliciously:
1. Kill any animal,
2. Maim any animal,
3. Disfigure any animal,
4. Torture any animal,
5. Beat any animal with a stick, chain, club or other object,
6. Mutilate any animal, or
7. Burn or scald any animal.
B. Unnecessary Punishment And Overworking Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person to:
1. Overdrive any animal,
2. Overload any animal or any wagon or other conveyance to be pulled by any animal,
3. Overwork any animal,
4. Deprive any animal of necessary sustenance,
5. Unnecessarily or excessively punish any animal,
6. Fail to provide a leash long enough (6 feet minimum) to give any animal freedom of
movement (except for vicious dogs or animals), or
7. Fail to provide adequate and appropriate shelter from the weather for any animal.
C. Hobbling Animals: It is unlawful for any person to hobble livestock or other animals by any means
which may cause injury or damage to the animal, except that hobbling for short periods shall be
permitted as part of a rodeo or other similar event.
D. Animals In Vehicles: It is unlawful for any person to carry or confine any animal in or upon any
vehicle in a cruel or inhumane manner, including, but not limited to:
1. Leaving an animal in a vehicle without adequate ventilation or cooling;
2. Leaving an animal in a vehicle for an unusual length of time or for a length of time likely to
cause harm to the animal;
3. Transporting an animal in a vehicle without providing enclosures, racks, crates or cages
in which the animal may stand or lie down during transportation; or
4. Transporting any animal in such a manner that the animal is likely to jump or fall out of the
vehicle.
E. Abandoning Animals: It is unlawful for any person to abandon any animal within the city.
F. Animal Poisoning: It is unlawful for any person by any means to make accessible to any animal,
with intent to cause harm or death to the animal, any substance which has in any manner been
treated or prepared with any harmful or poisonous substance. The provisions of this subsection
shall not be construed to prohibit the use of poisons to control vermin in furtherance of the public
health, provided that those poisons shall be used in such a manner as to reasonably prevent the
poisoning of other animals.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=6:_PUBLIC_SAFETY 39/53
G. Injury To Animals By Motorists:
1. Every operator of a motor vehicle upon the streets of the city shall, immediately upon
injuring, striking, maiming or running down any animal, give such aid as is reasonable in
the circumstances.
2. The operator of the motor vehicle shall also notify the owner of the animal of the injury. If
the operator is unable to locate the animal's owner, the operator shall immediately notify
an animal control officer and provide any facts relative to the injury that the animal control
officer may request.
3. The operator of the motor vehicle shall also remain at or near the scene until such time as
the appropriate authorities or the animal's owner arrives. Upon the arrival of the
appropriate authorities, the operator shall immediately identify himself.
4. In an appropriate case, the operator of the motor vehicle may remove the animal from the
scene and take the animal to the city's designated animal control facility or other
appropriate facility. If the operator proceeds under this subsection, he or she shall
immediately notify the animal control supervisor or animal control officer of the incident
and the facility to which he or she has removed the animal. The facility may accept the
animal and treat it appropriately.
5. Operators of emergency vehicles responding to emergency calls are exempt from the
requirements of this subsection G.
H. Animals For Fighting:
1. It is unlawful for any person to raise, possess, keep or use any animal, fowl or bird for the
purpose of fighting or baiting.
2. It is unlawful for any person to be a party to, or a spectator at, any fighting or baiting of
animals, fowl or birds.
3. It is unlawful for any person to knowingly rent or lease any building, shed, room, yard,
ground, or premises for the purpose of fighting or baiting any animals, fowl, or birds.
4. It is unlawful for any person to knowingly permit or suffer the use of any buildings, sheds,
rooms, yards, grounds or premises for the purpose of animal fighting or baiting.
5. The animal control supervisor, an animal control officer or a police officer may enter any
building or place where there is an exhibition of fighting or baiting of animals, fowl or
birds, or where preparations are being made for such an exhibition. Upon entering the
building or place, the officers may arrest the persons present in the building or place and
impound all animals in the building or place. The officers may also seize any implements,
equipment or tools used in the fighting. This provision shall not be interpreted to authorize
a search or arrest without a warrant when a warrant is required by law.
I. Killing Of Birds: It is unlawful for any person to take or kill any birds or rob or destroy any nest,
egg or young of any bird within the city. This prohibition shall not be construed to prevent any
person from keeping domestic fowl and using those fowl and their eggs for domestic purposes.
J. Unauthorized Impounding: It is unlawful for any person maliciously to impound, remove, take, or
hide the animal of another or to cause another person to take any of those actions. It shall be a
defense to prosecution for a violation of this subsection, however, to show that the person
reasonably believed that the animal was vicious, was in the act of attacking a person or was
infected with rabies or another disease which could be passed from an animal to a human being.
K. Violations: A violation of any subsection of this section shall be a class B misdemeanor.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=6:_PUBLIC_SAFETY 40/53
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2007-1 on 1/9/2007
6-1-9: SALE OF ANIMALS
A. Animals Or Fowl:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, barter or give away ducklings in
any quantity less than two (2). It shall also be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for
sale, barter or give away any other fowl less than two (2) months old in any quantity less
than six (6).
2. Nothing in this subsection A shall be construed as prohibiting any person from raising fowl
for his personal use or consumption, provided that the owner shall maintain proper
facilities for the care and containment of the fowl while they are in his or her possession
and shall also comply with all applicable zoning ordinances.
B. Premiums And Novelties: No person shall offer any live animal as a premium, prize, award,
novelty or incentive to purchase merchandise.
C. Dyeing Prohibited: Animals or fowl offered for sale within the city shall not be artificially dyed or
colored.
D. No Sales Of Prohibited Animals: It is unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, barter or give
away any dangerous wild animal within the city or to sell, offer for sale, barter or give away any
other animals which cannot be lawfully possessed or kept by an individual in the city.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2007-1 on 1/9/2007
6-1-10: PROHIBITED ACTS AND ACTIVITIES
A. Interference With Humane Societies: It is unlawful for any person to interfere with an officer of a
humane society or a person authorized to act on behalf of a humane society in carrying out the
society's humane purposes or any duty imposed on a humane society under the provisions of
this chapter.
B. Harboring Stray Animals: It is unlawful for any person, except for an animal shelter or humane
society to harbor or keep any lost or stray animal. Whenever any person finds or discovers a lost
or stray animal, the person shall notify an animal control officer within twenty four (24) hours. For
purposes of this subsection, "harboring" shall mean to afford lodging to, to shelter or to give
refuge to a stray animal. Violation of this subsection shall be a class C misdemeanor.
C. Animals On Unenclosed Premises: It shall be unlawful for any person to chain, stake out or
tether any animal on any unenclosed premises in such a manner that the animal may:
1. Go beyond the boundaries of the property upon which the animal is restrained, unless the
person has the permission of the owner of the adjoining property, or
2. Go onto any sidewalk, street or other portion of the property commonly used by passing
pedestrians or vehicles.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=6:_PUBLIC_SAFETY 41/53
D. Places Prohibited To Animals; Exceptions:
1. It is unlawful for any person to take or permit any animals, whether on a leash, in the
arms of their owners or otherwise, in any establishment or place of business where food
or food products intended for human consumption are sold or distributed. This prohibition
applies to, but is not limited to, restaurants, grocery stores, meat markets, and fruit or
vegetable stands.
2. Animals, whether on a leash or not, are allowed only in specified areas of city parks and
city play areas. The owner of any animal brought into an area of a city park or play area
open to animals shall remove and dispose of any dropping left by the animal.
a. This prohibition shall not be construed to prohibit hearing or seeing eye dogs or
other certified aid dogs, or dogs in the presence and under the control of their
masters for the purpose of public education programs or law enforcement
exercises.
b. This prohibition shall also not be construed to prohibit animals (such as ponies
used in pony rides) from being used at city fairs or other city sponsored events
held in the parks.
c. A first violation of this subsection D shall be considered an infraction.
d. All subsequent violations of this subsection D shall be considered a class C
misdemeanor.
E. Trespassing Animals: It is unlawful for the owner of any animal to allow the animal to trespass on
the property of any other person, unless the owner of the animal first obtains the permission of
the owner of the other property.
F. Barns, Stables And Pens:
1. Any barn, stable, coop or other building or enclosure for the housing and keeping of
animals other than household pets shall be kept, constructed or maintained at least one
hundred feet (100') from any public street.
2. Any pen, house, run or other enclosure designed for the keeping or maintenance of any
dog, cat or other household pet shall be constructed and located in such a manner that
any waste, offal, drainage or other substance from the pet and any stench or smell
associated with the pet remains confined on the property of the owner. In every event, the
structure shall be constructed and located at least three feet (3') from any adjoining
property line.
3. No animals or fowl except for dogs, cats and other household pets, shall be kept or
maintained closer than twenty feet (20') from any dwelling and not closer than seventy
five feet (75') from any dwelling on an adjacent lot.
G. Limits On Dogs And Cats: It is unlawful for any person to keep, maintain, harbor or care for more
than two (2) dogs and two (2) cats in any dwelling unit, single-family home or place of business.
The prohibition above does not apply to:
1. Dogs and cats less than three (3) months of age;
2. Pet stores or other businesses licensed to sell live animals;
3. Kennels or other businesses licensed to board more animals on a temporary basis.
4. Violation of this subsection G is an infraction.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=6:_PUBLIC_SAFETY 42/53
H. Exotic Animals: No person may keep an exotic animal within the city limits. A violation of this
subsection shall be considered a class B misdemeanor.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-11 on 10/12/2010
6-1-11: WILD ANIMALS
A. Disturbing Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person to attack, harass, chase, injure, or otherwise
disturb any wild animal within the limits of the city.
B. Feeding Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person other than the animal control supervisor, an
animal control officer, a designated person acting on behalf of the animal shelter or a designated
employee of a humane society to feed any wild animal within the limits of the city.
1. This subsection B shall not be construed as prohibiting the feeding of ducks and geese in
the city's parks and the feeding of other birds through the erection and maintenance of
bird feeders.
C. Keeping Or Maintaining Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any wild
animal within the limits of the city. The prohibition contained in this subsection shall not apply to
the animal shelter or licensed humane societies.
D. Violation: The violation of any provision of this section shall be a class B misdemeanor.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2007-1 on 1/9/2007
6-1-12: VIOLATIONS
A. Unless otherwise indicated, each violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be a class C
misdemeanor.
B. For continuing violations of this chapter, each day the violation continues shall be a separate
violation and the responsible party may be separately cited for each day's violation.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2007-1 on 1/9/2007
6-2: OFFENSES
6-2-1: CRIMINAL CODE ADOPTED
6-2-2: CITATION
6-2-3: PENALTY
ARTICLE A HOUSING DISCRIMINATION
ARTICLE B DESTROYING OR DEFACING PROPERTY
ARTICLE C OBSTRUCTING PUBLIC WAYS
ARTICLE D CURFEW
ARTICLE E FIREARMS AND WEAPONS
6-2-1: CRIMINAL CODE ADOPTED
A. Adopted: The city adopts the Utah criminal and traffic code, ("the code"), to the extent the
offenses set forth herein are identified as infractions or misdemeanors.
B. Amendments: The code shall be automatically replaced whenever the state or its regularly
appointed agent shall issue a new version of the code or any successor to the code.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=6:_PUBLIC_SAFETY 43/53
C. Copies Available: Pursuant to the requirements of Utah Code § 10-3-711, the city shall make at
least one copy of the code, any new version of the code or any successor of the code, available
at the office of the city recorder for use and examination by the public.
D. Definitions: Unless the context requires otherwise, all references in the code to the following
terms shall have the following meanings when used in the city:
COMMISSION: North Ogden City and its officers, departments, agencies and agents.
LOCAL AUTHORITIES: The North Ogden City mayor and city council.
MAGISTRATE: The judge of the North Ogden City justice court.
THE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY OF THE STATE OF UTAH: The chief of police of
North Ogden City or his agent.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 10.04.010 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
6-2-2: CITATION
Where a citation or complaint is issued, it shall be sufficient to use the section number of the Utah Code
Annotated followed by "the ordinances of North Ogden City" to show the section of the ordinance of the
city which has been violated.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 10.04.020 on 1/1/1987
6-2-3: PENALTY
Unless otherwise provided, any violation of the provisions set forth in the code, relative to offenses, shall
be punishable as a class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in CCNO
1-4-1.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 10.04.050 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
ARTICLE A HOUSING DISCRIMINATION
6-2A-1: PURPOSE, POLICY
6-2A-2: DEFINITIONS
6-2A-3: CONSTRUCTION OF PROVISIONS
6-2A-4: DISCRIMINATORY TERMS
6-2A-5: DISCRIMINATION IN LENDING
6-2A-6: REPRESENTING CHANGE OF NEIGHBORHOOD COMPOSITION IN REAL ESTATE SALE
6-2A-7: PROHIBITED ACTS
6-2A-8: FAIR HOUSING BOARD
6-2A-9: COMPLAINT FILING
6-2A-10: HEARING
6-2A-11: ENFORCEMENT
6-2A-12: REMEDIES
6-2A-13: TEMPORARY COURT ORDER
6-2A-14: JUDICIAL REVIEW OF BOARD ORDER
6-2A-15: PENALTY
6-2A-1: PURPOSE, POLICY
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=6:_PUBLIC_SAFETY 44/53
It is declared to be the policy of the city and the purpose of this article to secure all persons living and/or
working, or desiring to live and/or work in the city, fair opportunity to purchase, lease, rent or occupy real
estate without discrimination based on race, color, religion, gender, age, marital status, physical
limitations, source of income, family responsibilities, educational association or national origin.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 9.38.010 on 1/1/1987
6-2A-2: DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this article:
AGE: Chronological age.
BOARD: The city council of North Ogden City.
EDUCATIONAL ASSOCIATION: The fact of being enrolled or not being enrolled at any educational
institution.
FAMILY RESPONSIBILITIES: The state of being or the potential to become a contributor to the support
of an individual or individuals in a dependent relationship.
LEASE: Includes sublease, assignment and rental, and includes any contract to do any of the foregoing.
LENDING INSTITUTION: Any bank, insurance company, savings and loan association, or any other
person in the business of lending money or guaranteeing loans, any person obtaining, arranging or
negotiating loans or guarantees as agent or broker, and any person in the business of buying or selling
loans or instruments for the payment of money which are secured by title to or a security interest in real
estate.
MARITAL STATUS: The state of being married, unmarried, divorced or widowed.
NATIONAL ORIGIN: Includes the national origin of an ancestor.
OWNER: Any person who holds legal or equitable title to, owns any beneficial interest in, any real
property, or who holds legal or equitable title to shares of, or who holds any beneficial interest in, any
real estate cooperative which owns any real property.
PANEL: A panel comprised of three (3) or more members of the board, designated by the mayor, to
investigate and to attempt to conciliate a complaint filed or made under CCNO 6-2A-6 or CCNO 6-2A-7.
PERSON: Includes one or more individuals, corporations and fiduciaries.
PHYSICAL LIMITATION: A limitation of physical capabilities unrelated to one's ability to safely perform
the work involved in jobs or positions available to such person for hire or promotion or a limitation of
physical capabilities unrelated to one's ability to acquire, rent and maintain property. "Physical limitation"
includes, but is not limited to, blindness or partial sightedness, deafness or hearing impairment,
muteness, partial or total absence of physical member, speech impairment and motor impairment.
PURCHASE: Includes any contract to purchase. "Sale" includes any contract to sell, exchange or to
convey, transfer or assign legal or equitable title to or a beneficial interest in real property.
REAL ESTATE BROKER: Any person licensed as real estate broker in accordance with the provisions
of Utah Code or required thereby to be so licensed. "Real estate agent" means any real estate broker,
any real estate salesperson and any other person who, as employee or agent or otherwise, engages in
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=6:_PUBLIC_SAFETY 45/53
the management or operation of any real property.
REAL ESTATE TRANSACTION: The purchase, sale, exchange, rental or lease of any real property or
an option to do any of the foregoing.
REAL PROPERTY: Any real estate, vacant land, building or structure or any part thereof, within the city
limits.
SOURCE OF INCOME: Any legal source from which a person obtains money.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 9.38.020 on 1/1/1987
6-2A-3: CONSTRUCTION OF PROVISIONS
This article shall be construed according to the fair import of its terms and shall be liberally construed to
further the purpose and policy stated in CCNO 6-2A-1 and the special purposes of the particular
provision involved.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 9.38.030 on 1/1/1987
6-2A-4: DISCRIMINATORY TERMS
It is unlawful housing practice and a violation of this article for any real estate broker, sales person,
agent, owner or other person to negotiate or advertise the sale of, or to sell or rent real property on
terms, conditions or privileges that discriminate between persons because of race, color, religion, sex,
age, marital status, physical limitations, source of income, family responsibilities, educational association
or national origin.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 9.38.040 on 1/1/1987
6-2A-5: DISCRIMINATION IN LENDING
It is an unlawful real estate practice and a violation of this article for any lending institution to refuse to
negotiate for, enter into, or perform any agreement to lend or guarantee the loan of funds or in making,
agreeing to make, arranging or negotiating any loan or guarantee of funds for the purpose of financing
the purchase or sale, construction, lease, rehabilitation, improvement, renovation or repair of any real
property, or to offer or agree to terms, conditions or privileges that discriminate between persons
because of race, color, religion, sex, age, marital status, physical limitations, source of income, family
responsibilities, educational association or national origin of any party to such agreement, or of any
member of the family of any such party, or of the residents of the area in which such real property is
located.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 9.38.050 on 1/1/1987
6-2A-6: REPRESENTING CHANGE OF NEIGHBORHOOD COMPOSITION IN REAL ESTATE SALE
It is an unlawful real estate practice and violation of this article for any real estate broker, sales person,
agent, owner or other person, for the purpose of inducing any other person to enter into a real estate
transaction with such person, his principal or his agent, to:
A. Represent that a change has occurred, will occur, or may occur with respect to race, color,
religion, sex, age, marital status, physical limitations, source of income, family responsibilities,
educational association or national origin in the composition of the owners or occupants in any
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=6:_PUBLIC_SAFETY 46/53
block, neighborhood or area in which the real property (which is the subject of the real estate
transaction) is located; or
B. Represent that a change with respect to race, color, religion, sex, age, marital status, physical
limitations, source of income, family responsibilities, educational association or national origin in
the composition of the owners or occupants in any block, neighborhood or area will result in the
lowering of property values or in an increase in criminal or antisocial behavior, or in a decline in
the quality of schools in such blocks, neighborhood or area.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 9.38.060 on 1/1/1987
6-2A-7: PROHIBITED ACTS
It is an unlawful real estate practice and a violation of this article for any real estate broker, sales person,
agent, owner or any other person to:
A. Aid, abet, incite or coerce a person to commit an unlawful real estate practice under this article;
B. Deliberately and knowingly refuse examination of copies of any listing of real property to any
person because of race, color, religion, sex, age, marital status, physical limitation, source of
income, family responsibilities, educational association or national origin;
C. Enter into a listing agreement which prohibits the inspection sale, lease or occupancy of real
property to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, age, marital status, physical
limitations, source of income, family responsibilities, educational association or national origin;
D. Knowingly and wilfully interfere with the performance of a duty or the exercise of a power by the
board or one of its members or representatives;
E. Wilfully obstruct or prevent or attempt to obstruct or prevent a person from complying with the
provisions of this article or an order issued thereunder.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 9.38.070 on 1/1/1987
6-2A-8: FAIR HOUSING BOARD
A. Established: There is created a fair housing board which shall consist of the members of the city
council.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=6:_PUBLIC_SAFETY 47/53
B. Powers And Duties: The board shall have and exercise the following duties and powers:
1. To act to eliminate unlawful real estate practices that violate this article;
2. To act to assure to persons living, working or desiring to live in the city an opportunity to
purchase, lease or occupy real property without discrimination because of race, color,
religion, age, sex, marital status, physical limitations, source of income, family
responsibilities, educational association or national origin;
3. To receive and investigate complaints alleging unlawful real estate practices in violation of
this article;
4. To attempt elimination of unfair real estate practice by conciliation, conference and/or
persuasion;
5. To hold public hearings in the event that its efforts under subsection B4 of this section are
ineffective or where it deems that such efforts will be ineffective;
6. To instruct the city attorney to commence appropriate court action against those the
board has found to be in violation of this article;
7. To exercise such other powers as are vested in the board by other sections of this article
and to adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of
this article.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 9.38.080, 9.38.090 on 1/1/1987
6-2A-9: COMPLAINT FILING
A. Procedure:
1. Content Of Complaint: Any person aggrieved in any manner of any violation of any
provision of this article may file with the board a written verified complaint setting forth his
grievance. The complaint shall state:
a. The name and address of the complainant;
b. The name and address of the person against whom the complaint is brought, if
known to the complainant;
c. The alleged facts surrounding the alleged violation of this article;
and such complaint shall state the names and addresses of all persons believed
to have knowledge concerning the alleged facts.
2. Service: After the filing of any complaint, the board shall serve a copy of the complaint on
the party or parties charged and the chairman of the board shall designate a "panel", as
defined in CCNO 6-2A-2, to make a prompt investigation in connection therewith.
3. Probable Cause Exists: If such panel shall determine after such investigation that
probable cause exists for the allegations of the complaint:
a. The chairman of the board shall set a time and date for a conference with the
board; such conference shall be private.
b. At such conference, the board shall interview the complainant and the person or
persons against whom the complaint has been directed and shall attempt to
resolve the complaint by all proper methods of conciliation and persuasion.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=6:_PUBLIC_SAFETY 48/53
4. Hearing: If at any time after the date of filing of the complaint, the board determines that
such attempt at conciliation and persuasion would not be in furtherance of the objectives
of this article, the board shall thereupon proceed promptly to a full hearing on the
complaint in accordance with CCNO 6-2A-10.
B. Time Limit: Any complaint filed under this article with the board must be filed within sixty (60)
days after the alleged discriminatory practice occurred or it shall be barred.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 9.38.100 on 1/1/1987
6-2A-10: HEARING
Such hearings shall be conducted by the entire board or a quorum thereof upon ten (10) days' notice to
all parties. The board shall not be bound by the strict rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or
equity. The board shall have power to administer oaths and take sworn testimony. The board shall have
the power to subpoena witnesses and pertinent documents, which power may be enforced by the board
by proper petition to the district court of the county where the complainant resides. The complainant and
the party alleged to have violated this article shall be entitled to be represented by counsel and shall
have the right to call witnesses in his own behalf and to cross examine witnesses.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 9.38.120 on 1/1/1987
6-2A-11: ENFORCEMENT
A. Order To Cease And Desist: If, upon all the evidence at the hearing, the board finds that the
person complained of has violated any of the provisions of this article, the board shall state its
findings of fact and shall issue and cause to be served upon such person, an order requiring
such person to cease and desist from such violation, and to take such affirmative or other action
as, in the judgment of the board, will effectuate the purpose of this article, including a report of
the manner of compliance.
B. Order Dismissing: If, upon all the evidence at the hearing, the board finds that the person
complained of has not violated any of the provisions of this article, the board shall state its
findings of fact and shall issue and cause to be served upon the complainant an order dismissing
the complaint.
C. Jurisdiction Retained: The board shall retain jurisdiction of the case until it is satisfied the person
to whom the order was directed has complied. The order of the board and its findings of fact shall
be issued within thirty (30) days after the filing of the complaint and shall be delivered to the
complainant, the person charged and the mayor of the city.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=6:_PUBLIC_SAFETY 49/53
D. Action By City Attorney: The board shall be empowered at the conclusion of the proceedings
under CCNO 6-2A-10 to instruct the city attorney to do any one or more of the following:
1. To institute and prosecute proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction or enforce
against any person found in violation of this article the fine provided for in CCNO 6-2A-15;
2. To apply to any court of competent jurisdiction for:
a. An order restraining any person from violating any provision of this article;
b. Such other future relief as may seem to the court appropriate for the enforcement
of this article and for the elimination of violations of this article.
3. Notification To State Agency: The board is also empowered at the conclusion of such
proceedings to notify the state real estate division of its findings and any judgments
rendered in connection therewith.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 9.38.130 on 1/1/1987
6-2A-12: REMEDIES
Any person aggrieved in any manner by the violation of any provision of this article who has exhausted
the remedies provided in CCNO 6-2A-9 and CCNO 6-2A-10 may apply to any court of competent
jurisdiction for appropriate relief from such violation, including:
A. An order compelling compliance with this article;
B. An order to prohibit any person found by the court to have violated any provision of this article
from the sale, lease, exchange, transfer, conveyance or assignment of any dwelling or housing
which is the subject of such violation;
C. An order requiring specific performance of any contract for the sale, lease, exchange, transfer,
conveyance or assignment of any dwelling or housing, by any person who in violation of this
article refuses or fails or perform such contract;
D. Compensatory damages and, if appropriate, punitive damages;
E. Such other and further relief as may seem appropriate to the court for the enforcement of this
article and the elimination of violations thereof.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 9.38.140 on 1/1/1987
6-2A-13: TEMPORARY COURT ORDER
Any complainant under this article may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for an order temporarily
prohibiting any transaction affecting the real property which is the subject of the complainant's pending
complaint under this article prior to final determination by the board where the owner of such property is
one of the parties complained of.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 9.38.150 on 1/1/1987
6-2A-14: JUDICIAL REVIEW OF BOARD ORDER
Any party, complainant or person aggrieved by an order of the board shall have the right to obtain
judicial review of such order.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=6:_PUBLIC_SAFETY 50/53
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 9.38.160 on 1/1/1987
6-2A-15: PENALTY
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, subject to penalty as provided in CCNO 1-4-1.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 9.38.170 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
ARTICLE B DESTROYING OR DEFACING PROPERTY
6-2B-1: SIGN OR GATE REMOVAL
6-2B-2: INJURY TO TREE OR MONUMENT
6-2B-3: UNAUTHORIZED POSTING
6-2B-4: UNAUTHORIZED DEFACING
6-2B-5: DAMAGING SIGNS OR EQUIPMENT
6-2B-6: DESTRUCTION OF TRESPASSING SIGNS
6-2B-1: SIGN OR GATE REMOVAL
A. It is unlawful for any person to remove mischievously any gates or signs within the limits of the
city.
B. A violation of this section is a class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as
provided in CCNO 1-4-1.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 9.72.030 on 1/1/1987
Adopted by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
6-2B-2: INJURY TO TREE OR MONUMENT
It is unlawful for any person wilfully and maliciously to take down, injure or remove any monument
erected or any tree marked as a boundary of any street, land or city lot, or to destroy or deface or alter
the marks of any monument or destroy or injure any shade or fruit trees within the limits of the city.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 9.72.040 on 1/1/1987
6-2B-3: UNAUTHORIZED POSTING
A. It is unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city to print, paint, write, mark or in
any way post up any notice, card, advertisement or other device upon any wall, fence, tree, post,
building, bridge or other property or cause the same to be done, without permission of the owner
or agent thereof, or of the city administrator, if upon public property.
B. A violation of this section is a class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as
provided in CCNO 1-4-1.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 9.72.050 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
6-2B-4: UNAUTHORIZED DEFACING
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=6:_PUBLIC_SAFETY 51/53
It is unlawful for any person, without lawful authority, to tear down or deface any ordinance, bill, notice,
advertisement or other paper of a business or legitimate character lawfully posted within the limits of the
city at any time before the object of such notice has been accomplished.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 9.72.060 on 1/1/1987
6-2B-5: DAMAGING SIGNS OR EQUIPMENT
It is unlawful and punishable as a class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as
provided in CCNO 1-4-1, for any person to shoot, deface, damage or destroy signs or placards placed,
permitted to be placed or caused to be placed in any part of the city by the city or by a private
landowner; or to damage, destroy, remove, or cause to be damaged, destroyed or removed any
equipment or devices owned, controlled or operated by the city; or to shoot, shoot at, damage, destroy
or remove any road signs placed upon any of the highways of the city.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 9.72.070 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
6-2B-6: DESTRUCTION OF TRESPASSING SIGNS
It is unlawful for any person, without the consent of the owner or person with apparent authority or act for
the owner of any privately owned land, to tear down, mutilate or destroy any sign, signboard or other
notice located on such property which regulates trespassing or otherwise limits or restricts specific
behavior; or to, without such consent, tear down, deface or destroy any fence or other enclosure on such
privately owned land, or any gate or bars belonging to any such fence or enclosure.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 9.72.080 on 1/1/1987
ARTICLE C OBSTRUCTING PUBLIC WAYS
6-2C-1: OBSTRUCTING SIDEWALK
6-2C-2: OBSTRUCTING STREET
6-2C-1: OBSTRUCTING SIDEWALK
It is unlawful and punishable as a class B misdemeanor, upon conviction, as provided in CCNO 1-4-1,
for any person to remain standing, lying or sitting on any sidewalk for a longer period than two (2)
minutes in such a manner as to obstruct the free passage of foot travellers thereon, or willfully to remain
standing, lying or sitting thereon in such manner for more than one minute after being requested to move
by any police officer, or willfully to remain on the sidewalk in front of any dwelling, house or place of
business in such a manner as to obstruct the free passage of any other person into or out of such
dwelling, house or place of business.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 9.74.010 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
6-2C-2: OBSTRUCTING STREET
It is unlawful and punishable as a class B misdemeanor, upon conviction, as provided in CCNO 1-4-1,
for any person to remain standing, lying or sitting on the street or highway in such a manner as to
obstruct the free passage of vehicular or pedestrian traffic thereon, or willfully to remain on such street or
highway in such a manner as to obstruct the free passage of any persons or vehicle into or out of any
property abutting upon such street or highway or any property having access to such street of highway.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=6:_PUBLIC_SAFETY 52/53
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 9.74.020 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
ARTICLE D CURFEW
6-2D-1: HOURS DESIGNATED
6-2D-2: PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY
6-2D-3: PENALTY
6-2D-1: HOURS DESIGNATED
It is unlawful for any person under the age of sixteen (16) years to be or to remain in or upon the streets,
alleys, public places or vacant lots in the city on any night, except Friday night, between the hours of ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M. and four o'clock (4:00) A.M., or to be upon such streets, alleys, public places or lots
on Friday night between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and four o'clock (4:00) A.M., unless
such person is accompanied by a parent, guardian or other person having legal custody of such minor
person. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any such minor persons whose employment or
lawful business makes it necessary to be upon such streets, alleys or public places during such hours, if
such minor person has upon his person a written permit from the chief of police to be upon such streets,
alleys or public places during such hours.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 9.86.010 on 1/1/1987
6-2D-2: PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY
It is unlawful for the parent, guardian or any person having the legal custody or charge of a person under
the age of sixteen (16) years to permit such minor person to go in or be in or upon any street, alleys,
public places or vacant lots in the city contrary to the provisions of this article.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 9.86.020 on 1/1/1987
6-2D-3: PENALTY
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor and,
upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in CCNO 1-4-1.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 9.86.030 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
ARTICLE E FIREARMS AND WEAPONS
6-2E-1: DISCHARGING WEAPONS WITHIN CITY LIMITS
6-2E-1: DISCHARGING WEAPONS WITHIN CITY LIMITS
It is unlawful and punishable as a class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as
provided in CCNO 1-4-1, for any person to discharge any gun or pistol or air gun, or to shoot any bow
and arrow, within the limits of the city, except in self-defense, or in the case of a peace officer performing
his official duty, or in case of target shooting with a bow and arrow after the erection in a proper place of
a proper breastwork or barrier for the protection of other persons and their property and after approval of
such barrier or breastwork by the chief of police or his designated representative; provided, however,
that nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit the use of play pistols, guns, bows
and arrows, or other similar children's toys.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-11 on 10/12/2010
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=6:_PUBLIC_SAFETY 53/53
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=7:_MOTOR_VEHICLES_AND_TRAFFIC 1/14
7: MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
7-1: TRAFFIC CODE; GENERAL PROVISIONS
7-2: PROPER LOOKOUT AND CONTROL BY DRIVER
7-3: STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
7-4: ROAD REGULATIONS
7-5: OFF ROAD VEHICLE OPERATION
7-6: HANDICAPPED PARKING FACILITIES
7-1: TRAFFIC CODE; GENERAL PROVISIONS
7-1-1: TRAFFIC CODE ADOPTED
7-1-2: CITATION
7-1-3: SPEED LIMIT
7-1-4: TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES AND SIGNS
7-1-5: PENALTY
ARTICLE A: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
7-1-1: TRAFFIC CODE ADOPTED
A. Adopted: The city adopts the Utah criminal and traffic code, ("the code"), to the extent the
offenses set forth herein are identified as infractions or misdemeanors.
B. Amendments: The code shall be automatically replaced whenever the state or its regularly
appointed agent shall issue a new version of the code or any successor to the code.
C. Copies Available: Pursuant to the requirements of Utah Code § 10-3-711, the city shall make at
least one copy of the code, any new version of the code or any successor of the code, available
at the office of the city recorder for use and examination by the public.
D. Definitions: Unless the context requires otherwise, all references in the code to the following
terms shall have the following meanings when used in the city:
COMMISSION: North Ogden City and its officers, departments, agencies and agents.
LOCAL AUTHORITIES: The North Ogden City mayor and city council.
MAGISTRATE: The judge of the North Ogden City justice court.
THE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY OF THE STATE OF UTAH: The chief of police of
North Ogden City or his agent.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 10.04.010 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
7-1-2: CITATION
Where a citation or complaint is issued, it shall be sufficient to use the number of the Utah Code followed
by "the ordinances of North Ogden City" to show the section of the ordinance of the city which has been
violated.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 10.04.020 on 1/1/1987
7-1-3: SPEED LIMIT
A. When appropriate traffic control or regulatory signs giving notice of speed are posted, the prima
facie maximum speed limits designated upon such signs shall apply to the appropriate streets or
portion of streets so posted.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=7:_MOTOR_VEHICLES_AND_TRAFFIC 2/14
B. In the absence of any speed limit sign designating a speed limit applicable thereto, the prima
facie speed limit shall be twenty five (25) miles per hour.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 10.04.030 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
7-1-4: TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES AND SIGNS
The traffic control and regulation of all public streets shall be as posted, regulated or controlled by
appropriate traffic control devices, signs or other regulatory devices or controls
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 10.04.040 on 1/1/1987
7-1-5: PENALTY
Any violation of the provisions set forth in the code, relative to traffic violations, shall be punishable as
provided in Utah Code § 41-6a-202.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-11 on 10/12/2010
ARTICLE A: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
7-1A-1: PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS
7-1A-2: AMOUNT OF PENALTY SET BY RESOLUTION
7-1A-3: ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS
7-1A-4: NOTICES
7-1A-5: OWNER'S RESPONSIBILITY
7-1A-6: PAYMENT OF PENALTY REDUCED
7-1A-7: HEARINGS
7-1A-8: COLLECTION
7-1A-9: APPEALS
7-1A-1: PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS
The city shall have sole discretion in deciding whether to file a civil or criminal judicial case or pursue an
administrative enforcement action for the violation of any of its ordinances or applicable code
requirements. The enactment of this chapter shall not be construed to limit the city's right to prosecute
any violation as a criminal offense.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-11 on 10/12/2010
7-1A-2: AMOUNT OF PENALTY SET BY RESOLUTION
The amount of any civil penalty assessed under CCNO 7-1A-1 shall be established by a resolution
adopted by the city council.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2003-12 on 5/27/2003
7-1A-3: ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS
A. All officers of the police department shall have the authority to issue notices under this article. In
addition, the mayor may also authorize other city employees to issue notices under this article.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=7:_MOTOR_VEHICLES_AND_TRAFFIC 3/14
B. The mayor may also, pursuant to Utah Code § 41-6-19.5, or any successor statute, delegate
authority to other persons to enforce:
1. The provisions of Utah Code § 41-1a-414 and related to parking for a person with a
disability;
2. The provisions of this title relating to accessible parking privileges for a person with a
disability; or
3. The provisions of Utah Code § 41-6-103.5(4) related to parking in a school bus parking
zone.
C. If the mayor delegates authority to other persons under this section:
1. The person must be at least twenty one (21) years of age; and
2. The person may not begin enforcement activities until the person has received
appropriate training from the chief of police or his designee.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2003-12 on 5/27/2003
7-1A-4: NOTICES
Persons authorized to issue notices under this article shall issue notices to persons who have violated
this title by affixing a notice (in a form approved by the city council) to the vehicle which has been parked
or left in violation of this title, or delivering the notice to the owner or driver of the vehicle.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2003-12 on 5/27/2003
7-1A-5: OWNER'S RESPONSIBILITY
Whenever any vehicle shall have been parked or left in violation of this title, there shall be a rebuttable
presumption that the person in whose name the vehicle is registered is responsible for the violation and
subject to the civil penalty provided in this article.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2003-12 on 5/27/2003
7-1A-6: PAYMENT OF PENALTY REDUCED
Any civil penalty imposed under this article which is paid within ten (10) days of the receipt of the notice
shall be reduced by the sum of twenty five dollars ($25.00).
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2003-12 on 5/27/2003
7-1A-7: HEARINGS
A. Hearing Officers: The mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council, shall appoint such
hearing officers as he or she deems appropriate to consider matters relating to violations of this
title. The hearing officers may be city employees and shall make final administrative
determinations in all matters in which a violation of this title has been alleged.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=7:_MOTOR_VEHICLES_AND_TRAFFIC 4/14
B. Request For Hearing: Within thirty (30) days after receiving the notice described in CCNO 7-1A-
4, the person who received the notice may request a hearing on the allegation that he or she
violated this title, except that a person may not request a hearing under this section if the
violation is alleged to have occurred in conjunction with a criminal violation as part of a single
criminal episode and the criminal violation will be prosecuted in a criminal proceeding. A person
desiring to have a hearing under this section shall file a written request for the hearing with the
city court clerk. Any person who received a notice and does not request a hearing within thirty
(30) days shall be deemed to have waived the right to a hearing.
C. Hearing Conducted: Within ten (10) days after receiving the request for a hearing, the hearing
officer shall conduct a hearing on the alleged violation of this title. The hearing shall:
1. Be a public meeting held during the city's regularly scheduled business hours;
2. Provide due process to all of the parties, including the right to be represented by counsel,
the right to cross examine witnesses, and the right to present evidence on the party's own
behalf; and
3. Be recorded or otherwise documented so that a true and correct transcript may be made
of the proceedings.
D. Burden To Prove Defense: The burden to prove any defense shall be upon the person raising the
defense.
E. Dismissal; Conditions: The hearing officer shall dismiss the notice of the violation if:
1. The hearing officer finds that no violation of this title occurred;
2. The city attorney has recommended dismissal and provided the hearing officer with good
cause for the dismissal; or
3. The hearing officer finds that the person who requested the hearing has established
either of the following defenses:
a. At the time the notice was given, possession of the vehicle had been acquired in
violation of the criminal laws of the state; or
b. Compliance with the provisions of this title would have presented an imminent and
irreparable injury to persons or property.
F. Reduction In Penalty: The hearing officer may reduce the penalty provided in this title if he or she
finds that the violation occurred, but the person requesting the hearing has established one of the
following defenses:
1. At the time of the violation, possession of the vehicle had been acquired pursuant to a
written lease agreement or similar written agreement;
2. The vehicle was mechanically incapable of being moved from the location; provided,
however, that this defense shall not apply to any vehicle which remained in the location
for more than six (6) hours; or
3. Any markings, signs or other indicia of the applicable parking regulations (if required
under this title) were not clearly visible or comprehensible.
G. Recommendation Of City Attorney For Reduction: The hearing officer may also reduce the
penalty provided in this title if the city attorney recommends the reduction of the penalty and
provides the hearing officer with good cause for the reduction.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=7:_MOTOR_VEHICLES_AND_TRAFFIC 5/14
H. Limitation In Reductions: In no event shall the hearing officer reduce the penalty under
subsections F or G of this section below the sum of twenty five dollars ($25.00).
I. Payment Of Penalty: If the hearing officer finds that a violation of this title occurred and no
applicable defense exists, the hearing officer may, in the interests of justice and on behalf of the
city, enter into an agreement for the timely or periodic payment of the applicable penalty.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2003-12 on 5/27/2003
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
7-1A-8: COLLECTION
If any penalty imposed pursuant to this title remains unpaid after forty (40) days from the receipt of the
notice or after ten (10) days after the date of a hearing pursuant to CCNO 7-1A-7, the city may file an
action to recover the penalty. The action may be filed in the city court. In any such action, the city shall
be entitled to recover its costs and attorney fees. The city may use any legal means to collect a
judgment received in any such action.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2003-12 on 5/27/2003
7-1A-9: APPEALS
A. Authority: Any person who is found to have violated this title in a hearing held pursuant to
CCNO 7-1A-7 may appeal the hearing officer's decision to the district court.
B. Limitation Of Allegation: The person may only allege that the decision in the hearing was
arbitrary, capricious or illegal.
C. Time Limit: An appeal under this section shall be barred unless it is filed within thirty (30) days
after the hearing officer's decision is final.
D. Record Of Proceedings To Court: The city shall transmit the record of its proceedings to the
reviewing district court. The record shall include the hearing officer's findings, orders and a true
and correct transcript of the hearing.
E. Evidence Considered: The district court may not accept or consider any evidence that is not
included in the record unless the evidence was offered to the hearing officer and the district court
determines that the hearing officer improperly excluded the evidence.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2003-12 on 5/27/2003
7-2: PROPER LOOKOUT AND CONTROL BY DRIVER
7-2-1: SAFE AND PROPER LOOKOUT
7-2-2: DRIVING TO RIGHT
7-2-1: SAFE AND PROPER LOOKOUT
A. Required: No person shall drive a motor vehicle within the corporate limits of the city in such a
manner as to endanger life or property by failing to keep a safe and proper lookout for other
traffic, objects or persons.
B. Penalty: Every person convicted of violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a class C
misdemeanor and shall be subject to penalty as provided in CCNO 1-4-1.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=7:_MOTOR_VEHICLES_AND_TRAFFIC 6/14
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 10.08.010 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
7-2-2: DRIVING TO RIGHT
A. Required: The driver of a motor vehicle traveling upon roadways within the corporate limits of the
city shall hold such motor vehicle under control and as near the right hand edge of the roadway
as reasonably possible.
B. Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a class C misdemeanor
and shall be subject to penalty as provided in CCNO 1-4-1.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 10.08.020 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
7-3: STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
7-3-1: PROHIBITED PARKING
7-3-2: BLOCKING TRAVELED ROADWAY
7-3-3: MOVING VEHICLE INTO PROHIBITED AREA
7-3-4: WINTER PARKING REGULATIONS
7-3-5: DISPLAYING VEHICLES FOR SALE
7-3-6: IMPOUNDMENT; FEE
7-3-7: PENALTY
7-3-8: PARKING UNATTACHED TRAILERS PROHIBITED
ARTICLE A: COMMERCIAL VEHICLES
ARTICLE B: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
7-3-1: PROHIBITED PARKING
It is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop, stand or park such vehicle in any of the following
places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a
peace officer or traffic control device:
A. On a sidewalk;
B. In front of a public or private driveway;
C. Within an intersection;
D. Within five feet (5') of a fire hydrant;
E. Within twenty feet (20') of crosswalk at an intersection;
F. On a crosswalk;
G. Within thirty feet (30') upon the approach of any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic control signal
location at the side of a roadway;
H. Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet (30') of points on the curb
immediately opposite ends of a safety zone, unless the chief of police indicates a different length
by signs or markings;
I. Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street
immediately opposite the entrance to any fire station, within seventy five feet (75') of such
entrance when properly signposted;
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=7:_MOTOR_VEHICLES_AND_TRAFFIC 7/14
J. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when standing, stopping or parking
would obstruct traffic;
K. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge of a street or at the curb of a
street;
L. Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway tunnel;
M. At any place where official signs prohibit stopping, standing or parking.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 10.16.010 on 1/1/1987
7-3-2: BLOCKING TRAVELED ROADWAY
It is unlawful for any operator of any vehicle to stop, stand or park any vehicle upon any street, highway
or alley, in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet (10') of the
traveled portion of the width of such roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, except that an
operator may stop temporarily during the actual loading or unloading of passengers, or when necessary
in obedience to traffic regulations, or signs or signals, or a peace officer.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 10.16.020 on 1/1/1987
7-3-3: MOVING VEHICLE INTO PROHIBITED AREA
No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any such prohibited area or away from
a curb such distance as is unlawful.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 10.16.030 on 1/1/1987
7-3-4: WINTER PARKING REGULATIONS
A. Definitions: As used in this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
PARK, PARKED AND PARKING: The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise
than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading property
or passengers.
SNOWSTORM: An event of snowfall which is anticipated to result in accumulations of snow
sufficient to necessitate the removal of snow from the public streets and roadways.
VEHICLE: Any device, means or mechanism in or on which persons, goods or other items of
personal property may be carried from one place to another. "Vehicle" includes, but is not limited
to, automobiles, trucks, trailers of all kinds, motorcycles, off highway vehicles, motor homes,
recreational vehicles and tractors.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=7:_MOTOR_VEHICLES_AND_TRAFFIC 8/14
B. Prohibited Parking:
1. It is unlawful for the owner of any vehicle to park his or her vehicle, or allow his or her
vehicle to be parked, on any public street or roadway in the city between the hours of
twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. from November 15 through
March 15 of each year, except for physicians or emergency vehicles in emergency
situations.
2. It is unlawful for the owner of any vehicle to park his or her vehicle, or allow his or her
vehicle to be parked, on any public street or roadway in the city during any snowstorm or
within twenty four (24) hours following the cessation of snow after any snowstorm.
C. Penalty: A violation of this section may be charged as a civil violation.
D. Removal: Any vehicle found parked in violation of this section shall be deemed a public nuisance
and may be removed or towed away by or under the direction of the police department or the
department of public works.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-11 on 10/12/2010
7-3-5: DISPLAYING VEHICLES FOR SALE
No person shall park a vehicle, boat, trailer or other item upon or within one hundred feet (100') of any
street or highway for the principal purpose of displaying such vehicle or item for sale. Nothing contained
herein shall prohibit the display of vehicles or other items for sale in residential zones where the vehicle
or other item is displayed upon the owner's premises or upon a street or roadway abutting said
premises. Violation of this section shall be considered an infraction.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-11 on 10/12/2010
7-3-6: IMPOUNDMENT; FEE
Any vehicle parked upon any public street in the city at a place, in any manner, or for a length of time
prohibited by any ordinance of this city, if unoccupied, may be removed and impounded by the chief of
police or any police officer and a service charge in such amount as established by resolution of the city
council shall be paid to the city before such vehicle is released from pound. The payment of such service
fee shall not release the owner, chauffeur, driver or operator of such vehicle from any penalty imposed
for violation of traffic laws or ordinances.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 10.16.040 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
7-3-7: PENALTY
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be liable for a civil penalty as described in
CCNO 7-1 Article A.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2003-12 on 5/27/2003
7-3-8: PARKING UNATTACHED TRAILERS PROHIBITED
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=7:_MOTOR_VEHICLES_AND_TRAFFIC 9/14
Except in the case of recreational vehicles as regulated by CCNO 7-3B-2, no person shall park a trailer
that is not attached to a registered vehicle upon any street or highway for more than twenty four (24)
hours and no person shall park a trailer on private property not belonging to the trailer owner, whether
attached or unattached, without the express consent of the property owner or the owner's authorized
agent. Violation of this section shall be considered an infraction.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2011-18 on 10/11/2011
ARTICLE A: COMMERCIAL VEHICLES
7-3A-1: DEFINITIONS
7-3A-2: PROHIBITED PARKING
7-3A-3: PENALTY
7-3A-1: DEFINITIONS
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section:
BUS: Every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than fifteen (15) passengers and used for the
transportation of persons; and every motor vehicle, other than a taxicab, designed and used for the
transportation of persons for compensation.
COMMERCIAL TRUCK: Every motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the
transportation of property and whose gross weight exceeds two (2) tons.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human power, and which are primarily
used for hire or compensation.
FARM TRACTOR: Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily as a farm implement, for drawing
plows, mowing machines and other implements of husbandry.
PARK OR PARKING: The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for
the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading property or passengers.
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT: The territory contiguous to and including a street when the property on such
street for a distance of three hundred feet (300') or more is in the main improved with private residences.
STREET: The entire width between the boundary line of every way publicly maintained when any part
thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular traffic, and the adjacent property
customarily intended for pedestrians or the parking of vehicles, except parking lots adjacent to
businesses, schools or churches.
TRAILER: Every vehicle with or without motive power, designed for carrying persons or property and for
being drawn by a motor vehicle.
TRUCK TRACTOR: Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles or
trailers and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle or trailer
and load so drawn.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 10.16.090 on 1/1/1987
7-3A-2: PROHIBITED PARKING
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=7:_MOTOR_VEHICLES_AND_TRAFFIC 10/14
No person shall park any bus, farm tractor, truck tractor, trailer, commercial truck or other commercial
vehicle upon any street within a residential district.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 10.16.100 on 1/1/1987
7-3A-3: PENALTY
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be liable for a civil penalty as described in
CCNO 7-1 Article A.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2003-12 on 5/27/2003
ARTICLE B: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
7-3B-1: DEFINITIONS
7-3B-2: PROHIBITED PARKING
7-3B-3: PENALTY
7-3B-1: DEFINITIONS
As used in this article:
PARK OR PARKING: The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for
the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading property or passengers.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: Travel trailers, motor homes, enclosed campers, boats, utility trailers, and
other like vehicles, trailers and facilities used primarily for recreational and utility purposes.
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT: The property contiguous to and including a street when such property for a
distance of three hundred feet (300') or more is in the main improved with private residences.
STREET: The entire width between the boundary line of every way publicly maintained when any part
thereof is opened to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular traffic.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 10.16.120 on 1/1/1987
7-3B-2: PROHIBITED PARKING
A. Specified: No person shall park any recreational vehicle upon any street within a residential
district for a period of more than two (2) consecutive days and no more than ten (10) days total
during any calendar month without a special permit from the city.
B. Removal: Any recreational vehicle parked in violation of this section shall be deemed a public
nuisance and may be removed and towed away by or under the direction of the police
department.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-18 on 11/30/2010
7-3B-3: PENALTY
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be liable for a civil penalty as described in
CCNO 7-1 Article A.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=7:_MOTOR_VEHICLES_AND_TRAFFIC 11/14
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2003-12 on 5/27/2003
7-4: ROAD REGULATIONS
7-4-1: SECURING LOADS
7-4-1: SECURING LOADS
A. Required:
1. No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any street or highway within the city unless such
vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent its contents from dropping, sifting or
leaking, or otherwise escaping therefrom.
2. All materials of any kind whatsoever conveyed or hauled through or upon any public
streets and/or highways of the city, shall be transported in such manner as to prevent
such materials from falling from the transporting vehicles and littering such street or
highways. If necessary to prevent such littering of street or highways, the material thus
transported shall be securely tied down or shall be tightly covered with heavy canvas or
other suitable covering.
B. Penalty: Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this section is guilty of a class
C misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to penalty as provided in CCNO 1-4-1.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 10.20.020 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
7-5: OFF ROAD VEHICLE OPERATION
7-5-1: PRIVATE STREET DEFINED
7-5-2: PRIVATE PROPERTY RESTRICTIONS
7-5-3: PUBLIC PROPERTY RESTRICTIONS
7-5-4: WRITTEN PERMISSION; POSSESSION REQUIRED
7-5-5: EXCEPTIONS
7-5-6: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES ON WATERSHED LAND
7-5-7: PENALTY
7-5-1: PRIVATE STREET DEFINED
As used in this chapter, "private street" means a street over which private persons have an easement to
travel and does not include driveways, paths or other ways over which no one has a right to travel,
except by license.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 10.24.010 on 1/1/1987
7-5-2: PRIVATE PROPERTY RESTRICTIONS
It is unlawful for any persons to operate any type of motor vehicle (including, but not limited to,
motorcycles, trail bikes, dune buggies, motor scooters or jeeps) upon the private property of another,
except a highway or private street, without first obtaining the written permission of the person in lawful
possession of the property or, if the property is unoccupied, the owner of such property.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 10.24.020 on 1/1/1987
7-5-3: PUBLIC PROPERTY RESTRICTIONS
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=7:_MOTOR_VEHICLES_AND_TRAFFIC 12/14
A. It is unlawful for any person to operate any type of motor vehicle (including, but not limited to,
motorcycles, trail bikes, dune buggies, motor scooters or jeeps) upon any public property, except
a highway or private street, without first obtaining the written permission of the public entity which
is in possession of such property or, if the property is unoccupied, the public entity which owns
such property. A violation of this section shall be considered a class C misdemeanor and may be
charged under Utah Code § 41-22-12.
B. A second violation of this section shall be considered a class C misdemeanor.
C. Three (3) or more violations of this section shall be considered a class B misdemeanor.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-11 on 10/12/2010
7-5-4: WRITTEN PERMISSION; POSSESSION REQUIRED
A. Every person who operates any type of motor vehicle upon the private property of another or
upon any public property, except a highway or private street, at all times while so operating such
motor vehicle shall maintain in his possession the written permission required by CCNO 7-5-2
and CCNO 7-5-3, except that, if the same document grants permission to two (2) or more
persons, a person named in such document need not have it in his possession while another
person named in the same document, riding in the same group and not more than three hundred
feet (300') from such person, has such document in his possession.
B. The first violation of this provision shall be charged as an infraction.
C. The second violation of this provision shall be charged as a class C misdemeanor.
D. Three (3) or more violations of this provision shall be charged as class B misdemeanors.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-11 on 10/12/2010
7-5-5: EXCEPTIONS
This chapter does not prohibit the use of such property by the following:
A. Emergency vehicles;
B. Vehicles of commerce in the course of the conduct of normal business;
C. Vehicles being operated on property devoted to commercial or industrial purposes where such
operation is in conjunction with commercial or industrial use and where such operation is implied
or expressly given by the person in possession of such property;
D. Vehicles operated on property actually used for residential purposes and where such vehicles
are there at the expressed or implied invitation of the owner or occupant;
E. Vehicles being operated on public or private parking lots where permission to operate is implied
or expressly given by the person in possession of the lot.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 10.24.050 on 1/1/1987
7-5-6: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES ON WATERSHED LAND
A. The Utah recreation vehicle act, comprising Utah Code 41-22, is adopted and terms and
provisions thereof made applicable to the operation of snowmobiles, all terrain and other
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=7:_MOTOR_VEHICLES_AND_TRAFFIC 13/14
recreation vehicles.
B. It is a class C misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in CCNO 1-4-1, for any person to
violate any of the provisions of the Utah recreation vehicle act so adopted, unless such violation
is by such act or other law of the city or the state declared to be a felony.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 10.24.060 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
7-5-7: PENALTY
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, shall be subject to penalty as provided in CCNO 1-4-1.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 10.24.070 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
7-6: HANDICAPPED PARKING FACILITIES
7-6-1: DEFINITIONS
7-6-2: PARKING OF APPROPRIATELY MARKED VEHICLES
7-6-3: ABUSE OF PARKING PRIVILEGE
7-6-4: PENALTY
7-6-1: DEFINITIONS
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings designated in this section:
DISABLED PERSON: Any person who has lost, or has lost the use of, both legs or, is so severely
disabled or handicapped as to be unable to ambulate without the aid of a wheelchair or other
mechanical device, or without causing extreme discomfort or danger to their health and medical wellbeing,
and who drives or is transported in a motor vehicle carrying distinctive logo handicapped license
plates, or a transferable motor vehicle identification card displayed in the rear window of that vehicle.
HANDICAPPED PARKING: Any publicly or privately owned parking stall which is clearly marked as
being restricted for handicapped use only, whether that marking is a sign or logo painted in the parking
area.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 10.32.010 on 1/1/1987
7-6-2: PARKING OF APPROPRIATELY MARKED VEHICLES
A. Any disabled person shall be allowed to park a vehicle in metered parking zones and
handicapped parking areas, other than those available for emergency use, without charge, if
such vehicle carries a distinctive logo handicapped license plate or transferable identification
card. Parking shall be allowed in a manner which allows access to the automobile by the
disabled person.
B. No person shall park a vehicle in a handicapped parking space unless such a vehicle carries a
distinctive logo handicapped license plate or transferable identification card.
C. Violation of handicapped parking as set forth herein may be enforced on public property and on
private property which is used or intended to be used by the public.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=7:_MOTOR_VEHICLES_AND_TRAFFIC 14/14
D. The parking privileges granted by this section shall also apply to vehicles displaying a distinctive
handicapped license plate or transferable identification card issued by another state if displayed
on a vehicle utilized by a handicapped person.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 10.32.020 on 1/1/1987
7-6-3: ABUSE OF PARKING PRIVILEGE
A. Every person in whose name a vehicle is registered or licensed shall be responsible for any such
parking of the vehicle in violation of this chapter. It shall be no defense to such charge that the
vehicle was illegally parked by another unless it is shown that at such time the vehicle was being
used without the consent of the registered owner thereof.
B. Any disabled person who abuses the rights and privileges conferred under this chapter or allows
individuals who are not disabled to use those parking privileges shall be in violation of this
section.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 10.32.030 on 1/1/1987
7-6-4: PENALTY
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be liable for a civil penalty as described in
CCNO 7-1 Article A.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2003-12 on 5/27/2003
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=8:_PUBLIC_WAYS_AND_PROPERTY 1/37
8: PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
8-1: EXCAVATIONS AND STREET CUTS
8-2: TELECOMMUNICATIONS; USE OF RIGHTS OF WAY
8-3: PROHIBITED STRUCTURES
8-4: SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL
8-5: TREES
8-6: PARKS
8-7: RESTRICTED VEHICLES
8-1: EXCAVATIONS AND STREET CUTS
8-1-1: DEFINITIONS
8-1-2: PERMIT REQUIRED; BASIS FOR ISSUANCE
8-1-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT
8-1-4: EMERGENCY WORK
8-1-5: FEE FOR PERMIT
8-1-6: CONTENTS OF PERMIT; DURATION; EXTENSIONS
8-1-7: TRANSFER, ASSIGNMENT PROHIBITED
8-1-8: COMPLIANCE; SITE PERMITTEE IDENTIFICATION; BARRICADES
8-1-9: OTHER HIGHWAY PERMITS
8-1-10: RELOCATION OF STRUCTURES IN PUBLIC WAYS
8-1-11: IMPACT ON EXISTING IMPROVEMENTS
8-1-12: RESTORATION OF PUBLIC PROPERTY
8-1-13: INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS
8-1-14: BOND; WHEN REQUIRED, CONDITIONS, WARRANTY
8-1-15: HOLD HARMLESS AGREEMENT; LIMITATIONS ON CITY LIABILITY
8-1-16: WORK WITHOUT PERMIT
8-1-17: FAILURE TO COMPLY; DEFAULT IN PERFORMANCE
8-1-18: FAILURE TO CONFORM TO DESIGN STANDARDS
8-1-19: APPEAL OF SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OR STOP WORK ORDER
8-1-20: TAMPERING WITH TRAFFIC BARRICADES
8-1-21: CONFLICT WITH GOVERNING PROVISIONS
8-1-22: PENALTY
8-1-1: DEFINITIONS
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following meaning unless a different
meaning clearly appears from the context:
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=8:_PUBLIC_WAYS_AND_PROPERTY 2/37
APPLICANT: Any person who makes application for a permit.
BUILDING OFFICIAL: The building official, or his/her authorized representative.
BUSINESS: Any place in the city in which there is conducted or carried on principally or exclusively any
pursuit or occupation for the purpose of gaining a livelihood.
CITY: North Ogden City, a municipal corporation of the state of Utah.
EMERGENCY: Any unforeseen circumstances or occurrence, the existence of which constitutes an
immediate danger to persons or property, or which causes interruption of utility or public services.
ENGINEERING REGULATIONS, REGULATIONS, SPECIFICATIONS AND/OR DESIGN STANDARDS:
The latest published version of the city public works standards, as supplemented and updated by
engineering regulations, specifications, design standards or criteria published or adopted by the city.
FAILURE: A work site restoration which fails to meet building official specifications, or which results in a
deteriorated or substandard condition within the duration of the warranty period. Failure may be
settlement of surfaces, deterioration of materials, or other surface irregularities.
INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER: A person providing to another, for the purpose of providing
telecommunication services to customers, all or part of the necessary system that uses the right of way.
OPERATOR: Any person who provides service over a telecommunications system and directly or
through one or more affiliates owns a controlling interest in such system, or who otherwise controls or is
responsible for the operation of such a system.
PERMITTEE: Any person that has been issued a permit and thereby has agreed to fulfill the
requirements of this chapter.
PERSON: Means and includes any natural person, partnership, firm, association, provider, corporation,
company, organization or entity of any kind.
PIPE DRIVEWAY: A driveway approach that uses a pipe or other means to bridge the gutter.
PRIVATE DRAIN LINE: A pipe installed solely for the transmission of water collected or generated on
private property, such as drainage, spring or storm water, or condensate into the public drainage
system.
PROPERTY OWNER: Person or persons who have legal title to property and/or equitable interest in the
property, or the ranking official or agent of a company having legal title to property and/or equitable
interest in the property.
PROVIDER: An operator, infrastructure provider, reseller, system lessee or public utility company.
PUBLIC UTILITY COMPANY: Any company subject to the jurisdiction of the Utah state public service
commission, or any mutual corporation providing gas, electricity, water, telephone or other utility product
or services for use by the general public.
PUBLIC WAY: Means and includes all public rights of way and easements, public footpaths, walkways
and sidewalks, public streets, public roads, public highways, public alleys and public drainageways. It
does not, however, include utility easements not within public ways of the city.
RESELLER: Refers to any person that provides service over a system for which a separate charge is
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=8:_PUBLIC_WAYS_AND_PROPERTY 3/37
made, where that person does not own or lease the underlying system used for the transmission and
does not install any system in the rights of way.
RESIDENT: The person or persons currently making their home at a particular dwelling.
RESTRICTED VEHICLE: Any vehicle designed for the commercial delivery of gravel, earth, aggregate,
asphalt, concrete, or other similar material which has a GVWR of 30,000 lbs or more.
STORM DRAIN: A dedicated pipe, conduit, waterway or ditch installed in a right of way or easement for
the transmission of storm and drainage water. This term does not include private drain lines.
SYSTEM LESSEE: Refers to any person that leases a system or a specific portion of a system to
provide services.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM OR SYSTEM: All conduits, manholes, poles, antennas,
transceivers, amplifiers and all other electronic devices, equipment, wire and appurtenances owned,
leased, or used by a provider located in the construction, ownership, operation, use or maintenance of a
telecommunications system.
WORK SITE RESTORATION: Means and includes the restoring of the original ground or paved hard
surface area to comply with engineering regulations, and includes, but is not limited to, repair, cleanup,
backfilling, compaction and stabilization, paving and other work necessary to place the site in acceptable
condition following the conclusion of the work, or the expiration or revocation of the permit.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2004-06 on 5/11/2004
8-1-2: PERMIT REQUIRED; BASIS FOR ISSUANCE
Any person desiring to perform work of any kind in a public way within the city shall make application for
a permit. The decision by the city to issue a permit shall include, among other factors determined by the
city, the following:
A. The capacity of the public way to accommodate the facilities or structures proposed to be
installed in the public way;
B. The capacity of the public way to accommodate multiple wire in addition to cables, conduits,
pipes or other facilities or structures of other users of the public way, such as electrical power,
telephone, gas, sewer and water;
C. The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private facilities, improvements or landscaping
previously existing in the public way;
D. The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of construction from numerous
excavations of the public way.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2004-06 on 5/11/2004
8-1-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT
Application for a permit shall be filed with the building inspection department on a form or forms to be
furnished by the city. Property owners and/or tenants for whom work is being done shall be responsible
for obtaining the permits, provided, however, contractors may obtain the permit in the contractor's name.
A. Eligible Persons: No person shall be eligible to apply for or receive permits to do work within the
public ways of the city, save and except the following:
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=8:_PUBLIC_WAYS_AND_PROPERTY 4/37
1. Contractors licensed by the state as general contractors;
2. Providers;
3. Persons offering a service which requires occupation of the public way, such as scaffold
or staging, staging of a crane, installation or maintenance of electric signs, glass,
awnings, and painting or cleaning of buildings or sign boards or other structures.
B. Denial Based On Past Performance: The building official may deny the issuance of permits to
contractors, utility companies or other permit applicants who have shown by past performance
that, in the opinion of the building official, they will not consistently conform to the engineering
regulations, specifications, design standards or the requirements of this chapter.
C. Plans May Be Required: When necessary, in the judgment of the building official, to fully
determine the relationship of the work proposed to existing or proposed facilities within the public
ways, or to determine whether the work proposed complies with the engineering regulations,
construction specifications and design standards, the building official may require the filing of
engineering plans, specifications and sketches showing the proposed work in sufficient detail to
permit determination of such relationship or compliance, or both, and the application shall be
deemed suspended until such plans and sketches are filed and approved.
D. Commencement Unlawful Without Approval And Permit: It shall be unlawful for any person to
commence work upon any public way until the building official has approved the application and
until a permit has been issued for such work, except as specifically approved to the contrary in
this chapter.
E. Appeal: The disapproval or denial of an application by the building official may be appealed by
the applicant to the city administrator by filing of a written notice of appeal within ten (10) days of
the action of the building official. The city administrator shall hear such appeal, if written request
therefor be timely filed as soon as practicable, and render his/her decision within two (2) weeks
following notice of such appeal.
F. Limited Authority Of Building Official: In approving or disapproving work within any public way, or
permits therefor, in the inspection of such work; in reviewing plans, sketches or specifications;
and generally in the exercise of the authority conferred upon him/her by this chapter, the building
official shall act in such manner as to preserve and protect the public way and the use thereof,
but shall have no authority to govern the actions or inaction of permittees and applicants or other
persons which have no relationship to the use, preservation or protection of the public way.
G. Routine Maintenance Work By Government Employees: It shall be lawful for a city, county, state,
federal or other government employee to perform routine maintenance work, not involving
excavations, without first having obtained a permit therefor.
H. Hand Digging Excavations: A permit is not required from the building official for hand digging
excavations for installation or repair of sprinkler systems and landscaping within the nonpaved
areas of the public way. However, conformance to all city specifications is required.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2004-06 on 5/11/2004
8-1-4: EMERGENCY WORK
A. Authorized: Any person maintaining pipes, lines or facilities in the public way may proceed with
work upon existing facilities without a permit when emergency circumstances demand the work
to be done immediately; provided a permit could not reasonably and practicably have been
obtained beforehand.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=8:_PUBLIC_WAYS_AND_PROPERTY 5/37
B. Business Hours: In the event that emergency work is commenced on or within any public way of
the city during regular business hours, the building official shall be notified within one-half (1/2)
hour from the time the work is commenced. The person commencing and conducting such work
shall take all necessary safety precautions for the protection of the public and the direction and
control of traffic, and shall ensure that work is accomplished according to city engineering
regulations, the manual on uniform traffic control devices and other applicable laws, regulations
or generally recognized practices in the industry.
C. Other Than Business Hours: Any person commencing emergency work in the public way during
other than business hours without a permit shall immediately thereafter apply for a permit or give
notice during the first hour of the first regular business day on which city offices are open for
business after such work is commenced. A permit for such emergency work may be issued
which shall be retroactive to the date when the work was begun, at the discretion of the building
official.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2004-06 on 5/11/2004
8-1-5: FEE FOR PERMIT
A. Required: The city shall charge and the permittee shall pay upon issuance of the permit, fees for
costs associated with the work performed under the permit as outlined in schedule A, to be
included in the consolidated fee schedule. Such costs could include costs for reviewing the
project and issuing the permit, inspections of the project, deterioration of the public way or
diminution of the useful life of the public way, and other costs to the city associated with the work
to be done under the permit. All costs shall be assessed in a nondiscriminatory manner.
B. Waiver: The building official may waive permit fees or penalties, or portion thereof, provided for in
this chapter, when he/she determines that such permit fee or penalty:
1. Pertains to construction or rehabilitation of housing for persons whose income is below
the median income level for the city; or
2. Pertains to an encroachment on the public way involving a beautification project which
furthers specific goals and objectives set forth in the city strategic plan, master plans or
other official documents, including decorative street lighting, building facade lighting,
flower and planter boxes, and landscaping.
C. Additional Charges: Additional charges to cover the reasonable cost and expenses of any
required engineering review, inspection and work site restoration associated with each
undertaking may be charged by the city to each permittee, in addition to the permit fee.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2004-06 on 5/11/2004
8-1-6: CONTENTS OF PERMIT; DURATION; EXTENSIONS
A. Starting And Estimated Completion Dates:
1. Each permit application shall state the starting date and estimated completion date. Work
shall be completed within five (5) days from the starting date or as determined by the
building official. Such determination shall be based upon factors reasonably related to the
work to be performed under the permit. Such factors may include, in addition to other
factors related to the work to be performed, the following:
a. The scope of work to be performed under the permit;
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=8:_PUBLIC_WAYS_AND_PROPERTY 6/37
b. Maintaining the safe and effective flow of pedestrian and vehicular traffic on the
public way affected by the work;
c. Protecting the existing improvements to the public way impacted by the work;
d. The season of the year during which the work is to be performed as well as the
current weather and its impact on public safety and the use of the public way by
the public;
e. Use of the public way for extraordinary events anticipated by the city.
2. The building official shall be notified by the permittee of commencement of the work within
twenty four (24) hours prior to commencing work. The permit shall be valid for the time
period specified in the permit. The building official shall inspect the work and the work site
restoration.
B. Extension: If the work is not completed during such period, prior to the expiration of the permit,
the permittee may apply to the building official for an additional permit or an extension, which
may be granted by the building official for good cause shown.
C. Length Of Extension: The length of the extension requested by the permittee shall be subject to
the approval of the building official. No extension shall be made that allows work to be completed
in the winter period without payment of winter fees.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2004-06 on 5/11/2004
8-1-7: TRANSFER, ASSIGNMENT PROHIBITED
Permits shall not be transferable or assignable, and work shall not be performed under a permit in any
place other than that specified in the permit. Nothing herein contained shall prevent a permittee from
subcontracting the work to be performed under a permit; provided, however, that the holder of the permit
shall be and remain responsible for the performance of the work under the permit, and for all bonding,
insurance and other requirements of this chapter and under said permit.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2004-06 on 5/11/2004
8-1-8: COMPLIANCE; SITE PERMITTEE IDENTIFICATION; BARRICADES
A. Compliance With Specifications: The work performed in the public way shall conform to the
requirements of the engineering regulations, design standards, construction specifications and
traffic control regulations of the city, copies of which shall be available from the building official,
kept on file in the office of the city recorder and be open to public inspection during office hours.
B. Site Permittee Identification: Where a job site is left unattended, before completion of the work,
signage with minimum two inch (2") high letters shall be attached to a barricade or otherwise
posted at the site, indicating the permittee's name or company name, telephone number and
after hours telephone number.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=8:_PUBLIC_WAYS_AND_PROPERTY 7/37
C. Barricades: All excavations shall be conducted in a manner resulting in a minimum amount of
interference or interruption of street or pedestrian traffic. Inconvenience to residents and
businesses fronting on the public way shall be minimized. Suitable, adequate and sufficient
barricades and/or other structures will be available and used where necessary to prevent
accidents involving property or persons. Barricades must be in place until all of the permittee's
equipment is removed from the site and the excavation has been backfilled and proper
temporary gravel surface is in place, except where backfilling and resurfacing is to be done by
the city; in which case the barricades, together with any necessary lights, flares or torches, must
remain in place until the backfill work is actually commenced by the city. From sunset to sunrise,
all barricades and excavations must be clearly outlined by adequate signal lights, torches, etc.
The police department and fire department shall be notified at least twenty four (24) hours in
advance of any planned excavation requiring street closure or traffic detour.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2004-06 on 5/11/2004
8-1-9: OTHER HIGHWAY PERMITS
A. Applicability: Holders of permits for work on highways owned or under the jurisdiction of other
government entities, but located within the city limits, shall not be required to obtain permits from
the city under the provisions of this chapter, unless the work extends beyond the back side of the
curb, or beyond any other designated jurisdictional boundary. Any city permit shall not be
construed to permit or allow work on a county road or a state highway within the city without an
applicable county or state permit.
B. Authority Of Building Official: The building official, in his or her discretion, shall have the right and
authority to regulate work under permits issued by other governmental entities with respect to
hours and days of work, and measures required to be taken by the permittee of said
governmental entity for the protection of traffic and safety of persons and property.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing in this chapter shall be construed to impose any duty,
implied or express, on the city or its employees, officers, agents or assigns, relative to the
protection of traffic and safety of persons or property, arising out of the issuance of any permit
issued by government entities other than the city, or arising out of any work performed on any
public way owned or within the jurisdiction of the city.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2004-06 on 5/11/2004
8-1-10: RELOCATION OF STRUCTURES IN PUBLIC WAYS
A. Authority: The building official may direct any person owning or maintaining facilities or structures
in the public way to alter, modify or relocate such facilities or structures as the building official
may require. Sewers, pipes, drains, tunnels, conduits, pipe driveways, vaults, trash receptacles
and overhead and underground gas, electric, telephone, telecommunication and communication
facilities shall specifically be subject to such directives. The person owning or maintaining the
facilities or structures shall, at their own cost and expense and upon reasonable written notice by
the city, promptly protect, or promptly alter or relocate such facilities or structures, or part thereof,
as directed by the city. In the event that such person refuses or neglects to conform to the
directive of the city, the city shall have the right to break through, remove, alter or relocate such
part of the facilities or structures without liability to such person. Such person shall pay to the city
all costs incurred by the city in connection with such work performed by the city, including also
design, engineering, construction, materials, insurance, court costs and attorney fees.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=8:_PUBLIC_WAYS_AND_PROPERTY 8/37
B. Conditions: Any directive by the building official shall be based upon any of the following:
1. The facility or structure was installed, erected or is being maintained contrary to law, or
determined by the building official to be structurally unsound or defective;
2. The facility or structure constitutes a "nuisance", as defined under state statute;
3. The permit under which the facility or structure was installed has expired or has been
revoked;
4. The public way is about to be repaired or improved and such facilities or structures may
pose a hindrance to construction; or
5. The grades or lines of the public way are to be altered or changed.
C. Failure To Comply: Any person owning or maintaining facilities or structures in the public way
who fails to alter, modify or relocate such facilities or structures upon notice to do so by the
building official shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in CCNO
1-4-1. All costs of alteration, modification or relocation shall be borne by the person owning or
maintaining the facilities or structures involved.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2004-06 on 5/11/2004
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
8-1-11: IMPACT ON EXISTING IMPROVEMENTS
A. Temporary Sidewalk Or Curb Ramp: If any sidewalk or curb ramp is blocked by excavation work,
a temporary sidewalk or curb ramp shall be constructed or provided. Said temporary
improvement shall be safe for travel and convenient for users, and consistent with city standards
for such.
B. Temporary Gravel Surface: Where excavations are made in paved areas, the surface shall be
replaced with a temporary gravel surface until such time as the permanent repairs are
completed.
C. Disturbance Of Property:
1. At any time a permittee disturbs the yard, residence or the real or personal property of a
private property owner or the city, such permittee shall ensure that such property is
returned, replaced and/or restored to a condition that is comparable to the condition that
existed prior to the commencement of the work.
2. The costs associated with the disturbance and the return, replacement and/or restoration
shall be borne by the permittee. Further, a permittee shall reimburse a property owner or
the city, for any actual damage caused by the permittee, its subcontractor, or its
independent contractor, in connection with the disturbance of such property. However,
nothing in this subsection shall require the permittee to pay a subscriber or private
property owner when that subscriber or private property owner requests that the permittee
remove, replace or relocate improvements associated with the service provided by the
permittee to the property owner and when the permittee exercises due care in the
performance of that service, or when the subscriber or private property owner provided
false information to the permittee on which the permittee relied to its detriment.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=8:_PUBLIC_WAYS_AND_PROPERTY 9/37
D. Included Acts: Examples of types of acts specifically included in this section are the following:
1. Removal of sod, lawn, shrubbery, flowers, trees, driveways or fence, to install, trench,
repair, replace, remove or locate, equipment, cable or other appurtenances of the
permittee;
2. Installation or removal of equipment or other appurtenances of the permittee's system
within a private property owner's property or residence which requires drilling, excavating,
plastering or the like on the part of the permittee;
3. Temporarily relocating or moving a piece of personal property or a fixture of a private
property owner (such as a motor vehicle, fence, air conditioning, heating unit, or the like)
in order to perform some sort of construction, maintenance or repair by the permittee; or
4. Permanently removing a permittee's equipment or other appurtenances due to the
revocation, termination or nonrenewal of the franchise (if applicable).
E. Interruption Of Water Flow: Existing drainage channels, such as gutters or ditches, shall be kept
free of dirt or other debris so that natural flow will not be interrupted. When it is necessary to
block or otherwise interrupt flow of the drainage channel, a method of rerouting the flow must be
submitted for approval by the city engineer prior to the blockage of the channel.
F. Applicable To Subcontractor Or Independent Contractor: The requirements imposed upon the
permittee extend to any subcontractor or independent contractor that the permittee might
employee to perform the tasks pursuant to the permit.
G. Exception To Applicability: The requirements of this section shall not apply to the removal by a
permittee of a permanent structure placed by a property owner in a public way, unless such
property owner has received prior written permission from the city granting the property owner
the right to install a permanent structure on a public way, and such written permission has been
recorded in the office of the county recorder.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2004-06 on 5/11/2004
8-1-12: RESTORATION OF PUBLIC PROPERTY
A. Required: The permittee shall, at the permittee's own expense, restore the surface of any public
way to its original condition and replace any removed or damaged pavement with the same type
and depth of pavement as that which is adjoining, including the gravel base material. All
restoration shall conform to the engineering regulations, design standards and specifications
promulgated by the city and shall be accomplished within the time limits set forth in the permit,
unless the department grants additional time in writing.
B. Restoration By City: At the permittee's option, the permittee doing the actual excavation work
may request that the city restore the surface to its original condition. The fee for such resurfacing
shall be determined by the building official in accordance with the city's reasonable costs for such
work and shall be charged to the person, firm or corporation making the excavation. The city,
prior to the release of the bond, shall receive payment for said work.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2004-06 on 5/11/2004
8-1-13: INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS
A. Minimum Required By State: All contractors shall have at least the minimum insurance required
by the state before a permit is issued. The applicant shall furnish to the city evidence of the
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=8:_PUBLIC_WAYS_AND_PROPERTY 10/37
required insurance.
B. Property Owners: A property owner performing work adjacent to his/her residence may submit
proof of the homeowner's insurance policy in lieu of the insurance requirements of this section.
C. Public Utility Company: A public utility company provider may be relieved of the obligation of
submitting certificates of insurance under the following circumstances: If such company shall
submit satisfactory evidence in advance that:
1. Such company is insured in the amounts set forth in this chapter, or has complied with
state requirements to become self-insured. Public utilities may submit annually evidence
of insurance coverage in lieu of individual submissions for each permit; and
2. Said coverage provides to the city the same scope of coverage that would otherwise be
provided by a separate policy as required by this chapter; or
3. The work to be performed under the permit issued to the applicant is to be performed by
the city, in which case insurance requirements shall be negotiated between the city and
the applicant by separate agreement.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2004-06 on 5/11/2004
8-1-14: BOND; WHEN REQUIRED, CONDITIONS, WARRANTY
A. Type, Amount Of Bond: Except as noted in this chapter, each applicant, before being issued a
permit, shall provide the city with an acceptable security (this may include a corporate surety
bond, cash bond or letter of credit, as determined by the city) in the amount to be approved by
the city to guarantee faithful performance of the work authorized by a permit granted pursuant to
this chapter. The amount of the security required may be increased or decreased at the
discretion of the building official whenever it appears that the amount and cost of the work to be
performed, and not satisfactorily completed, may vary from the amount of security otherwise
required under this chapter. The form of the security and the entity issuing the security shall be
subject to the approval of the city attorney. With the exception of public utilities franchised by the
city and having specialized equipment and experience in resurfacing, all contractors shall at a
minimum, provide a financial or payment performance bond approved by the city in the sum of
two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). In lieu of submitting a performance bond, the contractor may
deposit with the city a minimum resurfacing deposit of three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each
excavation permit. The city shall hold this deposit or guarantee bond for a period of twenty four
(24) months as surety against any defects or workmanship.
B. Public Utilities: Public utilities franchised by the city shall not be required to file any security if
such requirement is expressly waived in the franchise documents.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=8:_PUBLIC_WAYS_AND_PROPERTY 11/37
C. Conditions: The security required by this section shall be conditioned as follows:
1. The permittee shall fully comply with the requirements of the city ordinances and
regulations, specifications and standards promulgated by the city relative to work in the
public way, and respond to the city in damages for failure to conform therewith;
2. After work is commenced, the permittee shall proceed with diligence and expedition and
shall promptly complete such work and restore the public way to construction
specifications, so as not to obstruct the public place or travel thereon more than is
reasonably necessary;
3. The permittee shall guarantee the materials and workmanship for a period of two (2)
years from completion of such work, with reasonable wear and tear excepted; and
4. Unless authorized by the building official on the permit, all paving, resurfacing or
replacement of street facilities on major or collector streets shall be done in conformance
with the regulations contained herein within three (3) calendar days, and within seven (7)
calendar days from the time the excavation commences on all other streets, except as
provided for during excavation in winter or during weather conditions which do not allow
paving according to engineering regulations. In winter, a temporary patch must be
provided. In all excavations, restoration or pavement surfaces shall be made immediately
after backfilling is completed or concrete is cured. If work is expected to exceed the above
duration, the permittee shall submit a detailed construction schedule for approval. The
schedule will address means and methods to minimize traffic disruption and complete the
construction as soon as reasonably possible.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2004-06 on 5/11/2004
8-1-15: HOLD HARMLESS AGREEMENT; LIMITATIONS ON CITY LIABILITY
A. The permittee agrees to save the city, its officers, employees and agents harmless from any and
all costs, damages and liabilities, which may accrue or be claimed to accrue by reason of any
work performed under the permit. The issuance and acceptance of any permit under this chapter
shall constitute such an agreement by the permittee to this section.
B. This chapter shall neither be construed as imposing upon the city, its officers, employees and
agents, any liability or responsibility for damages to any person injured by or by reason of the
performance of any work within the public way, or under a permit issued pursuant to this chapter;
nor shall the city, its officers, officials, employees, agents, volunteers or assigns thereof be
deemed to have assumed any such liability or responsibility by reason of inspection authorized
hereunder, the issuance of any permit, or the approval of any work.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2004-06 on 5/11/2004
8-1-16: WORK WITHOUT PERMIT
A. Stop Work Order: A stop work order may be issued by the building official directed to any person
or persons doing or causing any work to be done in the public way without a permit.
B. Fee: Any person found to be doing work in the public way without having obtained a permit, as
provided in this chapter, shall be required to pay a permit fee equal to two (2) times the normal
permit fee. For replacement work, where a fee is not normally charged, the normal permit fee for
new construction shall apply.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=8:_PUBLIC_WAYS_AND_PROPERTY 12/37
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2004-06 on 5/11/2004
8-1-17: FAILURE TO COMPLY; DEFAULT IN PERFORMANCE
A. Violations: Any permit may be revoked or suspended and a stop work order issued by the
building official, after notice to the permittee for:
1. Violation of any condition of the permit, the bond, or of any provision of this chapter;
2. Violation of any provision of any other ordinance of the city or law relating to the work; or
3. Existence of any condition or the doing of any act that does constitute, may constitute, or
cause a condition endangering life or property.
B. Immediate Effect: A suspension or revocation by the building official, and a stop work order, shall
take effect immediately upon entry thereof by the building official and notice to the person
performing the work in the public way. Notice to the person performing the work shall be
accomplished when the building official has posted a stop work order at the location of the work
and written notice has been mailed, return receipt requested, to the address indicated by the
permittee on the permit.
C. Notice Of Default: Whenever the building official finds that a default has occurred in the
performance of any term or condition of the permit, written notice thereof may be given to the
principal and to the surety on the bond, if there is a surety bond. Such notice shall state the work
to be done, the estimated cost thereof, and the period of time deemed by the building official to
be reasonably necessary for the completion of the work.
D. Performance By City: In the event that the surety (or principal), within a reasonable time following
the giving of such notice (taking into consideration the exigencies of the situation, the nature of
the work, the requirements of public safety and for the protection of persons and property), fails
either to commence and cause the required work to be performed with due diligence, or to
indemnify the city for the cost of doing the work, as set forth in the notice, the city may perform
the work, at the discretion of the building official, with city forces or contract forces, or both, and
suit may be commenced by the city attorney against the contractor and bonding company and
such other persons as may be liable, to recover the entire amount due to the city, including
attorney fees, on account thereof. In the event that cash has been deposited, the cost of
performing the work may be charged against the amount deposited, and suit brought for the
balance due, if any.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2004-06 on 5/11/2004
8-1-18: FAILURE TO CONFORM TO DESIGN STANDARDS
For failure to conform to the design standards and regulations, the building official may:
A. Suspend or revoke the permit;
B. Issue a stop work order;
C. Order removal and replacement of faulty work;
D. Require an extended warranty period; and/or
E. Negotiate a cash settlement to be applied toward future maintenance costs.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2004-06 on 5/11/2004
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=8:_PUBLIC_WAYS_AND_PROPERTY 13/37
8-1-19: APPEAL OF SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OR STOP WORK ORDER
Any suspension, revocation or stop work order by the building official may be appealed by the permittee
to the city administrator by filing a written notice of appeal within ten (10) days of the action of the
building official. The city administrator shall hear such appeal, if written request therefor be timely filed,
as soon as practicable, and render his/her decision within a reasonable time following filing of notice of
appeal.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2004-06 on 5/11/2004
8-1-20: TAMPERING WITH TRAFFIC BARRICADES
It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously or wantonly or without authorization and legal cause,
extinguish, remove or diminish any light illuminating any barricade or excavation, or to tear down,
remove or in any manner alter any rail, fence or barricade protecting any excavation or other
construction site.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2004-06 on 5/11/2004
8-1-21: CONFLICT WITH GOVERNING PROVISIONS
Should there be a conflict between the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any other
ordinance, agreement, franchise or other document governing the excavation of a public way, the more
restrictive provisions of the aforesaid documents shall apply.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2004-06 on 5/11/2004
8-1-22: PENALTY
Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, a violation of any provision of this chapter, or failure to comply
with an order of suspension, revocation or stop work, shall be a class B misdemeanor, subject to penalty
as provided in CCNO 1-4-1. Each day the violation exists shall be a separate offense. No criminal
conviction shall excuse the person from otherwise complying with the provisions of this chapter.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2004-06 on 5/11/2004
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
8-2: TELECOMMUNICATIONS; USE OF RIGHTS OF WAY
8-2-1: FINDINGS AND INTENT; AUTHORITY
8-2-2: DEFINITIONS
8-2-3: ADMINISTRATION; GENERAL PROVISIONS
8-2-4: APPLICABILITY; EXCEPTIONS
8-2-5: FRANCHISE REQUIRED
8-2-6: APPLICATION FOR FRANCHISE
8-2-7: COMPENSATION, FEES AND PAYMENTS
8-2-8: INSURANCE, RECORD REQUIREMENTS
8-2-9: CONSTRUCTION, TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS
8-2-10: PRIVATE PROPERTY; OBLIGATION TO NOTIFY
8-2-11: TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE AND LICENSE
8-2-12: ENFORCEMENT; RIGHTS OF CITY
8-2-13: SEVERABILITY
8-2-1: FINDINGS AND INTENT; AUTHORITY
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=8:_PUBLIC_WAYS_AND_PROPERTY 14/37
A. Rights Of Way: The city finds that the rights of way within the city:
1. Are critical to the travel and transport of persons and property in the business and social
life of the city;
2. Are intended for public uses and must be managed and controlled consistent with that
intent;
3. Can be partially occupied by the facilities of utilities and other public service entities
delivering utility and public services rendered for profit, to the enhancement of the health,
welfare and general economic well-being of the city and its citizens; and
4. Are a unique and physically limited resource requiring proper management to maximize
the efficiency and to minimize the costs to the taxpayers of the foregoing uses and to
minimize the inconvenience to and negative effects upon the public from such facilities'
construction, placement, relocation and maintenance in the rights of way.
B. Compensation: The city finds that the city should receive fair and reasonable compensation for
use of the rights of way.
C. Local Concern: The city finds that while telecommunications systems are in part an extension of
interstate commerce, their operations also involve rights of way, municipal franchising and vital
business and community service, which are of local concern.
D. Promotion Of Telecommunications Services: The city finds that it is in the best interests of its
taxpayers and citizens to promote the rapid development of telecommunications services, on a
nondiscriminatory basis, responsive to community and public interest, and to assure availability
for municipal, educational and community services.
E. Franchise Standards: The city finds that it is in the interests of the public to franchise and to
establish standards for franchising providers in a manner that:
1. Fairly and reasonably compensates the city on a competitively neutral and
nondiscriminatory basis as provided herein;
2. Encourages competition by establishing terms and conditions under which providers may
use the rights of way to serve the public;
3. Fully protects the public interests and the city from any harm that may flow from such
commercial use of rights of way;
4. Protects the police powers and rights of way management authority of the city in a
manner consistent with federal and state law;
5. Otherwise protects the public interests in the development and use of the city
infrastructure;
6. Protects the public's investment in improvements in the rights of way; and
7. Ensures that no barriers to entry of telecommunications providers are created and that
such franchising is accomplished in a manner that does not prohibit or have the effect of
prohibiting telecommunication services, within the meaning of the telecommunications act
of 1996.
F. Power To Manage Rights Of Way: The city adopts this telecommunications chapter pursuant to
its power to manage the rights of way, pursuant to common law, the Utah constitution and
statutory authority, and receive fair and reasonable compensation for the use of rights of way by
providers as expressly set forth by section 253 of the act.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=8:_PUBLIC_WAYS_AND_PROPERTY 15/37
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 12.20.010 on 1/1/1987
8-2-2: DEFINITIONS
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall have the
meanings set forth in this section, unless the context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended.
Words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the single number include the plural
number, words in the plural number include the singular. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory, and
"may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning.
APPLICATION: The process by which a provider submits a request and indicates a desire to be granted
a franchise to utilize the rights of way of all, or a part, of the city. An application includes all written
documentation, verbal statements and representations, in whatever form or forum, made by a provider
to the city concerning: the construction of a telecommunications system over, under, on or through the
rights of way; the telecommunications services proposed to be provided in the city by a provider; and
any other matter pertaining to a proposed system or service.
CITY: North Ogden City, Utah.
COMPLETION DATE: The date that a provider begins providing services to customers in the city.
CONSTRUCTION COSTS: All costs of constructing a system, including make ready costs, other than
engineering fees, attorney or accountant fees, or other consulting fees.
CONTROL OR CONTROLLING INTEREST: Actual working control in whatever manner exercised,
including, without limitation, working control through ownership, management, debt instruments or
negative control, as the case may be, of the system or of a provider. A rebuttable presumption of the
existence of control or a controlling interest shall arise from the beneficial ownership, directly or
indirectly, by any person or group of persons acting in concert, of more than twenty five percent (25%) of
any provider (which person or group of persons is hereinafter referred to as "controlling person"). Control
or controlling interest, as used herein, may be held simultaneously by more than one person or group of
persons.
FCC: The federal communications commission or any successor thereto.
FRANCHISE: The rights and obligations extended by the city to a provider to own, lease, construct,
maintain, use or operate a system in the rights of way within the boundaries of the city. Any such
authorization, in whatever form granted, shall not mean or include:
A. Any other permit or authorization required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a
business within the city required by the ordinances and laws of the city;
B. Any other permit, agreement or authorization required in connection with operations on rights of
way or public property, including, without limitation, permits and agreements for placing devices
on or in poles, conduits or other structures, whether owned by the city or a private entity, or for
excavating or performing other work in or along the rights of way.
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT: A contract entered into in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
between the city and a franchisee that sets forth, subject to this chapter, the terms and conditions under
which a franchise will be exercised.
GROSS REVENUE: Includes all revenues of a provider that may be included as gross revenue within
the meaning of Utah Code 11-26, as amended.
INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER: A person providing to another, for the purpose of providing
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=8:_PUBLIC_WAYS_AND_PROPERTY 16/37
telecommunication services to customers, all or part of the necessary system which uses the rights of
way.
OPEN VIDEO SERVICE: Any video programming services provided to any person through the use of
rights of way by a provider that is certified by the FCC to operate an open video system pursuant to
section 651 et seq., of the telecommunications act (to be codified at 47 USC title VI, part V), regardless
of the system used.
OPEN VIDEO SYSTEM: The system of cables, wires, lines, towers, wave guides, optic fiber, microwave,
laser beams and any associated converters, equipment, or facilities designed and constructed for the
purpose of producing, receiving, amplifying or distributing open video services to or from subscribers or
locations within the city.
OPERATOR: Any person who provides service over a telecommunications system and directly or
through one or more persons owns a controlling interest in such system, or who otherwise controls or is
responsible for the operation of such a system.
ORDINANCE OR TELECOMMUNICATIONS ORDINANCE: This telecommunications chapter
concerning the granting of franchises in and by the city for the construction, ownership, operation, use or
maintenance of a telecommunications system.
PSC: The public service commission or any successor thereto.
PERSON: Includes any individual, corporation, partnership, association, joint stock company, trust or
any other legal entity, but not the city.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES FACILITIES: Has the same meaning as provided in section 704 of
the act (47 USC 332(c)(7)(c)), which includes what is commonly known as cellular and PSC services
that do not install any system or portion of a system in the rights of way.
PROVIDER: An operator, infrastructure provider, reseller or system lessee.
RESELLER: Refers to any person that provides local exchange service over a system for which a
separate charge is made, where that person does not own or lease the underlying system used for the
transmission.
RIGHTS OF WAY: The surface of and the space above and below any public street, sidewalk, alley or
other public way of any type whatsoever, now or hereafter existing as such within the city.
SIGNAL: Any transmission or reception of electronic, electrical, light or laser or radio frequency energy
or optical information, in either analog or digital format.
SYSTEM LESSEE: Refers to any person that leases a system or a specific portion of a system to
provide services.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: The transmission, between or among points specified by the user, of
information of the user's choosing (e.g., data, video and voice), without change in the form or content of
the information sent and received.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE OR SERVICES: Any telecommunications services provided by a
provider within the city that the provider is authorized to provide under federal, state and local law, and
any equipment and/or facilities required for and integrated with the services provided within the city,
except that these terms do not include "cable service", as defined in the cable communications policy act
of 1984, as amended by the cable television consumer protection and competition act of 1992 (47 USC
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=8:_PUBLIC_WAYS_AND_PROPERTY 17/37
521 et seq.) and the telecommunications act of 1996.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM OR SYSTEM: All conduits, manholes, poles, antennas,
transceivers, amplifiers and all other electronic devices, equipment, wire and appurtenances owned,
leased or used by a provider, located in the rights of way and utilized in the provision of services,
including fully digital or analog, voice, data and video imaging and other enhanced telecommunications
services. Telecommunications system or systems also includes an open video system.
WIRE: Fiber optic telecommunications cable, wire, coaxial cable or other transmission medium that may
be used in lieu thereof for similar purposes.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 12.20.040 on 1/1/1987
8-2-3: ADMINISTRATION; GENERAL PROVISIONS
A. Conflicts: In the event of a conflict between any provision of this chapter and a franchise entered
pursuant to it, the provisions of this chapter in effect at the time the franchise is entered into shall
control.
B. New Developments: It shall be the policy of the city to liberally amend this chapter, upon
application of a provider, when necessary to enable the provider to take advantage of any
developments in the field of telecommunications which will afford the provider an opportunity to
more effectively, efficiently or economically serve itself or the public.
C. Notices: All notices from a provider to the city required under this chapter or pursuant to a
franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be directed to the officer as designated by the
mayor. A provider shall provide in any application for a franchise the identity, address and phone
number of the person designated to receive notices from the city. A provider shall immediately
notify the city of any change in such designated person's name, address or telephone number.
D. Exercise Of Police Power: To the full extent permitted by applicable law either now or in the
future, the city reserves the right to adopt or issue such rules, regulations, orders or other
directives that it finds necessary or appropriate in the lawful exercise of its police powers.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=8:_PUBLIC_WAYS_AND_PROPERTY 18/37
E. Construction:
1. Federal And State Statutes: This chapter shall be construed in a manner consistent with
all applicable federal and state statutes.
2. Applicability: This chapter shall apply to all franchises granted or renewed after the
effective date hereof. This chapter shall further apply, to the extent permitted by
applicable federal or state law, to all existing franchises granted prior to the effective date
hereof and to a provider providing services, without a franchise, prior to the effective date
hereof.
3. Other Applicable Ordinances: A provider's rights are subject to the police powers of the
city to adopt and enforce ordinances necessary to the health, safety and welfare of the
public. A provider shall comply with all applicable general laws and ordinances enacted
by the city pursuant to its police powers. In particular, all providers shall comply with the
city zoning and other land use requirements.
4. City Failure To Enforce: A provider shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply with
any of the provisions of this chapter or any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter by
reason of any failure of the city to enforce prompt compliance.
5. Construed According To State Law: This chapter and any franchise granted pursuant to
this chapter shall be construed and enforced in accordance with the substantive laws of
the state.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 12.20.480, 12.20.500, 12.20.510, 12.20.520, 12.20.530, 12.20.540, 12.20.550, 12.20.560,
12.20.570 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
8-2-4: APPLICABILITY; EXCEPTIONS
A. Providers: This chapter shall provide the basic local scheme for providers of telecommunications
services and systems that require the use of the rights of way, including providers of both the
system and service, those providers of the system only and those providers who do not build the
system but who only provide services. This chapter shall apply to all future providers and to all
providers in the city prior to the effective date hereof, whether operating with or without a
franchise as set forth in CCNO 8-2-3E2.
B. Excluded Activities:
1. Cable Television Operators: This chapter shall not apply to cable television operators
otherwise regulated by the cable television ordinance.
2. Wireless Service Facilities: This chapter shall not apply to personal wireless service
facilities.
C. Excluded Providers; Provisions Applicable: Providers excused by other law that prohibits the city
from requiring a franchise shall not be required to obtain a franchise, but all of the requirements
imposed by this chapter through the exercise of the city police power and not preempted by other
law shall be applicable.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 12.20.020, 12.20.030 on 1/1/1987
8-2-5: FRANCHISE REQUIRED
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=8:_PUBLIC_WAYS_AND_PROPERTY 19/37
A. Nonexclusive Franchise; Authority: The city is empowered and authorized to issue nonexclusive
franchises governing the installation, construction and maintenance of systems in the city rights
of way, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The franchise is granted through a
franchise agreement entered into between the city and provider.
B. Provider Required To Obtain: Except to the extent preempted by federal or state law, as
ultimately interpreted by a court of competent jurisdiction, including any appeals, every provider
must obtain a franchise prior to constructing a telecommunications system or providing
telecommunications services using the rights of way, and every provider must obtain a franchise
before constructing an open video system or providing open video services via an open video
system. Any open video system or service shall be subject to the customer service and
consumer protection provisions applicable to the cable TV companies to the extent the city is not
preempted or permitted as ultimately interpreted by a court of competent jurisdiction, including
any appeals. The fact that particular telecommunications systems may be used for multiple
purposes does not obviate the need to obtain a franchise for other purposes. By way of
illustration and not limitation, a cable operator of a cable system must obtain a cable franchise,
and, should it intend to provide telecommunications services over the same system, must also
obtain a telecommunications franchise.
C. Nature Of Grant: A franchise shall not convey title, equitable or legal, in the rights of way. A
franchise is only the right to occupy rights of way on a nonexclusive basis for the limited
purposes and for the limited period stated in the franchise; the right may not be subdivided,
assigned or subleased. A franchise does not excuse a provider from obtaining appropriate
access or pole attachment agreements before collocating its system on the property of others,
including the city's property. This subsection shall not be construed to prohibit a provider from
leasing conduit to another provider, so long as the lessee has obtained a franchise.
D. Current Providers; Time Limit To Request: Except to the extent exempted by federal or state law,
any provider acting without a franchise on the effective date hereof shall request issuance of a
franchise from the city within ninety (90) days of the effective date hereof. If such request is
made, the provider may continue providing service during the course of negotiations. If a timely
request is not made, or if negotiations cease and a franchise is not granted, the provider shall
comply with the provisions of CCNO 8-2-12D.
E. Nature Of Franchise: The franchise granted by the city under the provisions of this chapter shall
be a nonexclusive franchise providing the right and consent to install, repair, maintain, remove
and replace its system on, over and under the rights of way in order to provide services.
F. Regulatory Approval Needed: Before offering or providing any services pursuant to the franchise,
a provider shall obtain any and all regulatory approvals, permits, authorizations or licenses for
the offering or provision of such services from the appropriate federal, state and local authorities,
if required, and shall submit to the city, upon the written request of the city, evidence of all such
approvals, permits, authorizations or licenses.
G. Term: No franchise issued pursuant to this chapter shall have a term of less than five (5) years or
greater than fifteen (15) years. Each franchise shall be granted in a nondiscriminatory manner.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 12.20.050, 12.20.060, 12.20.070, 12.20.080, 12.20.090, 12.20.100, 12.20.110 on 1/1/1987
8-2-6: APPLICATION FOR FRANCHISE
A. Required; Form: To obtain a franchise to construct, own, maintain or provide services through
any system within the city, to obtain a renewal of a franchise granted pursuant to this chapter or
to obtain the city approval of a transfer of a franchise, as provided in CCNO 8-2-11A2, granted
pursuant to this chapter, an application must be filed with city on the form attached to the
ordinance codified herein as exhibit A, which is hereby incorporated by reference. The
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=8:_PUBLIC_WAYS_AND_PROPERTY 20/37
application form may be changed by the mayor so long as such changes request information that
is consistent with this chapter. Such application form, as amended, is incorporated by reference.
B. Criteria: In making a determination as to an application filed pursuant to this chapter, the city
may, but shall not be limited to, request the following from the provider:
1. A copy of the order from the PSC granting a certificate of convenience and necessity.
2. Certification of the provider's financial ability to compensate the city for provider's
intrusion, maintenance and use of the rights of way during the franchise term proposed by
the provider.
3. Provider's agreement to comply with the requirements of CCNO 8-2-9.
C. Determination By City: The city, in its discretion, shall determine the award of any franchise on
the basis of these and other considerations relevant to the use of the rights of way, without
competitive bidding.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 12.20.220, 12.20.230, 12.20.240 on 1/1/1987
8-2-7: COMPENSATION, FEES AND PAYMENTS
A. Compensation; Provider Obligations: As fair and reasonable compensation for any franchise
granted pursuant to this chapter, a provider shall have the following obligations:
1. Application Fee: In order to offset the cost to the city to review an application for a
franchise and in addition to all other fees, permits or charges, a provider shall pay to the
city, at the time of application, a nonrefundable application fee in such amount as
established by resolution of the city council.
2. Franchise Fee: The franchise fee, if any, shall be set forth in the franchise agreement.
The obligation to pay a franchise fee shall commence on the completion date. The
franchise fee is offset by any business license fee or business license tax enacted by the
city.
3. Excavation Permits: The provider shall also pay fees required for an excavation permit as
provided in CCNO 8-1.
B. Due Monthly: Unless otherwise agreed to in the franchise agreement, all franchise fees shall be
paid on a monthly basis within forty five (45) days of the close of each calendar month.
C. Statement Of Calculation; Certification: Unless a franchise agreement provides otherwise, each
fee payment shall be accompanied by a statement showing the manner in which the fee was
calculated and shall be certified as to its accuracy.
D. Future Costs: A provider shall pay to the city or to third parties, at the direction of the city, an
amount equal to the reasonable costs and reasonable expenses that the city incurs for the
services of third parties (including, but not limited to, attorneys and other consultants) in
connection with any renewal or provider initiated renegotiation, or amendment of this chapter or a
franchise; provided, however, that the parties shall agree upon a reasonable financial cap at the
outset of negotiations. In the event the parties are unable to agree, either party may submit the
issue to binding arbitration in accordance with the rules and procedures of the American
arbitration association.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=8:_PUBLIC_WAYS_AND_PROPERTY 21/37
E. Taxes, Assessments: To the extent taxes or other assessments are imposed by taxing
authorities, other than the city, on the use of the city property as a result of a provider's use or
occupation of the rights of way, the provider shall be responsible for payment of its pro rata share
of such taxes, payable annually unless otherwise required by the taxing authority. Such
payments shall be in addition to any other fees payable pursuant to this chapter.
F. Interest On Late Payments: In the event that any payment is not actually received by the city on
or before the applicable date fixed in the franchise, interest thereon shall accrue from such date
until received at the rate charged for delinquent state taxes.
G. Acceptance Of Fee; Not Construed Satisfaction: No acceptance by the city of any fee shall be
construed as an accord that the amount paid is in fact the correct amount, nor shall such
acceptance of such fee payment be construed as a release of any claim the city may have for
additional sums payable.
H. Additional Taxes Or Fees Still Applicable: The fee payment is not a payment in lieu of any tax,
fee or other assessment, except as specifically provided in this chapter or as required by
applicable law. By way of example, and not limitation, excavation permit fees and fees to obtain
space on the city owned poles are not waived and remain applicable.
I. Operation After Term; Continuing Obligation And Holdover: In the event a provider continues to
operate all or any part of the system after the term of the franchise, such operator shall continue
to comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter and the franchise, including, without
limitation, all compensation and other payment provisions throughout the period of such
continued operation; provided, that any such continued operation shall in no way be construed as
a renewal or other extension of the franchise, nor as a limitation on the remedies, if any,
available to the city as a result of such continued operation after the term, including, but not
limited to, damages and restitution.
J. Publication Costs: A provider shall assume any publication costs associated with its franchise
that may be required by law.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 12.20.120, 12.20.130, 12.20.140, 12.20.150, 12.20.160, 12.20.170, 12.20.180, 12.20.190,
12.20.200, 12.20.210 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
8-2-8: INSURANCE, RECORD REQUIREMENTS
A. Insurance Required: Prior to the execution of a franchise, a provider will deposit with the city an
irrevocable, unconditional letter of credit or surety bond as required by the terms of the franchise,
and shall obtain and provide proof of the insurance coverage required by the franchise. A
provider shall also indemnify the city as set forth in the franchise.
B. Oversight: The city shall have the right to oversee, regulate and inspect periodically the
construction, maintenance and upgrade of the system, and any part thereof, in accordance with
the provisions of the franchise and applicable law. A provider shall establish and maintain
managerial and operational records, standards, procedures and controls to enable a provider to
prove, in reasonable detail, to the satisfaction of the city at all times throughout the term, that a
provider is in compliance with the franchise. A provider shall retain such records for not less than
the applicable statute of limitations.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=8:_PUBLIC_WAYS_AND_PROPERTY 22/37
C. Records Maintenance: A provider shall at all times maintain:
1. On file with the city, a full and complete set of plans, records and as built hard copy maps
and, to the extent the maps are placed in an electronic format, they shall be made in
electronic format compatible with the city's existing GIS system, of all existing and
proposed installations and the types of equipment and systems installed or constructed in
the rights of way, properly identified and described as to the types of equipment and
facility by appropriate symbols and marks, which shall include annotations of all rights of
way where work will be undertaken. As used herein, as built maps include file
construction prints. Maps shall be drawn to scale. As built maps, including the compatible
electronic format, as provided above, shall be submitted within thirty (30) days of
completion of work or within thirty (30) days after completion of modification and repairs.
As built maps are not required of the provider who is the incumbent local exchange carrier
for the existing system to the extent they do not exist.
2. Throughout the term of the franchise, a provider shall maintain complete and accurate
books of account and records of the business, ownership and operations of a provider
with respect to the system in a manner that allows the city at all times to determine
whether a provider is in compliance with the franchise. Should the city reasonably
determine that the records are not being maintained in such a manner, a provider shall
alter the manner in which the books and/or records are maintained so that a provider
comes into compliance with this section. All financial books and records which are
maintained in accordance with the regulations of the FCC and any governmental entity
that regulates utilities in the state and generally accepted accounting principles shall be
deemed to be acceptable under this section.
D. Confidentiality: If the information required to be submitted is proprietary in nature or must be kept
confidential by federal, state or local law, upon proper request by a provider, such information
shall be classified as a protected record within the meaning of the Utah government records
access and management act (GRAMA), making it available only to those who must have access
to perform their duties on behalf of the city; provided, that a provider notifies the city of, and
clearly labels the information which a provider deems to be confidential, proprietary information.
Such notification and labeling shall be the sole responsibility of the provider.
E. Provider's Expense: All reports and records required under this chapter shall be furnished at the
sole expense of a provider, except as otherwise provided in this chapter or a franchise.
F. Right Of Inspection: For the purpose of verifying the correct amount of the franchise fee, the
books and records of the provider pertaining thereto shall be open to inspection or audit by duly
authorized representatives of the city at all reasonable times, upon giving reasonable notice of
the intention to inspect or audit the books and records; provided, that the city shall not audit the
books and records of the provider more often than annually. The provider agrees to reimburse
the city the reasonable costs of an audit if the audit discloses that the provider has paid ninety
five percent (95%) or less of the compensation due the city for the period of such audit. In the
event the accounting rendered to the city by the provider herein is found to be incorrect, then
payment shall be made on the corrected amount within thirty (30) calendar days of written notice,
it being agreed that the city may accept any amount offered by the provider, but the acceptance
thereof by the city shall not be deemed a settlement of such item if the amount is in dispute or is
later found to be incorrect.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 12.20.370, 12.20.380, 12.20.390, 12.20.400, 12.20.410, 12.20.420 on 1/1/1987
8-2-9: CONSTRUCTION, TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS
A. Compliance Required; Excavation Permit: No provider shall receive a franchise unless it agrees
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=8:_PUBLIC_WAYS_AND_PROPERTY 23/37
to comply with each of the terms set forth in this section governing construction and technical
requirements for its system, in addition to any other reasonable requirements or procedures
specified by the city or the franchise, including requirements regarding locating and sharing in the
cost of locating portions of the system with other systems or with city utilities. A provider shall
obtain an excavation permit, pursuant to CCNO 8-1, before commencing any work in the rights of
way.
B. Quality And Performance Of Work: All work involved in the construction, maintenance, repair,
upgrade and removal of the system shall be performed in a safe, thorough and reliable manner,
using materials of good and durable quality. If, at any time, it is determined by the FCC or any
other agency granted authority by federal law or the FCC to make such determination, that any
part of the system, including, without limitation, any means used to distribute signals over or
within the system, is harmful to the public health, safety or welfare, or quality of service or
reliability, then a provider shall, at its own cost and expense, promptly correct all such conditions.
C. Licenses And Permits: A provider shall have the sole responsibility for diligently obtaining, at its
own cost and expense, all permits, licenses or other forms of approval or authorization necessary
to construct, maintain, upgrade or repair the system, including, but not limited to, any necessary
approvals from persons and/or the city to use private property, easements, poles and conduits. A
provider shall obtain any required permit, license, approval or authorization, including, but not
limited to, excavation permits, pole attachment agreements, etc., prior to the commencement of
the activity for which the permit, license, approval or authorization is required.
D. Relocation Of System:
1. New Grades Or Lines; Excavation Requirements: If the grades or lines of any rights of
way are changed at any time in a manner affecting the system, then a provider shall
comply with the requirements of CCNO 8-1.
2. Emergency; City Authority To Move System: The city may, at any time, in case of fire,
disaster or other emergency, as determined by the city in its reasonable discretion, cut or
move any parts of the system and appurtenances on, over or under the rights of way of
the city, in which event the city shall not be liable therefor to a provider. The city shall
notify a provider in writing prior to, if practicable, but in any event as soon as possible and
in no case later than the next business day following any action taken under this section.
Notice shall be given as provided in CCNO 8-2-3C.
3. Temporary Move For Third Party: A provider shall, upon prior reasonable written notice by
the city or any person holding a permit to move any structure, and within the time that is
reasonable under the circumstances, temporarily move any part of its system to permit
the moving of said structure. A provider may impose a reasonable charge on any person
other than the city for any such movement of its systems.
4. Change In Rights Of Way; Obligation To Move System: When the city is changing a right
of way and makes a written request, a provider is required to move or remove its system
from the right of way, without cost to the city, to the extent provided in the excavation
ordinance, as provided in CCNO 8-1. This obligation does not apply to systems originally
located on private property pursuant to a private easement, which property was later
incorporated into the rights of way, if that private easement grants a superior vested right.
This obligation exists whether or not the provider has obtained an excavation permit.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=8:_PUBLIC_WAYS_AND_PROPERTY 24/37
E. Protection Of Structures, Landmarks: In connection with the construction, maintenance, repair,
upgrade or removal of the system, a provider shall, at its own cost and expense, protect any and
all existing structures belonging to the city and all designated landmarks, as well as all other
structures within any designated landmark district. A provider shall obtain the prior written
consent of the city to alter any water main, power facility, sewerage or drainage system, or any
other city structure on, over or under the rights of way of the city required because of the
presence of the system. Any such alteration shall be made by the city or its designee on a
reimbursable basis. A provider agrees that it shall be liable for the costs incurred by the city to
replace or repair and restore to its prior condition in a manner as may be reasonably specified by
the city, any municipal structure or any other rights of way of the city involved in the construction,
maintenance, repair, upgrade or removal of the system that may become disturbed or damaged
as a result of any work thereon by or on behalf of a provider pursuant to the franchise.
F. Obstructions Prohibited: In connection with the construction, maintenance, upgrade, repair or
removal of the system, a provider shall not unreasonably obstruct the rights of way of fixed
guideway systems, railways, passenger travel or other traffic to, from or within the city without the
prior consent of the appropriate authorities.
G. Safety Precautions: A provider shall, at its own cost and expense, undertake all necessary and
appropriate efforts to prevent accidents at its work sites, including the placing and maintenance
of proper guards, fences, barricades, security personnel and suitable and sufficient lighting, and
such other requirements prescribed by OSHA and Utah OSHA. A provider shall comply with all
applicable federal, state and local requirements, including, but not limited to, the national
electrical safety code.
H. Repair Of Rights Of Way: After written reasonable notice to the provider, unless, in the sole
determination of the city, an eminent danger exists, any rights of way within the city which are
disturbed or damaged during the construction, maintenance or reconstruction by a provider of its
system may be repaired by the city at the provider's expense, to a condition as good as that
prevailing before such work was commenced. Upon doing so, the city shall submit to such a
provider an itemized statement of the cost for repairing and restoring the rights of ways intruded
upon. The provider shall, within thirty (30) days after receipt of the statement, pay to the city the
entire amount thereof.
I. Maintenance Of System: A provider shall:
1. Install and maintain all parts of its system in a nondangerous condition throughout the
entire period of its franchise.
2. Install and maintain its system in accordance with standard prudent engineering practices
and shall conform, when applicable, with the national electrical safety code and all
applicable other federal, state and local laws or regulations.
3. At all reasonable times, permit examination by any duly authorized representative of the
city of the system and its effect on the rights of way.
J. Trimming Trees; Authority: A provider shall have the authority to trim trees, in accordance with all
applicable utility restrictions, ordinance and easement restrictions, upon and hanging over rights
of way so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with its system.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 12.20.250, 12.20.260, 12.20.270, 12.20.280, 12.20.290, 12.20.300, 12.20.310, 12.20.320,
12.20.330, 12.20.340 on 1/1/1987
8-2-10: PRIVATE PROPERTY; OBLIGATION TO NOTIFY
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=8:_PUBLIC_WAYS_AND_PROPERTY 25/37
Before entering onto any private property, a provider shall make a good faith attempt to contact the
property owners in advance and describe the work to be performed.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 12.20.470 on 1/1/1987
8-2-11: TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE AND LICENSE
A. Notification Of Sale:
1. PSC Approval: When a provider is the subject of a sale, transfer, lease, assignment,
sublease or disposal, in whole or in part, either by force or involuntary sale, or by ordinary
sale, consolidation or otherwise, such that it or its successor entity is obligated to inform
or seek the approval of the PSC, the provider or its successor entity shall promptly notify
the city of the nature of the transaction. The notification shall include either:
a. The successor entity's certification that the successor entity unequivocally agrees
to all of the terms of the original provider's franchise agreement; or
b. The successor entity's application, in compliance with CCNO 8-2-6.
2. Transfer Of Franchise: Upon receipt of a notification and certification in accordance with
subsection A1a of this section, the city designee, as provided in CCNO 8-2-12A1, shall
send notice affirming the transfer of the franchise to the successor entity. If the city has
good cause to believe that the successor entity may not comply with this chapter or the
franchise agreement, it may require an application for the transfer. The application shall
comply with CCNO 8-2-6.
3. If PSC Approval No Longer Required: If the PSC no longer exists or if its regulations or
state law no longer require approval of transactions described in subsection A of this
section, and the city has good cause to believe that the successor entity may not comply
with this chapter or the franchise agreement, it may require an application. The
application shall comply with CCNO 8-2-6.
B. Events Of Sale: The following events shall be deemed to be a sale, assignment or other transfer
of the franchise requiring compliance with subsection A of this section:
1. The sale, assignment or other transfer of all or a majority of a provider's assets to another
person;
2. The sale, assignment or other transfer of capital stock or partnership, membership or
other equity interests in a provider by one or more of its existing shareholders, partners,
members or other equity owners so as to create a new controlling interest in a provider;
3. The issuance of additional capital stock or partnership, membership or other equity
interest by a provider so as to create a new controlling interest in such a provider; or
4. The entry by a provider into an agreement with respect to the management or operation
of such provider or its system.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 12.20.350, 12.20.360 on 1/1/1987
8-2-12: ENFORCEMENT; RIGHTS OF CITY
A. Enforcement; Remedies:
1. City Designee: The city is responsible for enforcing and administering this chapter, and
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=8:_PUBLIC_WAYS_AND_PROPERTY 26/37
the city or its designee, as appointed by the mayor, is authorized to give any notice
required by law or under any franchise agreement.
2. Enforcement Provisions: Any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall contain
appropriate provisions for enforcement, compensation and protection of the public,
consistent with the other provisions of this chapter, including, but not limited to, defining
events of default, procedures for accessing the bond/security fund and rights of
termination or revocation.
B. Force Majeure: In the event a provider's performance of any of the terms, conditions or
obligations required by this chapter or a franchise is prevented by a cause or event not within a
provider's control, such inability to perform shall be deemed excused and no penalties or
sanctions shall be imposed as a result thereof. For the purpose of this subsection, causes or
events not within the control of a provider shall include, without limitation, acts of God, strikes,
sabotage, riots or civil disturbances, failure or loss of utilities, explosions, acts of public enemies
and natural disasters such as floods, earthquakes, landslides and fires.
C. Extended Operation; Continuity Of Services:
1. Continuation After Expiration: Upon either expiration or revocation of a franchise granted
pursuant to this chapter, the city shall have discretion to permit a provider to continue to
operate its system or provide services for an extended period of time not to exceed six (6)
months from the date of such expiration or revocation. A provider shall continue to
operate its system under the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise
granted pursuant to this chapter.
2. Incumbent Local Exchange Carrier; Negotiate Renewal: If the provider is the incumbent
local exchange carrier, it shall be permitted to continue to operate its system and provide
services without regard to revocation or expiration, but shall be obligated to negotiate a
renewal in good faith.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=8:_PUBLIC_WAYS_AND_PROPERTY 27/37
D. Removal Or Abandonment Of Franchise Property:
1. Abandoned System: In the event that:
a. the use of any portion of the system is discontinued for a continuous period of
twelve (12) months and thirty (30) days after no response to written notice from
the city to the last known address of provider;
b. any system has been installed in the rights of way without complying with the
requirements of this chapter or franchise; or
c. the provisions of CCNO 8-2-5D are applicable and no franchise is granted, a
provider, except the provider who is an incumbent local exchange carrier, shall be
deemed to have abandoned such system.
2. Removal Of Abandoned System: The city, upon such terms as it may impose, may give a
provider written permission to abandon, without removing, any system, or portion thereof,
directly constructed, operated or maintained under a franchise. Unless such permission is
granted or unless otherwise provided in this chapter, a provider shall remove within a
reasonable time the abandoned system and shall restore, using prudent construction
standards, any affected rights of way to their former state at the time such system was
installed, so as not to impair their usefulness. In removing its plant, structures and
equipment, a provider shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation necessarily made by
it and shall leave all rights of way in as good condition as that prevailing prior to such
removal without materially interfering with any electrical or telephone cable or other utility
wires, poles or attachments. The city shall have the right to inspect and approve the
condition of the rights of way cables, wires, attachments and poles prior to and after
removal. The liability, indemnity and insurance provisions of this chapter and any security
fund provided in a franchise shall continue in full force and effect during the period of
removal and until full compliance by a provider with the terms and conditions of this
section.
3. Transfer Of Abandoned System To City: Upon abandonment of any system in place, a
provider, if required by the city, shall submit to the city a written instrument, satisfactory in
form to the city, transferring to the city the ownership of the abandoned system.
4. Removal Of Aboveground System: At the expiration of the term for which a franchise is
granted, or upon its revocation or earlier expiration, as provided for by this chapter, in any
such case without renewal, extension or transfer, the city shall have the right to require a
provider to remove, at its expense, all aboveground portions of a system from the rights of
way within a reasonable period of time, which shall not be less than one hundred eighty
(180) days. If the provider is the incumbent local exchange carrier, it shall not be required
to remove its system, but shall negotiate a renewal in good faith.
5. Leaving Underground System: Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this
chapter, a provider may abandon any underground system in place so long as it does not
materially interfere with the use of the rights of way or with the use thereof by any public
utility, cable operator or other person.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 12.20.430, 12.20.440, 12.20.450, 12.20.460 on 1/1/1987
8-2-13: SEVERABILITY
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=8:_PUBLIC_WAYS_AND_PROPERTY 28/37
If any provision of this chapter is held by any federal, state or local court of competent jurisdiction to be
invalid as conflicting with any federal or state statute, or is ordered by a court to be modified in any way
in order to conform to the requirements of any such law and all appellate remedies with regard to the
validity of the ordinance provisions in question are exhausted, such provision shall be considered a
separate, distinct and independent part of this chapter, and such holding shall not affect the validity and
enforceability of all other provisions hereof. In the event that such law is subsequently repealed,
rescinded, amended or otherwise changed, so that the provision which had been held invalid or modified
is no longer in conflict with such law, the provision in question shall return to full force and effect and
shall again be binding on the city and the provider; provided, that the city shall give the provider thirty
(30) days' written notice, or a longer period of time as may be reasonably required for a provider to
comply with such a rejuvenated provision, of the change before requiring compliance with such
provision.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 12.20.490 on 1/1/1987
8-3: PROHIBITED STRUCTURES
8-3-1: STREET DEFINED
8-3-2: OBSTRUCTION PROHIBITED
8-3-3: PENALTY
8-3-1: STREET DEFINED
"Street" is defined as any public road, street, alley, lane, court, place, viaduct, tunnel, culvert, bridge, or
structure laid out or erected for public use, or dedicated or abandoned to the public, or made such in an
action for the partition of real property, and includes the entire area within the right of way.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 12.06.010 on 1/1/1987
8-3-2: OBSTRUCTION PROHIBITED
No pole, pipeline, conduit, sewer, ditch, culvert, permanent sign, fence, or any other structure or object
of any kind or character, shall be placed, constructed or maintained upon or within any street except as
permitted by, and in accordance with, ordinances or regulations authorizing the placement of such
structures.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 12.06.020 on 1/1/1987
8-3-3: PENALTY
Any person who violates the provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor and shall
be subject to penalty as provided in CCNO 1-4-1.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 12.06.030 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
8-4: SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL
8-4-1: REMOVAL FROM SIDEWALK
8-4-2: DISCHARGING UPON ABUTTING STREET OR SIDEWALK
8-4-1: REMOVAL FROM SIDEWALK
A. Required: It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, owning, having charge of, having
control of, or occupying any property, building or lot, part of lot, land or real estate of any kind
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=8:_PUBLIC_WAYS_AND_PROPERTY 29/37
abutting on any public street in the city to fail, neglect or refuse to remove promptly and
effectively all snow and ice from the sidewalk in front of such property. In case of any such
failure, refusal or neglect, the public works director may cause the removal of such snow and/or
ice and charge the cost thereof to the person so owning, having charging of, having control of, or
occupying such property.
B. Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this section is guilty of a class B misdemeanor
and, upon conviction, shall be subject to penalty as provided in CCNO 1-4-1.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 12.08.010 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
8-4-2: DISCHARGING UPON ABUTTING STREET OR SIDEWALK
A. Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person owning, occupying or having control of any premises to
suffer, cause or permit water, snow or ice which has accumulated on such premises, regardless
of the source, to be discharged upon the sidewalk or street abutting such premises.
B. Penalty: Any person violating subsection A of this section is guilty of a class B misdemeanor and
shall be subject to penalty as provided in CCNO 1-4-1. (1987 Code § 12.08.020; amd. 2006
Code)
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 12.08.020 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
8-5: TREES
8-5-1: TITLE
8-5-2: PURPOSE
8-5-3: DEFINITIONS
8-5-4: TREE BOARD
8-5-5: PUBLIC TREES
8-5-6: PRIVATE TREES
8-5-7: CITY AUTHORITY
8-5-8: LICENSING OF PRIVATE TREE CARE FIRMS
8-5-9: ENFORCEMENT
8-5-10: SEVERABILITY
8-5-1: TITLE
This chapter shall be known as the NORTH OGDEN TREE ORDINANCE.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2008-01 on 1/8/2008
8-5-2: PURPOSE
The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies, regulations, and standards necessary to ensure that
the city of North Ogden will continue to realize the benefits provided by its urban forest. The provisions
of this chapter are enacted to establish the tree board as part of the parks and beautification committee;
provide guidance to the tree board; establish requirements of tree care personnel working on public
trees; coordinate maintenance of public trees; promote education for all citizens on proper tree care
practices and encourage tree diversity; and nurture community participation in tree care and planting.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2008-01 on 1/8/2008
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=8:_PUBLIC_WAYS_AND_PROPERTY 30/37
8-5-3: DEFINITIONS
For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall apply as defined herein:
ARBORICULTURAL: Having to do with the accepted practices of tree care.
CITY FORESTER: A person designated in writing by the city administrator to manage the North Ogden
City urban tree forestry program.
CITY STREET RIGHT OF WAY: Any city owned roadway, street, lane or right of way used or available
for public transportation.
FLUSH: Cutting within the branch bark collar or ridge of a branch when pruning.
PARK: A parcel of land dedicated to the public or owned by the city of North Ogden, either in fee simple
absolute, or implied or expressly dedicated to the public for the primary purpose of recreation and/or
green space.
PARK TREE: Any tree or shrub or other woody vegetation on park property.
PRIVATE TREE: Any tree, shrub, or other woody vegetation not on public property.
PROPERTY OWNER: The record owner or contract purchaser of any parcel of land.
PROTECTIVE GROUND COVER: A landscaping technique which utilizes a variation of plants, grass,
shrubs, trees, mulch, underlayment, rocks, and other similar natural and manmade components as
determined by the building official, which are used to control weeds, erosion, dust, runoff, and other
nuisances from harming neighboring property owners. Protective ground cover shall be a conscious
effort through planning, designing, and cultivation of the property. Allowing the natural growth of any
plant variety which takes root does not qualify as protective ground cover. Natural landscaping is
allowed when care is taken to remove nonnative species of plants. It shall be unlawful for the owner or
occupant of any real property to allow to grow on such property any noxious weeds or other noxious
vegetable growth as determined by the Utah noxious weed act or Weber County health department to
be especially injurious to public health, crops, livestock, land, or other property.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Property owned by the city of North Ogden either in fee simple absolute, or
implied or expressly dedicated to the public for the present or future use, for purposes of pedestrian, or
vehicular traffic, or for public easements.
PUBLIC TREE: Any tree, shrub, or other woody vegetation on public property.
SHRUB: A perennial, multiple stemmed woody plant often formed by a number of vertical or semiupright
branches arising from close or at ground level and whose height at maturity is usually between three (3)
and fifteen feet (15').
STREET TREE: Any tree, shrub, or other woody vegetation on lands with city of North Ogden street
rights of way.
TOPPING: Lopping, rounding over or leaving long branch stubs when pruning; not pruning to an
auxiliary branch.
TREE: A woody perennial plant, generally with one main stem and usually over ten feet (10') tall at
maturity.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=8:_PUBLIC_WAYS_AND_PROPERTY 31/37
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2008-01 on 1/8/2008
Amended by Ord. 2014-08 on 4/22/2014
8-5-4: TREE BOARD
A. The North Ogden City parks and beautification committee will function in addition as the North
Ogden tree board. The North Ogden tree board will be noted as the tree board in this chapter.
Their additional function, duty and authority of the North Ogden tree board is limited by this
chapter.
1. The tree board shall draft and recommend necessary amendments to the tree ordinance.
2. The tree board shall create, draft, and recommend the "North Ogden City Tree
Specifications Manual", which will have guidelines for tree selection, planting,
maintenance, and removal of trees in the city public areas. The board will present the
manual to the mayor and city council, for approval by resolution. The tree board will
review the tree specifications manual annually.
3. The board may assist the city as needed with fundraising, Arbor Day celebrations, and
educational programs and materials. The board may also assist the city with preparing a
community forestry plan.
4. The board will keep the council appraised of its activities.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2008-01 on 1/8/2008
8-5-5: PUBLIC TREES
A. Duties Of Adjacent Property Owner; Planting And Removal:
1. No person shall plant or remove trees or other plants in or upon parking strips or public
grounds without first obtaining an encroachment permit from the city.
2. A condition of the encroachment permit shall be the acceptance by the permittee of
responsibility for the repair and replacement of any damage to sprinkling systems or
adjacent property caused during the work under the permit.
3. No tree shall be planted in city right of way except of the species recommended in the
"North Ogden City Tree Specifications Manual", unless in writing approved by the city
forester. If an existing tree is not on the current tree list, but the city forester does not
consider it an immediate concern due to pests, disease, or hazard, current removal of the
tree is not required.
4. No tree shall be planted so as, in the opinion of the city forester or a law enforcement
officer, to cause a traffic hazard and all trees shall be planted according to the guidelines.
5. In parking strips of four and one-half feet (41/2') or less in width, trees must be centered
when planted. In parking strips wider than four and one-half feet (41/2'), no tree shall be
planted closer than three feet (3') from the curb.
6. Tree damage to curb and/or sidewalks will be the homeowner's responsibility for the cost
of removal and/or repair.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=8:_PUBLIC_WAYS_AND_PROPERTY 32/37
B. Tree Maintenance: It shall be the duty of any person growing a tree within a public street right of
way or responsible for trees growing on property abutting on public grounds supporting trees or
plants to provide adequate maintenance:
1. Sufficient water, mulching, and protection from compaction or injury by vehicles or other
causes.
2. Prune the public trees so as to not cause a hazard to public places or interfere with the
proper lighting of public streets by the streetlights and so that the minimum clearance of
any overhanging portion thereof shall be nine feet (9'). The trees shall be at least fifty feet
(50') from any intersection and shall be pruned as to not block any traffic signs. See
"North Ogden City Tree Specifications Manual" for acceptable pruning methods.
3. Treat or remove any tree or plant that has died or that is diseased or insect infested as to
constitute a hazard to trees or plants in public grounds. If there is a new invasive pest or
disease that is considered a great threat, the tree will be removed or treated immediately.
Stump should be ground or dug out if required by city forester.
C. Unlawful To Abuse Public Tree:
1. Neglect, Abuse, Poison Or Mutilate: It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to
neglect, abuse, poison, or mutilate any public tree or shrub.
2. Top Or Flush Cut: It shall be a violation of this chapter to top any public tree or to flush cut
any branch on public trees except in an emergency.
3. Consequence Of Violation: Violation of this chapter is a class C misdemeanor and shall,
at the discretion of the city, also subject the offender to other civil remedies available to
the city for its reasonable costs to restore, replace any such damage, neglected, abused,
poisoned, mutilated, topped or flush cut public tree.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2008-01 on 1/8/2008
8-5-6: PRIVATE TREES
A. When the city forester shall find it necessary to order the trimming, preservation, or removal of
trees or plants upon private property due to serious epidemic, disease, or pest, or hazardous
conditions, which pose a threat to public safety or the welfare of the urban forest, the city forester
shall serve a written order to correct the dangerous condition upon the owner, operator,
occupant, or other person responsible for the tree's existence, within the time provided.
The order may be served in one of the following ways:
1. By making personal delivery of the order to the person responsible;
2. By affixing a copy of the order to the door at the entrance of the premises in violation;
3. By mailing a copy of the order to last known address of the owner of the premises, by
registered mail.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2008-01 on 1/8/2008
8-5-7: CITY AUTHORITY
A. The city forester shall have jurisdiction and supervision over all trees, shrubbery, plants, and
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=8:_PUBLIC_WAYS_AND_PROPERTY 33/37
grassy areas planted or growing in public grounds. The powers and duties of the city forester
shall be established by regulation, which powers shall include, but not be limited to, the power to:
1. Direct planting, irrigating, pruning, spraying, removing of shade and ornamental trees and
shrubbery now growing or which may hereafter be planted on any public grounds.
B. The city is authorized to do the following with respect to conditions caused by trees or shrubs on
city tree planting strips, public parks or other city property:
1. Remove dead limbs or trees, or trees or limbs that have already fallen across city
property.
2. Remove diseased or dying trees that are beyond reclamation; or that are a hazard as
determined by the city forester.
3. Remove trees or roots directly in the way of street widening projects, new curbs and
gutter or sidewalk and curb repairs.
4. Prune all trees and shrubs.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2008-01 on 1/8/2008
8-5-8: LICENSING OF PRIVATE TREE CARE FIRMS
A. Any person, firm, or corporation engaged in the business of trimming or removing public trees
shall carry public liability and property damage insurance in an amount to be determined by the
city council and policies or certificates thereof shall be filed with the city clerk. They will also
acquire and maintain a license from the city to perform tree work on trees in the right of way or
public locations. Said license shall be revocable for cause including, but not limited to, failure to
maintain the required insurance and shall terminate upon its stated date of expiration. Such
license may be renewed pursuant to city policies provided the applicant has fully replied with all
licensing terms and conditions.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2008-01 on 1/8/2008
8-5-9: ENFORCEMENT
A. Interference With Planting, Maintenance, And Removal Unlawful: No person, firm, or corporation
shall interfere with city personnel while engaged in planting, mulching, pruning, or removing any
tree, shrub, or plant in any street, or public place within the city of North Ogden.
B. Enforcement: Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine
equal to the monetary value of the tree as assessed by a certified arborist or tree appraiser using
the guidelines established by International Society Of Arboriculture and the degree of damage to
the tree. Penalty for violation to be enforced by city forester or code enforcement officer.
C. Resolution Of Conflicts Between Trees And Structures: Where sidewalk or curb damage due to
tree roots occur, every effort shall be made to correct the problem without removing or damaging
the tree. The city forester shall be responsible for developing or approving corrective measures in
consultation with the city engineer. The city shall not be liable for costs incurred by a property
owner for resolution of any such conflict.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=8:_PUBLIC_WAYS_AND_PROPERTY 34/37
D. Liability: Nothing in this chapter or within the specification manual shall be deemed to impose any
liability for damages or a duty of care and maintenance upon the city or upon any of its officers or
employees, nor to relieve the owner of any private property from the duty to keep the trees,
shrubs, or plants upon their property or on street tree area under the private property owner's
control in a safe, healthy condition.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2008-01 on 1/8/2008
8-5-10: SEVERABILITY
A. Should any part or provision of this chapter be declared by a court with competent jurisdiction to
be invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of this chapter as a whole or any part thereof
other than the part held to be invalid.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2008-01 on 1/8/2008
8-6: PARKS
8-6-1: APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS
8-6-2: HOURS DESIGNATED
8-6-3: PROHIBITED ACTS AND ACTIVITIES
8-6-4: MEETINGS, PICNICS OR ENTERTAINMENT; PERMIT REQUIRED
8-6-5: AMPHITHEATER RULES
8-6-6: PENALTY
8-6-1: APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS
A. The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable to any public officer or employee while
acting within the scope of his employment.
B. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all public parks, cemeteries and other public grounds
within the corporate limits of the city
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 12.16.010 on 1/1/1987
8-6-2: HOURS DESIGNATED
It is unlawful for any person, other than a peace officer on duty, or a public employee or officer in the
discharge of his official duties, to be in or about any park within the corporate limits of the city after the
hour of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M., and before the hour of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of the following day,
except in connection with an organized and authorized sporting event or other city sponsored activity.
The hours referred to in this section shall be deemed to be the time then in current use at the date in
question, whether the same is Mountain Standard Time or Daylight Saving Time.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 12.16.020 on 1/1/1987
8-6-3: PROHIBITED ACTS AND ACTIVITIES
A. Riding Or Driving Off Roadways: It is unlawful for any person to ride or operate any vehicle or
any bicycle or similar device, or any horse or animal, in or about any park within the corporate
limits of the city, except upon roadways, or areas lawfully established for that purpose, or to play
or practice golf or similar game in any such park.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=8:_PUBLIC_WAYS_AND_PROPERTY 35/37
B. Trailer Parking: It is unlawful to park or stop any trailer at any place within a park except for such
time as may be reasonably required to load or unload
C. Sleeping In Park: It is unlawful for any person to sleep overnight at any place in any park unless
specifically permitted as part of a city sponsored event.
D. Hitching Horses: It is unlawful for an person to hitch or fasten any horse or other animal to any
tree, shrub, fountain, monument, lamppost or any other ornament or improvement situated in any
park.
E. Injuring Or Picking Grass Or Plants: It is unlawful for any person to willfully pull any grass, pick
any flower or part of any plant, or to in any way deface or injure any grass, plant, tree or shrub
within any park.
F. Alcohol; Vandalism; Animals At Large: It is unlawful for any person to:
1. have in their possession or to consume any alcohol or alcoholic beverage;
2. or to scratch, cut, injure or deface, or write upon any of the buildings, fences or structures;
3. or to foul any of the fountains, streams or improvements within such parks;
4. or to smoke or use any tobacco product, including electronic cigarettes in the parks;
5. or for the owners or person in charge of any dog or other animal to permit such dog or
other animal to run at large within any park area not designated as an off leash area.
G. Firearms, Fireworks or Explosives: It is unlawful for any person to fire or discharge any firearm,
firecracker, fireworks or explosives within any park.
H. Littering: It is unlawful for any person to litter any park, or to leave or deposit any garbage, junk or
refuse of any kind, other than in receptacles provided for that purpose.
I. Posted Rules: It is unlawful for any person to disregard rules posted by North Ogden City on parks or
other publicly owned property.
J. Penalty: Violation of this section shall be an infraction.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-11 on 10/12/2010
Amended by Ord. 2017-20 on 9/26/2017
8-6-4: MEETINGS, PICNICS OR ENTERTAINMENT; PERMIT REQUIRED
It shall be unlawful for any person to hold a meeting, gathering, picnic, musical, theatrical or other
entertainment in any park without first obtaining a permit therefor which shall set forth the name,
address, telephone number of the person responsible therefor, the time, date, location, length of the
proposed event and such other information and uniform regulation as the city shall from time to time
prescribe.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 12.16.100 on 1/1/1987
8-6-5: AMPHITHEATER RULES
The amphitheater will be used on a priority basis by North Ogden City during the show season as
established by the Parks and Recreation Director. Other users may reserve the amphitheater provided
all fees are paid and rules are followed. Reservation fees shall be as established in the consolidated fee
schedule prior to any rental of the facility.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=8:_PUBLIC_WAYS_AND_PROPERTY 36/37
A. Use Number Permitted: A maximum not to exceed three (3) events or productions a week that
require the use of any loudspeakers will be allowed at the amphitheater in a calendar week
Sunday to Saturday.
B. Sound Level: Sound broadcast from any loudspeakers at the amphitheater may not exceed a
ninety (90) dBc at the park boundaries.
1. All amplified events shall utilize the City installed sound system unless approved by the
Parks and Recreation Director. If the City owned sound system is unavailable then
speakers may be used which operate within the approved dBc limits.
C. End Time: All events, productions, concerts, festivals, etc., held at the amphitheater must end by
ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. with the exception of the 4th of July fireworks and corresponding show.
All loudspeakers must be turned off by this time and patrons begin exiting the facility.
D. Time of Loudspeaker Use: No loudspeakers may be used to broadcast sound at the
amphitheater before ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. any day of the week unless authorized for City
sponsored events.
E. Outside Agreements: North Ogden City may enter into an agreement to partner with or
cosponsor with any outside agency or promoter to bring events to the amphitheater when it is
deemed to be beneficial to the amphitheater and a valuable opportunity.
1. All negotiations and agreements/contracts must be finalized to be official. This includes
contracts with the promoter and talent agency.
2. All fees including a "per ticket" fee charged by the City to the partner/promoter must be as
in the consolidated fee schedule.
3. Some or all production costs, including lights, sound, talent purchase, director's costs,
etc., are to be paid by the promoter or cosponsoring agency.
4. If ticket sales are to be sold through a ticket outlet other than the current North Ogden
Amphitheater ticket outlet, it must be approved by the Parks and Recreation Director and
all payments for ticket sales made to the City within five (5) business days.
5. Ticket sales shall be limited to four (4) tickets per authorized Park parking space.
F. Rental By Private Contractors: The amphitheater may be rented by private contractors once the
City Council has approved the facility for private rentals under the following conditions:
1. The North Ogden Amphitheater rental agreement is signed and executed by the renter
and North Ogden City Parks and Recreation Director.
2. All rental fees are paid as per the consolidated fee schedule and are non-refundable
within two (2) months of the event.
3. All North Ogden City police or Northview Fire staff as deemed necessary by the Parks
and Recreation Director are paid for per the consolidated fee schedule.
G. Parking: All event parking must be located within an approved location as authorized by the City,
and be limited to four (4) tickets per authorized Park parking space. The City is allowed to charge
for parking or authorize others to charge for parking. No event parking is allowed along the
southern curb of Deer Meadows Drive or the eastern curb of Barker Parkway. Homeowners in
Deer Meadows Subdivision and their guests may park along the restricted curbs provided a
proper permit is displayed in the window of the vehicle except on the 4th of July from nine o’clock
(9:00) P.M. to eleven o’clock (11:00) P.M. Any individual violation this provision shall be a class
C misdemeanor subject to all associated fines, and subject to immediate towing and
impoundment of the vehicle.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=8:_PUBLIC_WAYS_AND_PROPERTY 37/37
H. Interference with Events: It shall be a Class B Misdemeanor for any individual to:
1. Interfere with an event;
2. Obstruct patrons from attending an event;
3. Use loudspeakers within six hundred feet of an event;
4. Attempt to gain admittance to a paid event without a ticket;
5. Use lighting or other visual methods to disrupt an event;
6. Interfere with a scheduled event in any way.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-11 on 10/12/2010
Amended by Ord. 2018-11 on 6/19/2018
8-6-6: PENALTY
Unless otherwise specified, any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of
an infraction.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 2018-11 on 6/19/2018
8-7: RESTRICTED VEHICLES
8-7-1: USE OF ROADS BY RESTRICTED VEHICLES
8-7-1: USE OF ROADS BY RESTRICTED VEHICLES
A. All Restricted Vehicles shall be prohibited from using any road within the North Ogden City limits
except for:
1. Washington Boulevard (400 East) - between 2600 North and 1500 North.
2. 2700 North - between Washington Boulevard (400 East) and 300 West.
B. Restricted Vehicles which are making local deliveries in the North Ogden City municipal limits are
not subject to these restrictions.
C. Any Restricted Vehicle which violate this ordinance are guilty of a class B misdemeanor, subject
to the penalty as provided in CCNO 1-4-1.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2016-30 on 9/20/2016
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=9:_UTILITIES_AND_PUBLIC_SERVICES 1/18
9: UTILITIES AND PUBLIC SERVICES
9-1: WATER USE AND SERVICE
9-2: SECONDARY WATER SYSTEMS
9-3: SEWER REGULATIONS
9-4: DRAINAGE EASEMENTS
9-5: GARBAGE AND REFUSE DISPOSAL
9-6: STORM WATER CONTROL SYSTEM
9-1: WATER USE AND SERVICE
9-1-1: SERVICE CONNECTIONS
9-1-2: APPLICATION FOR SERVICE
9-1-3: FEES, RATES AND CHARGES
9-1-4: METER READING DATE ADJUSTMENT
9-1-5: BILLINGS; DELINQUENCY
9-1-6: CONSOLIDATED BILLINGS; PARTIAL PAYMENTS
9-1-7: METER INSTALLATIONS
9-1-8: INSPECTION OF PREMISES
9-1-9: PROHIBITED ACTS AND ACTIVITIES
9-1-10: PENALTY
9-1-11: WATER CONSERVATION PLAN ADOPTED
9-1-1: SERVICE CONNECTIONS
A. Authority: The city will make service connections upon application and payment of the fees
therefor.
B. Individual Meter Required: Each dwelling unit, building suite and building (if there are no suites in
the building) shall have its own individual water meter.
C. Meter Size: A residential water meter shall be one inch (1"), unless otherwise authorized by the
water superintendent.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2001-06 on 2/27/2001
9-1-2: APPLICATION FOR SERVICE
A. Required: No water, sewer, garbage and solid waste disposal, or storm water control services
("the city services") shall be furnished to any house, tenement, apartment, multi-family unit,
duplex, fourplex, building, place, premises or lot ("premises"), unless an application for city
services shall be made in writing, signed by the owner or the owner's duly authorized agent. An
applicant may apply for less than the entire city services provided by the city; provided, that the
applicant must apply for all city services if the failure to receive the city services from the city will
result in the creation, maintenance or perpetuation of a nuisance. In the application, the owner
shall agree to pay for all city services furnished to such premises according to the ordinances,
regulations and rules enacted or adopted by the city. A new owner must provide proof of
purchase in the form of settlement papers or closing papers from a lender or a deed from the
previous owner and picture identification. In the event an authorized agent applies for city
services on behalf of an owner, the agent shall also provide written proof of the agency.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=9:_UTILITIES_AND_PUBLIC_SERVICES 2/18
B. Owner Application for All Properties: Applications for city services to all properties shall be made
only by the owner or the owner's authorized agent. Applications from tenants shall not be
accepted. The application shall be in writing and shall be signed by the owner or the owner's duly
authorized agent. In the application, the owner or his authorized agent shall agree that the owner
shall pay for all city services furnished to the premises according to the ordinances, regulations
and rules enacted or adopted by the city.
C. Any utility service which has been discontinued shall only be reinstated upon payment of all
associated fees and service charges.
D. Property Owners may elect to have additional copies of bills sent to multiple addresses provided
the fee as set forth in the consolidated fee schedule is paid monthly for each additional address
requested.
E. Penalty: Any violation of this section shall be deemed a class B misdemeanor and shall be
subject to penalty as provided in CCNO 1-4-1.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 13.04.060 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
Amended by Ord. 2012-3 on 1/24/2012
Amended by Ord. 2016-06 on 2/16/2016
9-1-3: FEES, RATES AND CHARGES
A. City Limits: In conformity with the laws and constitution of the state and the ordinances of the
city, a schedule of water connection fees and water rates for the users of water from the city
waterworks system shall from time to time be established by resolution. Such schedule shall be
applicable only to users and premises using such water within the corporate limits of the city.
B. Outside City Limits: Water service to premises outside the corporate limits of the city shall be
furnished only after the approval of such individual application by the city council, and shall be for
such rates as the city council may, from time to time, establish by resolution of the city council. In
no event will the city council approve any such application for water service if the granting of the
application will in any way prejudice users on property within the corporate limits of the city.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 13.04.010 on 1/1/1987
9-1-4: METER READING DATE ADJUSTMENT
When, in the discretion of the city council, it is determined advisable that water readings be made on
some date other than the first of each month, the city council shall determine the date or dates on which
meter readings shall be made, and then the schedules provided for in CCNO 9-1-3 shall apply, but shall
be computed from the day of the month so determined by the council.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 13.04.020 on 1/1/1987
9-1-5: BILLINGS; DELINQUENCY
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=9:_UTILITIES_AND_PUBLIC_SERVICES 3/18
All bills for metered water service shall be due and payable monthly at the office of the city treasurer. If
such bills are not paid by the end of the month in which they are issued, then such bills shall become
delinquent; provided, that residents shall always have at least fifteen (15) days to pay the bills before
they become delinquent. By the fifteenth of the month following a bill becoming delinquent, a shutoff
notice shall be sent to the customer and the account shall be charged a processing fee. If such bill is not
paid within ten (10) days from the date of the shutoff notice, water service may be discontinued and shall
not be restored until either:
A. all fees and charges have been paid (including the processing fee and any collection or
reconnection fees); or
B. the customer has entered into a written water restoration agreement with the city. The amount of
the processing, collection and reconnection fees shall be established by resolution.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 13.04.030 on 1/1/1987
9-1-6: CONSOLIDATED BILLINGS; PARTIAL PAYMENTS
A. Consolidated Billings: The city shall issue consolidated bills for all water, sewer, garbage and
solid waste disposal, and storm water control services. These consolidated bills shall be issued
monthly by the city and shall state the amounts due for each individual charge and a total of all
charges for city services due for that month. Customers who receive some of these services from
the city and either do not receive the other services or receive the other services from other
providers shall be billed monthly for those services they receive from the city and their bills shall
show no charges due for those services which they do not receive or which they receive from
other sources.
B. Partial Payments:
1. In the event any customer shall make a partial payment on a consolidated monthly bill
sent by the city, the partial payment shall be applied to the outstanding charges in the
following order:
a. Processing, collection and reconnection fees;
b. Overdue charges for garbage and solid waste disposal services;
c. Current charges for garbage and solid waste disposal services;
d. Overdue charges for storm water control services;
e. Current charges for storm water control services;
f. Overdue charges for sewer services;
g. Current charges for sewer services;
h. Overdue charges for water services; and
i. Current charges for water services.
2. Partial payments shall be applied in the order specified in subsection B1 of this section
regardless of any request or communication from the customer submitting the partial
payment that the partial payment be applied in a different order.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 13.04.035 on 1/1/1987
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=9:_UTILITIES_AND_PUBLIC_SERVICES 4/18
9-1-7: METER INSTALLATIONS
A. Fee Established: The meter installation fee for installing water meters shall be prescribed from
time to time by resolution.
B. Requirements: Minimum meter size on all new construction shall be one inch (1"). The contractor
shall make all excavations, including the tap, running the service line, providing the copper
tubing, meter setter, meter box and all appropriate fittings pursuant to the public works standards
of the city, except in platted subdivisions wherein the subdivider will be responsible for all costs,
materials and labor for all water mains, laterals to the property line, the cost of the service tap
and related fittings. All meter boxes for one inch (1") meters shall be concrete twenty one inches
by thirty inches (21" x 30"), using solid meter box lids and rings. In all other installations larger
than one inch (1"), the contractor or applicant will furnish and install all appropriate fittings,
including a four foot (4') manhole section, complete with a concrete lid with an offset access hole,
including steps and manhole ring and cover. All materials used must have the city's approval
prior to installation. Meter boxes will be set one foot (1') behind the curb. In areas where curb
does not exist, boxes will be set one foot (1') inside the property line. The city will provide and
install all water meters.
C. Location: All meters shall be located in a convenient place in front of the property to be serviced
and/or within five feet (5') of the side property line; and in no event shall more than one
residential structure nor more than one commercial establishment be serviced by the same
meter.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 13.04.050, 13.04.070 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
9-1-8: INSPECTION OF PREMISES
The water superintendent, or his designee, shall have the right at all reasonable hours to enter and
inspect any premises using water from the city waterworks system to determine whether all applicable
rules, regulations and ordinances of the city are being followed in the use of such water.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 13.04.080 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
9-1-9: PROHIBITED ACTS AND ACTIVITIES
A. Unlawful Plumbing Connections: It is unlawful for any person to connect any plumbing installation
or fixture, directly or indirectly, to the water supply of the city unless all plumbing work in
connection therewith is installed according to the ordinances of the city.
B. Tampering With Valves: It is unlawful for any person to tamper with any valve of the water
system including fire hydrants without proper authority and it is unlawful for any person to turn on
any water service without proper authority, nor to reconnect any service which has been shut off
or disconnected for nonpayment of fees or otherwise.
C. Damaging Equipment: It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to in any way molest or tamper
with any meter of the waterworks system, or to in any way remove, damage or injure any
bulkhead, gate, gatehouse, conduit, culvert, hydrant or main constructed or maintained for the
purpose of supplying water to the inhabitants of the city.
D. Pollution Of Water System: It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to in any way
contaminate, pollute or render impure any water or water supply of the city.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=9:_UTILITIES_AND_PUBLIC_SERVICES 5/18
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 13.04.090, 3.04.110, 3.04.120 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2009-04 on 4/28/2009
9-1-10: PENALTY
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a class B
misdemeanor and subject to penalty as provided in CCNO 1-4-1.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 13.04.130 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
9-1-11: WATER CONSERVATION PLAN ADOPTED
The water conservation plan for North Ogden City, Utah, is adopted and on file in the city.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2009-06 on 6/30/2009
9-2: SECONDARY WATER SYSTEMS
9-2-1: FINDINGS
9-2-2: CONNECTION TO SECONDARY WATER SYSTEM
9-2-3: BACKFLOW AND CROSS CONNECTIONS
9-2-4: USE OF CULINARY WATER FOR IRRIGATION PROHIBITED
9-2-5: PENALTY
9-2-1: FINDINGS
The city council has determined that heavy demand is being placed upon the culinary water system by
use of culinary water for irrigation purposes, and that such heavy demand, if continued, could result in a
shortage of culinary water and could result in inadequate water supply for fire protection in some areas.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 13.08.010 on 1/1/1987
9-2-2: CONNECTION TO SECONDARY WATER SYSTEM
It is unlawful for the owner of any residential or agricultural property to fail to connect to a secondary
water system.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2001-04 on 2/13/2001
9-2-3: BACKFLOW AND CROSS CONNECTIONS
A. Purpose: The purposes of these provisions are to:
1. Protect the public potable water supply of the city from the possibility of contamination or
pollution by containing within the customer's internal distribution system contaminants or
pollutants which could backflow into the public water systems; and
2. Promote the elimination or control of existing cross connections, actual or potential,
between the customer's in house potable water system and nonpotable water system,
plumbing fixtures, industrial piping systems; and
3. Provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross connection control which
will systematically and effectively prevent the contamination or pollution of all potable
water systems.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=9:_UTILITIES_AND_PUBLIC_SERVICES 6/18
B. Definitions: As used in this section, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this subsection:
APPROVED BACKFLOW ASSEMBLY: The backflow assembly accepted by the Utah
department of health as meeting an applicable specification or as suitable for the proposed use.
AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY: Any water supply on or available to the premises other than the
city public water supply will be considered as an auxiliary water supply. These auxiliary waters
may include water from another city/municipality's public potable water supply, a pressured
irrigation system, or any natural source such as a well, spring, river, stream, harbor, etc., or used
waters or industrial fluids.
BACK PRESSURE: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances under pressure
into the distribution pipes of potable water supply system from any source other than the
intended source.
BACK SIPHONAGE: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into the
distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source other than the intended
source.
BACKFLOW: The reversal of the normal flow of water caused by either back pressure or back
siphonage.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY: An assembly or means designed to prevent backflow.
Specifications for backflow prevention assemblies are contained within the international plumbing
code, and the cross connection control program for Utah. All backflow prevention assemblies
must be approved by the Utah department of health prior to installation. A listing of these
approved backflow prevention assemblies is available from the Utah department of health.
CONTAMINATION: An impairment of the quality of the potable water supply by sewage,
industrial fluids, waste liquids, compounds or other materials to a degree which creates an actual
or potential hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease.
CROSS CONNECTION: Any physical connection or arrangement of piping or fixtures between
two (2) otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water and the other
nonpotable water or industrial fluids of questionable safety, through which, or because of which,
backflow may occur into the potable water system. This would include any temporary
connections, such as swing connections, removable sections, four (4) way plug valves, spools,
dummy sections of pipe, swivel or changeover devices or sliding multiport tubes.
CROSS CONNECTION, CONTAINMENT: The installation of an approved backflow prevention
assembly at the water service connection to any customer's premises where it is physically and
economically infeasible to find and permanently eliminate or control all actual or potential cross
connections within the customer's water supply system; or, it shall mean the line leading to and
supplying a portion of a customer's water system where there are actual or potential cross
connections which cannot be effectively eliminated or controlled at the point of the cross
connection (isolation).
CROSS CONNECTION, CONTROLLED: A connection between a potable water supply system
and a nonpotable water system with an approved backflow prevention assembly properly
installed and maintained so that it will continuously afford the protection commensurate with the
degree of hazard.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=9:_UTILITIES_AND_PUBLIC_SERVICES 7/18
C. Responsibility Of Officials:
1. City: The city shall be responsible for the protection of the public potable water distribution
system from contamination or pollution due to the backflow of contaminants or pollutants
through the water service connection. The public works director, or his agent ("water
authority"), is vested with the authority and responsibility for the implementation of an
effective cross connection control program and for the enforcement of the provisions of
this section. If, in the judgment of the water authority, an approved backflow prevention
assembly is required (at the customer's water service connection or within the customer's
private water system) for the safety of the water system, the water authority shall give
notice in writing to said customer to install such an approved backflow prevention
assembly) at a specified location on his premises. The customer shall immediately install
such approved assembly at the customer's own expense. Failure, refusal or inability on
the part of the customer to install, have tested and maintain said assembly shall constitute
grounds for discontinuing water service to the premises until such requirements have
been satisfactorily met.
2. Building Inspection Division: The building inspection division has the responsibility to
review building plans and inspect plumbing installations to ensure compliance with the
current edition of the international plumbing code as adopted by the city and the state with
respect to cross connections and back siphonages. The building inspection division's
responsibility begins at the point of service (the downstream side of the meter) and
carried throughout the entire length of the customer's water system.
3. Certified Backflow Assembly Technician: Certified backflow assembly technicians only
shall do the testing of backflow prevention assemblies. The certified technician must tag
each double check valve, pressure vacuum breaker, reduced pressure backflow
assembly and air gap, showing the serial number of the assembly, date tested and by
whom. The technician's license number must also be on this tag. All repairs and
maintenance of the assemblies shall be accomplished by a licensed plumber.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=9:_UTILITIES_AND_PUBLIC_SERVICES 8/18
D. Requirements:
1. Service of water to any premises shall be discontinued by the city if a backflow prevention
assembly required by this section for control of backflow and cross connections is not
installed, tested and maintained, or it is found that a backflow prevention assembly has
been removed, bypassed, or if an unprotected cross connection exists on the premises.
Service will not be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected.
2. The customer's system shall be open for inspection at all reasonable times to authorized
representatives of the city to determine whether cross connections exist.
3. An approved backflow prevention assembly shall be installed on each service line to a
nonresidential customer's water system, at or near the property line or immediately inside
the building being served, when it is deemed necessary by the utility to conform to public
law 93-253, (the safe drinking water act of 1974), occupational safety and health rules
and regulations (section 1910.141, subpart J), Utah Code § 19-4-112, Utah public
drinking water regulations (sections 2.4, and 12.5), and the Utah plumbing code, revised
September 1990, chapter 10. In all cases, the assembly will be installed before the first
branch line leading off the service line, whenever the city deems the protection of the
water supply to be in the best interest of the water supply customers.
4. The type of protective assembly required under subsection D3 of this section, shall
depend upon the degree of hazard which exists at the point of cross connection (whether
direct or indirect), as stipulated in the international plumbing code.
5. All presently installed backflow prevention assemblies which do not meet the
requirements of this section but were approved assemblies for the purposes described
herein at the time of installation and which have been properly maintained, shall be
excluded from the requirements of these rules so long as the city is assured that they will
satisfactorily protect the public water system. Whenever the existing assembly is moved
from the present location or requires more than minimum maintenance or when the city
finds that the maintenance of the assembly constitutes a hazard to health, the unit shall
be replaced by an approved backflow prevention assembly meeting the requirements of
this section.
6. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the customer at any premises where backflow
prevention assemblies are installed to have certified inspections and operational tests
made at least once per year at the customer's expense. In those instances where the city
deems the hazard to be great, it may require certified inspections and tests at a more
frequent interval. These inspections and tests shall be performed by a certified backflow
assembly technician.
7. Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in water supply lines to provide at least
the degree of protection stipulated in the international plumbing code.
8. All backflow prevention assemblies installed in a potable water supply system for
protection against backflow shall be maintained in good working condition by the person
or persons having control of such assemblies. Upon inspection, any assembly found to be
defective or inoperative shall be replaced or repaired. No assembly shall be removed
from use, relocated or another assembly substituted, without the approval of the city.
9. All backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested within ten (10) working days of initial
usage.
10. No backflow prevention assembly shall be installed so as to create a safety hazard.
Example: Installed over an electrical panel, steam pipe, boilers, pits or above ceiling level.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=9:_UTILITIES_AND_PUBLIC_SERVICES 9/18
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 13.08.030 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
9-2-4: USE OF CULINARY WATER FOR IRRIGATION PROHIBITED
It is unlawful for any person, whether owner or occupant, of any residential or agricultural property, to
use culinary water from the city waterworks for the purpose of irrigating any yard, garden, lawn, field or
for livestock watering. Building permits for residential structures shall not be issued unless there is a
pressurized secondary water system serving the property. Property located in the Ben Lomond estates
subdivision, Roylance farms PRUD subdivision, phases 1 and 2, and the Roylance farms phase 3
subdivision are excluded from this section until secondary water is available.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2001-04 on 2/13/2001
9-2-5: PENALTY
Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a class B misdemeanor and shall be subject
to penalty as provided in CCNO 1-4-1.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 13.08.050 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
9-3: SEWER REGULATIONS
9-3-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
9-3-2: PERMIT FOR CONNECTION; FEE
9-3-3: USAGE FEES
9-3-4: BILLINGS; DELINQUENCY
9-3-5: NONCOMPLIANCE; NUISANCE DECLARED
9-3-6: PRIVY VAULTS
9-3-7: PENALTY
9-3-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
A. Maintenance of Sewers – The City’s obligation to maintain sewer facilities is limited to the main
public sewer trunk lines within the road right-of-way or other easements obtained by the City for
such purposes. The City is not obligated to maintain, repair, replace or otherwise perform any
work on private sewer facilities installed by the owners of houses, buildings, or other properties
as outlined under the subsection (B) below.
B. Connection Required – The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, commercial, institutional, recreational or other like purposes, any part of
which building is within three hundred feet (300') of any street, alley, court, passageway or area
in which a public sewer or sewer owned or operated by or lying within the corporate limits of the
city is in existence and use is required at his expense to install suitable facilities (“sewer laterals”)
therein, and to connect and maintain in perpetuity, including repair and replacement, such
facilities and sewer laterals with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter within ninety (90) days after the date that the public sewer line is available for use,
provided such public sewer line is within three hundred feet (300') of any part of such building
discharging sanitary or industrial waste.
C. Compliance with Central Weber Sewer Improvement District Regulations. All individuals must
comply with rules and regulations of the Central Weber Sewer Improvement District as approved
by the District Board of Directors.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=9:_UTILITIES_AND_PUBLIC_SERVICES 10/18
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 13.12.010 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2015-09 on 5/12/2015
Amended by Ord. 2018-24 on 10/9/2018
9-3-2: PERMIT FOR CONNECTION; FEE
A. Permit Required: It is unlawful for any person to connect to such sewer system without first
obtaining a sewer connection permit and paying such sewer connection permit fee as shall
hereafter be fixed by resolution from time to time by the city council. No such permit shall be
issued until the plumbing in the building to be serviced shall comply with the requirements and
regulations of the city and the state plumbing codes.
B. Fees; Waiver; Line Of Credit: The requirement for paying connection fees as outlined in
subsection A of this section shall be deemed waived upon the application by any person required
to connect to a public sewer for the establishment of a line of credit with the city for payment of
the connection fees. Upon acceptance a by the city of such application, the person making
application may connect to the sewer as provided for in this chapter, and shall pay in one
payment within one year the required connection fee, together with interest at a rate determined
at time of application. Failure to pay such fees within the time allotted shall be deemed to be a
violation of this chapter and punishable as provided for in CCNO 9-3-7.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 13.12.020, 13.12.030 on 1/1/1987
9-3-3: USAGE FEES
All persons, corporations and associations connected to a sewer as required in this chapter shall pay
such sewer maintenance and usage fees and charges as the city council may establish and fix from time
to time by resolution.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 13.12.080 on 1/1/1987
9-3-4: BILLINGS; DELINQUENCY
A. Due And Payable: All bills for monthly sewer service shall be due and payable monthly at the
office of the city treasurer. If such bills are not paid by the end of the month in which they are
issued, then such bills shall become delinquent; provided, that residents shall always have at
least fifteen (15) days to pay the bills before they become delinquent. By the fifteenth of the
month following a bill becoming delinquent, a shutoff notice shall be sent to the customer and the
account shall be charged a processing fee. The amount of the processing fee shall be
established by resolution. In the event the city expends additional funds in collecting the account,
including attorney fees, the city may add those amounts due from the customer.
B. Consolidation: Bills for monthly sewer service shall be consolidated with bills submitted for water
service for those persons who receive both services from the city. Partial payments of the
consolidated bills shall be applied pursuant to the provisions of CCNO 9-1-6.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 13.12.090 on 1/1/1987
9-3-5: NONCOMPLIANCE; NUISANCE DECLARED
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=9:_UTILITIES_AND_PUBLIC_SERVICES 11/18
Any privy vaults, septic tanks or cesspools constructed or maintained in violation of the provisions of this
chapter are declared to be a public nuisance; and it shall be the duty of the city attorney to proceed
forthwith with condemnation proceedings declaring the subject matter of such violation to be a nuisance,
and also to proceed forthwith with the filing of a complaint for the criminal violation of this chapter.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 13.12.040 on 1/1/1987
9-3-6: PRIVY VAULTS
A. Prohibited: It is unlawful for the owner or his agent or other persons having charge of or
occupying any property upon which a building shall have been or is being constructed for
residential, commercial or industrial use, any part of which building is within three hundred feet
(300') of the street, alley, court, passageway or area in which a public sewer is in existence and
in use within the corporate limits of the city to construct, cause or permit to be constructed any
privy vault, septic tank or cesspool into which such building is to be connected.
B. Notice To Connect: It is unlawful for the owner, or his agent, or other person having charge of or
occupying any property upon which a building shall have been constructed for residential,
commercial or industrial use, any part of which building is within three hundred feet (300') of any
street, alley, court, passageway or area in which a public sewer is in existence and use within the
corporate limits of the city, after the owner or his agent or other person having charge of or
occupying such property has been given written notice by the city that an accepted public sewer
is ready to receive connections therewith, and ninety (90) days have expired, to maintain or use
or cause or permit to exist any privy vault, septic tank or cesspool to which such building is
connected or which is used by the occupants of such building.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 13.12.050, 13.12.060 on 1/1/1987
9-3-7: PENALTY
Any person, corporation or association violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a class B
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to penalty as provided in CCNO 1-4-1. Each day in
which such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate and new offense.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 13.12.100 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
9-4: DRAINAGE EASEMENTS
9-4-1: MAINTENANCE REQUIRED
9-4-2: OBSTRUCTIONS
9-4-3: ACCESS
9-4-4: STRUCTURES ON WATERWAY
9-4-5: PENALTY
9-4-1: MAINTENANCE REQUIRED
The city shall have the duty to keep all drains, sewers, ditches and waterways located within duly
recorded city easements and rights of way in reasonably good repair and condition in order that such
easements serve the purpose for which they are intended.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 13.16.010 on 1/1/1987
9-4-2: OBSTRUCTIONS
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=9:_UTILITIES_AND_PUBLIC_SERVICES 12/18
A. Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person to obstruct, damage, place rubbish or debris in, erect
structures in or upon, or to in any other way interfere with the normal use of any drain, sewer,
ditch or waterway located within a city easement or right of way which is used, or could be used
for drainage purposes, or to alter, change, reduce or enlarge such drain, sewer, ditch or
waterway.
B. Repairs And Maintenance Excepted: Subsection A of this section shall not be construed in any
way to prohibit the normal maintenance and repair of such drains, ditches and waterways by the
city or others entitled to the lawful use thereof; provided, that such repairs and maintenance shall
at all times be done in a reasonable manner and at reasonable times.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 13.16.020, 13.16.030 on 1/1/1987
9-4-3: ACCESS
The city shall at all times enjoy access to all easements wherein drains, ditches, sewers and waterways
as described in this chapter are located for the purpose of reasonable maintenance and repair, and shall
enjoy the right at all reasonable times to enter such easement for all lawful purposes. It is unlawful for
any person to interfere with or obstruct access to such easement.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 13.16.040 on 1/1/1987
9-4-4: STRUCTURES ON WATERWAY
A. Permit Required: No persons shall erect any fence, gate, building, porch, patio or other like
structure, place rubbish, leaves, trees, limbs or other vegetation or store materials in or upon or
otherwise obstruct or interfere with any drain, ditch, sewer or waterway as described in this
chapter without first obtaining an easement construction permit from the city. Applications for
easement construction permits shall be made available by the city which shall contain the name
and address of the permit applicant, the location at which the proposed structure or other
improvements or use will be erected and/or maintained, and a description of the proposed
structure, improvement or use. Any structure, improvement or use placed in or upon an
easement pursuant to such permit shall, at the request of the city, be immediately removed if city
officials determine that removal is necessary to prevent potential damage or destruction in case
of emergency, or in the event that removal is recommended by the city engineer or other
qualified expert who after study and evaluation, determines such structure, improvement or use
to be incompatible to the purpose for which the easement has been granted. The city may, in
case of emergency, remove or destroy said improvement or use, without liability, if, in the
judgment of the city, removal or destruction is necessary in order to prevent potential damage to
property or injury to persons. Any permit issued shall include a waiver of liability and shall release
the city from and against all claims arising out of or due to destruction occasioned by the
improvement or use authorized by the permit.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=9:_UTILITIES_AND_PUBLIC_SERVICES 13/18
B. Removal; Cost: Upon the city's determination that a structure or use maintained within or upon
an easement is or may be detrimental to persons or property or incompatible within the use
served by the easement, the city shall, except in the case of emergency, notify the owner or
occupant of such determination, and require such owner or occupant to eradicate, remove or
destroy the same within such time as the city shall designate, which shall not be less than ten
(10) days from the date of service of such notice. If any owner or occupant described in such
notice shall fail or neglect to eradicate, remove or destroy the structure or use in accordance with
such notice, the city may, at the expense of the city, remove, destroy or eradicate such structure
or use. The city shall then prepare an itemized statement of all expenses incurred in the removal
and destruction of the same and mail a copy thereof to the owner, and shall demand payment
from the owner within twenty (20) days of the mailing. In the event the owner fails to make
payment of the amount set forth in such statement to the city treasurer within such twenty (20)
days, the city may cause suit to be brought in an appropriate court of law or may bring such
criminal actions as may be provided by this chapter or other laws and regulations. In the event
collection of such costs are pursued through the courts, the city may sue for and receive
judgment upon all of such costs of removal and destruction, together with reasonable attorney
fees, at the then prevailing legal rate of interest and court costs. The city may execute on such
judgment in the manner provided by law.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 13.16.050, 13.16.060 on 1/1/1987
9-4-5: PENALTY
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor, and
subject to penalty as provided in CCNO 1-4-1.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 13.16.070 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
9-5: GARBAGE AND REFUSE DISPOSAL
9-5-1: DEFINITIONS
9-5-2: DISPOSAL REQUIREMENTS
9-5-3: ACCUMULATION PROHIBITED
9-5-4: FEES, RATES AND CHARGES
9-5-5: BILLINGS; DELINQUENCY
9-5-6: RECEPTACLES
9-5-7: SEMIANNUAL CITY CLEANUP
9-5-8: HAULING AND DISPOSAL
9-5-9: FAILURE TO REMOVE
9-5-10: PENALTY
9-5-1: DEFINITIONS
As used in this chapter:
GARBAGE AND REFUSE: Garbage: All kitchen waste or byproducts, including, but not limited to,
animal or vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
Refuse: Paper, cardboard, tin cans, glass, crockery, rags and similar materials, grass, weeds, leaves,
flowers and shrub clippings small enough to be contained within a plastic bag; garden vegetables and
fruits, and ash residue of materials burned in stoves, fireplaces and furnaces.
Garbage and refuse do not include tree limbs, rocks, dirt, sod, roots, building materials, tires, automobile
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=9:_UTILITIES_AND_PUBLIC_SERVICES 14/18
parts, concrete, furniture, appliances, large toys, liquids of any kind in any container, hot ashes, dead
animals, nor manure or waste from animals other than household pets.
RECEPTACLE: A specialized container with a maximum capacity of ninety (90) gallons, supplied by the
city to each residence or household for the purpose of garbage and refuse disposal.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 13.20.010 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
9-5-2: DISPOSAL REQUIREMENTS
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to place or deposit in or on any of the public streets,
alleys or parks in the city any rubbish, debris, grass cuttings, leaves, tree limbs, branches, sticks, stones,
junk, cast off clothing, papers, printed matter, dirt or other discarded thing or matter incident to house
cleaning or yard cleaning, except garbage and refuse on regular garbage collection days, and except in
garbage "receptacles", as defined in CCNO 9-5-1 and at locations set forth in this chapter.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 13.20.090 on 1/1/1987
9-5-3: ACCUMULATION PROHIBITED
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to permit garbage, refuse or similar wastes to
accumulate or remain on or about the premises under the control of such person for such period of time
as to become a "nuisance" or "public nuisance", as defined in CCNO 5-2-1, and every person, firm or
corporation is required to remove or provide for the removal of garbage, refuse and similar wastes
before the same becomes a nuisance or public nuisance.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 13.20.110 on 1/1/1987
9-5-4: FEES, RATES AND CHARGES
A. Funding: The city council finds and declares that it is necessary and in the public interest to raise
funds for the purpose of defraying the costs for removing and hauling and disposing of garbage
and refuse and for procuring Weber County to take possession of garbage and refuse originating
in the city at the county landfill. It is further necessary and in the public interest to raise funds to
defray incidental expenses of administering the city refuse disposal department, including, but
not limited to, the policing and inspection thereof and the costs of collection of the service
charges imposed under this chapter. For the purpose of retaining funds for the purpose stated in
this subsection, garbage and refuse disposal service charges are imposed, levied and assessed
against all persons and premises eligible for garbage and refuse disposal services on and after
the date of adoption of this chapter. In addition, charges shall be levied against each new
building or dwelling constructed within the city.
B. Rate Determination: The city council shall, from time to time, by resolution, fix and determine the
rates and charges and fees to be levied and assessed upon the several persons and premises
eligible for garbage and refuse disposal services by or through the city. All rates and charges
shall be just, reasonable and nondiscriminatory.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=9:_UTILITIES_AND_PUBLIC_SERVICES 15/18
C. Commercial Establishments: All removal, hauling and disposal of garbage by the city or one with
whom the city may contract for such service shall be available to residential households and may
be made available to nonresidential units (i.e., commercial and industrial establishments,
churches, etc.) at such rates and fees as the city may determine by resolution. All nonresidential
units to whom such service is not made available shall make suitable arrangements to have their
accumulated garbage and refuse and similar wastes removed and properly disposed of, at the
owner's expense at such intervals as shall be determined by the city council, but at least once a
week, until such time as the city may resolve to provide such service.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 13.20.150, 13.20.160, 13.20.210 on 1/1/1987
9-5-5: BILLINGS; DELINQUENCY
A. Due And Payable: All bills for monthly garbage and solid waste disposal service shall be due and
payable monthly at the office of the city treasurer. If such bills are not paid by the end of the
month in which they are issued, then such bills shall become delinquent; provided, that residents
shall always have at least fifteen (15) days to pay the bills before they become delinquent. By the
fifteenth of the month following a bill becoming delinquent, a shutoff notice shall be sent to the
customer and the account shall be charged a processing fee. The amount of the processing fee
shall be established by resolution. In the event the city expends additional funds in collecting the
account, including attorney fees, the city may add those amounts due from the customer.
B. Consolidation: Bills for monthly garbage and solid waste disposal service shall be consolidated
with bills submitted for water service for those persons who receive both services from the city.
Partial payments of the consolidated bills shall be applied pursuant to the provisions of CCNO 9-
1-6.
C. Lien; Waiver: All unpaid charges for garbage and refuse disposal service are a lien against the
premises to which garbage and refuse disposal service is rendered or for which service is
procured by the city. Such lien may be foreclosed in any court of competent jurisdiction. The lien
may be waived and an action in person may be maintained for the collection of such charges.
D. Failure To Pay: In the event that any charges made under the provisions of CCNO 9-5-4B are
not promptly paid when due, the city may proceed to collect the sum as a debt due the city and
may sue thereon in any court of competent jurisdiction.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 13.20.170, 13.20.190, 13.20.220 on 1/1/1987
9-5-6: RECEPTACLES
A. Placement:
1. Any person placing garbage or refuse out for collection shall do so on the scheduled
collection day and shall place the same in garbage receptacles which shall be placed
against the curb with the wheels thereof abutting said curb, or where no curb exists, at a
location upon or contiguous to the garbage owner's property and as close as practical to
the street, highway or roadway abutting such owner's property or at such other location
prescribed by resolution. All receptacles should be so placed as to provide for easy
collection and removal, in clear view and in no case shall be placed behind any
obstruction, including, but not limited to, snow banks, mailboxes or shrubbery.
2. Those items of waste or rubbish which do not qualify as "garbage or refuse", as those
terms are defined in CCNO 9-5-1, will not be removed or disposed of by the city, but shall
be disposed of by the owner at the Weber County landfill at his own expense.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=9:_UTILITIES_AND_PUBLIC_SERVICES 16/18
3. The household occupant or premises owner to whom such receptacle is assigned shall
be liable for the cost of replacing any garbage receptacle damaged, stolen or removed
from the city by or while under the control of said occupant or owner. Any garbage
receptacle damaged, stolen or removed from the city by or while under the control of the
household occupant to whom said receptacle is assigned shall be liable for the cost of
replacing the damaged, stolen or removed receptacle. The city shall repair and replace,
from time to time, the wheels, handles and axles of garbage receptacles which require
maintenance or replacement due to normal use.
B. Draining And Separating Required: All garbage and refuse, when applicable, shall be drained of
excess water and shall be wrapped in paper, and any animal defecation shall be separately
wrapped in paper or plastic, before being placed in a garbage receptacle.
C. Ashes: All ashes, after being allowed to cool, shall be wrapped in paper or otherwise sealed in a
bag or container before being placed in a garbage receptacle.
D. Removal: All empty garbage receptacles must be removed from the street as soon as practical
after being emptied, and in every case must be removed from the street on the day they are
emptied. No such receptacle shall be permitted to remain on any street longer than may be
reasonably necessary for the removal of the contents thereof.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 13.20.020, 13.20.050, 13.20.070, 13.20.060 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
9-5-7: SEMIANNUAL CITY CLEANUP
Each year on a designated week during the spring and again in the fall, the city will provide a special
cleanup service. During these cleanup periods, such items as green waste, tree limbs, yard clippings
and other rubbish not regularly picked up by the city garbage collection service may be placed at
curbside for a special pickup by the city. Dates of these cleanup weeks as well as limits on quantity and
quality of items to be picked up will be set and specified by resolution.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 13.20.100 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
9-5-8: HAULING AND DISPOSAL
A. License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage in the
business of collection, hauling or disposal of garbage, refuse and similar wastes within the
corporate limits of the city without first having obtained a license to do so from the city council.
B. Securing Loads; Use Of Dump: It is unlawful for any person hauling garbage, refuse, manure or
matter of any kind to permit or allow any such matter to fall upon and remain or allow any such
matter to fall upon and remain in any street, alley or park within the corporate limits of the city, or
to deposit any such matter at any place except the Weber County landfill or other dumping
ground authorized by the city council.
C. Contracting: The city council shall have the power, at any time it may deem it advisable, to
contract with any person, firm or corporation for the hauling and disposal of garbage, refuse and
similar wastes and may provide by resolution for such charge as the city council may determine
to be collected from all persons, firms and corporations benefited by such service.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 13.20.120, 13.20.130, 13.20.140 on 1/1/1987
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=9:_UTILITIES_AND_PUBLIC_SERVICES 17/18
9-5-9: FAILURE TO REMOVE
Any person, firm or corporation permitting the accumulation of garbage, refuse or similar wastes or
failing to remove the same as provided in this chapter, shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor and
subject to penalty as provided in CCNO 1-4-1. In addition, the city council may, at its discretion, arrange
for the removal and destruction of any accumulated garbage, refuse or similar wastes from the premises
and may charge the costs of such removal to the owner or occupant of the premises on which such
accumulation is permitted, such charge to be a debt due to the city, and the city may sue for and receive
judgment upon all of such costs of removal and destruction, together with all attorney fees, interest and
court costs. Furthermore, the city may take any other action authorized by law.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 13.20.230 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
9-5-10: PENALTY
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a class B
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to penalty as provided in CCNO 1-4-1.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 13.20.240 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
9-6: STORM WATER CONTROL SYSTEM
9-6-1: FEES AND RATES ESTABLISHED
9-6-2: BILLINGS; DELINQUENCY
9-6-3: TAMPERING PROHIBITED
9-6-4: PENALTY
9-6-1: FEES AND RATES ESTABLISHED
In conformity with the laws and constitution of the state and the ordinances of the city, the city shall
impose a monthly fee on residents of the city to pay for use of the city storm water control system. This
fee shall be in an amount sufficient to cover the costs of installation, expansion, maintenance,
replacement and repair of the storm water control system. No resident shall be able to exempt himself
from payment of these fees by alleging that he or she does not use the storm water control system. The
fees imposed by this section shall be billed monthly and shall be established by resolution. The fees
shall be just, reasonable and nondiscriminatory.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 13.24.010 on 1/1/1987
9-6-2: BILLINGS; DELINQUENCY
A. Due And Payable: Bills for use of the storm sewer control system shall be due and payable
monthly at the office of the city treasurer. If such bills are not paid by the end of the month in
which they are issued, then such bills shall become delinquent; provided, that residents shall
always have at least fifteen (15) days to pay the bills before they become delinquent. By the
fifteenth of the month following a bill becoming delinquent, a shutoff notice shall be sent to the
customer and the account shall be charged a processing fee. The amount of the processing fee
shall be established by resolution. In the event the city expends additional funds in collecting the
account, including attorney fees, the city may add those amounts due from the customer.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=9:_UTILITIES_AND_PUBLIC_SERVICES 18/18
B. Consolidation: Bills for monthly service shall be consolidated with bills for water service for those
persons who receive both services from the city. Partial payments of the consolidated bills shall
be applied pursuant to the provisions of CCNO 9-1-6.
C. Failure To Pay: In the event that any fees assessed under the authority of subsection A of this
section are not paid promptly when due, the city may proceed to collect the sum as a debt due to
the city and may sue thereon in any court of competent jurisdiction.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 13.24.020, 13.24.030 on 1/1/1987
9-6-3: TAMPERING PROHIBITED
It is unlawful for any person to tamper with any part of the storm water control system without proper
authority, or to in any way remove, damage or injure any gate, grating, pipe, culvert, detention pond or
any other part of the city storm water control system.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 13.24.040 on 1/1/1987
9-6-4: PENALTY
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a class B
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to penalty as provided in CCNO 1-4-1.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 13.24.050 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=10:_BUILDINGS_AND_CONSTRUCTION 1/45
10: BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
10-1: BUILDING AND RELATED CODES
10-2: FIRE CODE
10-3: CONSTRUCTION PERMITS AND FEES
10-4: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
10-5: RELOCATION POLICY FOR ACQUIRED PROPERTY
10-6: PUBLIC WORKS STANDARDS
10-7: SIDEWALK, CURB AND GUTTER REPLACEMENT PROGRAM
10-8: STORM WATER AND DRAINAGE
10-9: EXPLOSIVES
10-1: BUILDING AND RELATED CODES
10-1-1: CODES ADOPTED
10-1-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODES
10-1-3: UPDATES
10-1-4: AVAILABILITY
10-1-5: APPEALS
10-1-6: EXEMPTIONS
10-1-7: FEES
10-1-8: PENALTY
10-1-1: CODES ADOPTED
A. Adoption: Pursuant to the terms of Utah Code § 58-56-4(2) and R156-56-701 of the Utah
administrative code, the city hereby adopts the following international building standards to
govern all construction performed in the city:
1. International Building, Energy And Residential Codes: The 2000 edition of the
international building code (IBC) as modified by chapter 11 of the 2001 edition of the
supplement to the international building code, promulgated by the International Code
Council, and amendments adopted under the Utah administrative code, together with
standards incorporated into the IBC by reference, including, but not limited to, the 2000
edition of the international energy conservation code (IECC) promulgated by the
International Code Council and the 2000 edition of the international residential code (IRC)
promulgated by the International Code Council;
2. National Electrical Code: The 1999 edition of the national electrical code (NEC)
promulgated by the National Fire Protection Association;
3. International Plumbing Code: The 2000 edition of the international plumbing code (IPC)
promulgated by the International Code Council;
4. International Mechanical And Fuel Gas Codes: The 2000 edition of the international
mechanical code (IMC), together with all applicable standards set forth in the 2000
international fuel gas code (IFGC) (formerly included as part of the IMC).
B. Incorporated By Reference: All of the codes described above are hereby incorporated into this
code by this reference.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-03 on 3/12/2002
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
10-1-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODES
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=10:_BUILDINGS_AND_CONSTRUCTION 2/45
A. International Building Code: The IBC adopted in CCNO 10-1-1A1 is amended by the statewide
amendments contained in R156-56-704 of the Utah administrative code. All of those
amendments included in R156-56-704 are hereby incorporated into this code by this reference.
B. National Electrical Code: The NEC adopted in CCNO 10-1-1A2 is amended by the statewide
amendments contained in R156-56-706 of the Utah administrative code. All of those
amendments included in R156-56-706 are hereby incorporated into this code by this reference.
C. International Plumbing Code: The IPC adopted in CCNO 10-1-1A3 is amended by the statewide
amendments contained in R156-56-707 of the Utah administrative code. All of those
amendments included in R156-56-707 are hereby incorporated into this code by this reference.
D. International Mechanical Code: The IMC adopted in CCNO 10-1-1A4 is amended by the
statewide amendments contained in R156-56-708 of the Utah administrative code. All of those
amendments included in R156-56-708 are hereby incorporated into this code by this reference.
E. International Residential Code: The IRC adopted in CCNO 10-1-1A1 is amended by the
statewide amendments contained in R156-56-710 of the Utah administrative code. All of those
amendments included in R156-56-710 are hereby incorporated into this code by this reference.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-03 on 3/12/2002
10-1-3: UPDATES
A. Codes: The codes adopted by this chapter shall be automatically replaced whenever the division
of occupational and professional licensing (DOPL) shall adopt a new code or an updated version
of an adopted code pursuant to the authority granted to DOPL in Utah Code § 58-56-4(3), or any
successor statute.
B. Amendments: The amendments adopted in CCNO 10-1-2 shall be automatically updated
whenever additional amendments are adopted by the division of occupational and professional
licensing and/or the building code commission pursuant to their authority under Utah Code §§
58-56-4(4) and 58-56-7, and added to the amendments included in R156-56-704, R156-56-706,
R156-56-707, R156-56-708 or R156-56-710 of the Utah administrative code. (1987 Code; amd.
Ord. 2002-03, 3-12-2002)
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 15.04.060 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2002-03 on 3/12/2002
10-1-4: AVAILABILITY
Pursuant to Utah Code § 10-3-711, the city shall keep one copy of each of the codes adopted in this
chapter in the office of the city recorder. These copies shall be available for use and examination by the
public during regular business hours. Copies of the codes or portions of the codes shall be available to
the public upon the payment of reasonable fees.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 15.04.070 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
10-1-5: APPEALS
Any person disputing any application or interpretation of any code adopted by this chapter shall have a
right of appeal pursuant to the provisions of this section.
A. Filing; Information: The person filing the appeal shall file an appeal with the city recorder. The
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=10:_BUILDINGS_AND_CONSTRUCTION 3/45
appeal must be in writing and must include:
1. The name, address and daytime telephone number of the person making the appeal;
2. The date of the decision from which the appeal is made;
3. The name of the person making the decision;
4. A description of all facts and circumstances giving rise to the decision and the appeal,
including all relevant documents, plans and drawings submitted to the person who made
the original decision and all relevant documents, plans and drawings received from the
person who made the original decision;
5. A copy of the written decision from which the person making the appeal is appealing. If no
written decision exists, the person making the appeal shall submit an affidavit describing
the decision; and
6. A description of the relief requested, including a description of the decision the person
making the appeal feels should have been made.
B. Time Limit For Filing: Appeals must be filed within thirty (30) days of the date of the decision from
which the appeal is taken.
C. Incomplete: Appeals which do not contain all of the information described in subsection A of this
section shall be deemed incomplete and shall be returned to the person making the appeal. The
person shall then have an additional thirty (30) days to submit a complete appeal.
D. Notification; Response: Upon receiving an appeal, the city recorder shall notify the person who
made the original decision that an appeal has been filed and that person shall have twenty (20)
days to respond. Responses shall be in writing and may be accompanied by any additional
documents, plans or drawings which were not submitted with the original appeal and which the
person making the original decision believes will be beneficial in explaining the original decision.
The response, if any, shall be submitted to the city recorder.
E. Failure To Respond: If the person making the original decision fails to submit a response within
twenty (20) days of receiving notice of the appeal, the city recorder may presume that the person
making the original decision will not file a response.
F. Referral To Administrative Law Judge: Within thirty (30) days of receiving an appeal, the city
recorder shall refer the appeal and any response to the administrative law judge or city council
for a hearing. The administrative law judge shall convene a hearing on the appeal within thirty
(30) days after the matter is referred to the administrative law judge by the city recorder.
G. Hearing Notice: The administrative law judge shall give the person filing the appeal at least ten
(10) days' notice of the time and place of the hearing.
H. Hearing Procedure: At the hearing on the matter, the person filing the appeal shall have a right
to:
1. be represented by an attorney at his own expense;
2. present evidence and call witnesses regarding the appeal; and
3. cross examine any witnesses called by the city in support of the original decision.
I. Written Decision: The administrative law judge shall issue a written decision regarding the appeal
within thirty (30) days of the date of the hearing.
J. Limited Authority Of The Administrative Law Judge: The administrative law judge shall have no
authority to hear appeals regarding the administrative provisions of the codes. The administrative
law judge shall have no authority to waive any of the requirements of any of the codes.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=10:_BUILDINGS_AND_CONSTRUCTION 4/45
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2011-11 on 5/24/2011
10-1-6: EXEMPTIONS
Structures used in relation to tilling of soil, raising of crops or keeping or raising domestic animals for the
purpose of food production and which are not occupied by human beings are exempt from the permit
requirements of the IBC. Construction, expansion, maintenance, repair or replacement of such buildings
are still subject to the permit requirements of the other codes adopted by this chapter.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-03 on 3/12/2002
10-1-7: FEES
Fees authorized in the IBC for inspections, permits, certificates and other purposes shall be governed by
table 1-A of the 1997 edition of the uniform building code promulgated by the International Conference
Of Building Officials.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-03 on 3/12/2002
10-1-8: PENALTY
Violation of any provision of this chapter or the provisions of any of the codes adopted in this chapter
shall be a class B misdemeanor and shall be subject to penalty as provided in CCNO 1-4-1.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 15.04.100 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
10-2: FIRE CODE
10-2-1: FIRE CODE AND APPENDICES ADOPTED
10-2-2: ENFORCEMENT
10-2-3: JURISDICTION DEFINED
10-2-4: ESTABLISHMENT OF LIMITS FOR STORAGE
10-2-5: AMENDMENTS
10-2-6: APPEALS
10-2-7: NEW MATERIAL, PROCESS OR OCCUPANCY REQUIRING PERMIT
10-2-8: PENALTY
10-2-1: FIRE CODE AND APPENDICES ADOPTED
A. Fire Code: There is adopted by the City of North Ogden for the purpose of prescribing regulation
governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire, hazardous materials or explosion, that
certain code known as the International Fire Code (IFC), 2015 Edition including appendices, as
promulgated by the International Code Counsel; save and except such portions as are deleted, modified
or amended by CCNO 10-2-5, are adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and
from the date on which the ordinance codified in this chapter shall take effect, the provision thereof shall
be controlling within the limits of the city.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=10:_BUILDINGS_AND_CONSTRUCTION 5/45
B. Appendices:
1. The blanks in the following sections of the 2015 international fire code are filled in as
follows:
a. The blank in section 101.1 should read "North Ogden City";
b. The first blank in section 109.4 should read "misdemeanor";
c. The second blank in section 109.4 should read "$299.00";
d. The third blank in section 109.4 should read "180 days"; and
e. Both blanks in section 111.4 should read "$599.00".
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 15.36.010 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2003-09 on 4/8/2003
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
Amended by Ord. 2016-20 on 7/26/2016
10-2-2: ENFORCEMENT
A. Designated: The international fire code, as adopted and amended herein, shall be enforced by
the North View fire department, which shall be operated under the supervision of the chief of the
fire department.
B. Inspectors: The chief of the fire department may detail such members of the fire department as
inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 15.36.020 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
10-2-3: JURISDICTION DEFINED
Wherever the word "jurisdiction" is used in the international fire code, it shall mean within the city limits.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 15.36.030 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
10-2-4: ESTABLISHMENT OF LIMITS FOR STORAGE
A. Flammable Or Combustible Liquids In Outside Aboveground Tanks:
1. The storage of flammable or combustible liquids in outside aboveground tanks is
prohibited, except for within the following limits unless the tanks meet the requirements
set forth in appendix II-F:
a. Not to exceed ten (10) gallons of class I flammable liquids in all residential zones;
b. . Not to exceed sixty (60) gallons of class II and III liquids in all residential zones;
c. Not to exceed four hundred (400) gallons of class I, II and III liquids in all other
zones.
2. No bulk plant storage of flammable or combustible liquids shall be permitted within the
corporate limits of the city.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=10:_BUILDINGS_AND_CONSTRUCTION 6/45
B. Liquefied Petroleum Gas:
1. Not to exceed five hundred (500) gallons water capacity in all residential zones.
2. Not to exceed the allowable limits of the international fire code in all other zones.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 15.36.040, 15.36.050 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
10-2-5: AMENDMENTS
A. The international fire code is amended and changed in the following respects to meet the
requirements set forth by the Utah state fire marshal's office in section R710-9-3 of the state fire
rules and regulations. The following international fire code standards are amended as follows:
1. International fire code standard 10-1, selection, installation, maintenance, and testing of
portable fire extinguishers is amended to adopt NFPA, standard 10, 2013 edition.
2. International fire code standard 10-2, installation, maintenance and use of fire protection
signaling systems is amended to adopt NFPA, standard 72, 2016 edition.
3. International fire code standard 52-1, compressed natural gas (CNG) vehicular fuel
systems is amended to adopt NFPA, standard 52, 2013 edition.
4. International fire code standard 79-1, foam fire-protection systems is amended to adopt
NFPA, standard 11, 2016 edition.
5. International fire code standard 82-1, liquefied petroleum gas storage and use is
amended to adopt NFPA, standard 58, 2017 edition.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 15.36.080 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
Amended by Ord. 2016-20 on 7/26/2016
10-2-6: APPEALS
Whenever the chief disapproves an application or refuses to grant a permit applied for, or when it is
claimed that the provisions of the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have
been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal the decision of the chief to the city
council within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 15.36.090 on 1/1/1987
10-2-7: NEW MATERIAL, PROCESS OR OCCUPANCY REQUIRING PERMIT
The city plan review committee, composed of the chief of the fire department, mayor, building official,
chairperson of the planning commission and the chief of police, shall act as a committee to determine
and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or
occupancies for which permits are required in addition to those now enumerated in the international fire
code. The chief shall post such list in a conspicuous place in his office, and distribute copies thereof to
interested persons.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 15.36.100; on 1/1/1987
Adopted by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=10:_BUILDINGS_AND_CONSTRUCTION 7/45
10-2-8: PENALTY
A. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code hereby adopted or fails to comply
with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement or
specifications or plans submitted and approved hereunder or any certification or permits issued
thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an
order as affirmed or modified by the chief or by a court of competent jurisdiction within the time
fixed herein, shall severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance respectively,
be guilty of a class B misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in CCNO 1-4-1. The
imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue,
and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a
reasonable time, and when not otherwise specified, each ten (10) days that prohibited conditions
are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
B. The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of
prohibited conditions.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 15.36.110 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
10-3: CONSTRUCTION PERMITS AND FEES
10-3-1: NEW DWELLINGS
10-3-2: NEW PUBLIC, COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL STRUCTURES
10-3-3: STORM SEWER, PARK AND WATER FEES REQUIRED
10-3-4: SURCHARGE
ARTICLE A: PLAN CHECK FEES
10-3-1: NEW DWELLINGS
A. Scope: Notwithstanding the prescribed procedure set forth in other city ordinances pertaining to
construction permits, the city will accept application for comprehensive construction permits.
B. Permits Included; Fee: The comprehensive construction permit includes all permits prescribed by
other city ordinances and codes necessary in the construction of new buildings. The fee for a
comprehensive construction permit for a new dwelling will be based on the entire area of the
entire dwelling, including garage and carport. The permit fee is established in accordance with
the provisions of the 1997 uniform building code, as adopted by the city, or as the same may be
amended from time to time.
C. Procedure Limited: The procedure set forth in this section is only for the construction of new
dwellings and does not supersede or eliminate the procedure set forth in other city ordinances
providing for alterations, additions, repairs and miscellaneous construction. Also, the procedure
does not include water and sewer connection fees, street excavation permits or fees, nor does it
include storm sewer fees.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 15.40.010; on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
10-3-2: NEW PUBLIC, COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL STRUCTURES
A. Scope: Notwithstanding the prescribed procedure set forth in other city ordinances and codes
pertaining to construction permits, the city will accept applications for a comprehensive
construction permit.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=10:_BUILDINGS_AND_CONSTRUCTION 8/45
B. Permits Included; Fee: The comprehensive construction permit includes all permits necessary in
the construction of new public, commercial or industrial buildings. The permit fee for a
comprehensive construction permit for a public, commercial or industrial building will be based on
the building valuation. The permit is established in accordance with the provisions of the uniform
building code as adopted by the city, or as the same may be amended from time to time.
C. Procedure Limited: The procedure set forth in this section is only for the construction of new
public, commercial or industrial structures and does not supersede or eliminate the procedure
referred to in other city ordinances providing for repair, alterations, additions and miscellaneous
construction. Also, this procedure does not include water and sewer connection, street
excavation permits or fees, nor does it include storm sewer fees.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 15.40.020 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
10-3-3: STORM SEWER, PARK AND WATER FEES REQUIRED
A. Storm Sewer: No building permit shall be issued by the city until a storm sewer fee has been
paid, to be set from time to time by resolution; provided, however, the city council may in proper
cases and upon the recommendation of the planning commission, reduce the amount of storm
sewer fee when in the opinion of the city council the property is so constructed that the normal
storm runoff will be properly handled without placing a burden on public storm sewers.
B. Park And Water: In addition to other fees provided for in this chapter, no such permit will be
issued until a sum to be set from time to time by resolution has been paid for park and water
fees.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 15.40.030 on 1/1/1987
10-3-4: SURCHARGE
Pursuant to the terms of Utah Code § 58-56-9(4), there is imposed a one percent (1%) surcharge on all
building permits issued in the city. On April 30, July 31, October 31 and January 31 of each year, the city
shall file a report of all surcharges which have been collected on building permits and shall remit eighty
percent (80%) of that total to the division of occupational and professional licensing.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 15.40.040 on 1/1/1987
ARTICLE A: PLAN CHECK FEES
10-3A-1: LIMITATION ON PLAN CHECK FEES
10-3A-2: IDENTICAL BUILDINGS
10-3A-1: LIMITATION ON PLAN CHECK FEES
The city's fees for reviewing and approving plans for commercial or residential buildings shall be the
lesser of:
A. The city's actual cost of performing the review; or
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=10:_BUILDINGS_AND_CONSTRUCTION 9/45
B. Either:
1. In the case of commercial buildings, sixty five percent (65%) of the amount the city has
charged for the building permit; or
2. In the case of residential buildings, fifty percent (50%) of the amount the city has charged
for the building permit.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-03 on 3/12/2002
10-3A-2: IDENTICAL BUILDINGS
A. The city's fees for reviewing and approving identical plans shall be the greater of:
1. The city's costs of ensuring that the plans are identical and reviewing and approving
minor variations between the two (2) identical buildings; or
2. One hundred dollars ($100.00).
B. Plans shall be considered to be identical if:
1. The plans are substantially identical to plans that were previously reviewed and approved
by the city;
2. The plans describe a building that is in the same zone as the building described in the
plans previously reviewed and approved; and
3. The plans describe a building that is subject to the same geological and meteorological
conditions and the same law as the building described in the plans previously reviewed
and approved.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 15.60.020 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2002-03 on 3/12/2002
10-4: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
10-4-1: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION; FINDINGS OF FACT; PURPOSE; METHODS
10-4-2: DEFINITIONS
10-4-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS
10-4-4: FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR
10-4-5: PERMIT PROCEDURES
10-4-6: VARIANCE PROCEDURES
10-4-7: FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
10-4-1: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION; FINDINGS OF FACT; PURPOSE; METHODS
A. Statutory Authorization: The legislature of the state of Utah has delegated the authority to local
governmental units, by virtue of Utah Code § 10-8-84, to pass ordinances and regulations
designated to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizens, and to adopt
regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the city council of North Ogden City,
Utah, does hereby ordain as follows.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=10:_BUILDINGS_AND_CONSTRUCTION 10/45
B. Findings Of Fact:
1. The flood hazard areas of North Ogden City are subject to periodic inundation that results
in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and
governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and
relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
2. These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains
which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood
hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are
inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage.
C. Statement Of Purpose: It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific
areas by provisions designed to:
1. Protect human life and health;
2. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
3. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally
undertaken at the expense of the general public;
4. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
5. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric,
telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains;
6. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood
prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and
7. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
D. Methods Of Reducing Flood Losses: In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the
following methods:
1. Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood,
or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities;
2. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be
protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
3. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective
barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters;
4. Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood
damage;
5. Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert
floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2005-15 on 12/13/2005
10-4-2: DEFINITIONS
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted to give
them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application:
ALLUVIAL FAN FLOODING: Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=10:_BUILDINGS_AND_CONSTRUCTION 11/45
which originates at the apex and is characterized by high velocity flows, active processes of erosion,
sediment transport, and deposition, and unpredictable flow paths.
APEX: A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that
formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING: A designated AO, AH, or VO zone on a community's flood insurance
rate map (FIRM) with a one percent (1%) chance or greater annual chance of flooding to an average
depth of one to three feet (3') where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding
is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or
sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one
percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as zone A on
the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation
for publication of the FIRM, zone A usually is refined into zone A, AE, AH, AO, A1-99, VO, V1-30, VE or
V.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given
year.
BASEMENT: Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
CRITICAL FEATURE: An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which
the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change in improved and unimproved real estate including, but not
limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations or storage of equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING: A nonbasement building: a) built, in the case of a building in zones A1-30, AE,
A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, to have the top of the elevated floor, or in the case of a building in zone
V1-30, VE, or V, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure member of the elevated floor
elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel
to the flow of the water and b) adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the
building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of zones A1-30, AE, A, A99,
AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid
foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters.
In the case of zones V1-30, VE, or V, "elevated building" also includes a building otherwise meeting the
definition of "elevated building", even though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls if
the breakaway walls meet the standards of section 60.3(e)(5) of the national flood insurance program
regulations.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION: For the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of
construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs
effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures".
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes
are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the
floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=10:_BUILDINGS_AND_CONSTRUCTION 12/45
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes
are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): An official map of a community, on which the federal
emergency management agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk
premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: The official report provided by the federal emergency management
agency. The report contains flood profiles, water surface elevation of the base flood, as well as the
floodway boundary-floodway map.
FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally
dry land areas from:
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters;
B. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=10:_BUILDINGS_AND_CONSTRUCTION 13/45
FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM: Those physical structural works for which funds have been
authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding
in order to reduce the extent of the areas within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the
extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers,
dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in
conformance with sound engineering standards.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT: The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive
measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood
control works and floodplain management regulations.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS: Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building
codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading
ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes
such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of
flood damage prevention and reduction.
FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD PRONE AREA: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from
any source (see definition of Flood Or Flooding).
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments
to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and
sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY (REGULATORY FLOODWAY): The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively
increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE: A use that cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located
or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are
necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair
facilities, but does not include long term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction
next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
A. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
department of the interior) or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting
the requirements for individual listing on the national register,
B. Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the
historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
secretary to qualify as a registered historic district,
C. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation
programs which have been approved by the secretary of the interior, or
D. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation
programs that have been certified either:
1. By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the interior, or
2. Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved programs.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=10:_BUILDINGS_AND_CONSTRUCTION 14/45
LEVEE: A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in
accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to
provide protection from temporary flooding.
LEVEE SYSTEM: A flood protection system that consists of a levee, or levees, and associated
structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance
with sound engineering practices.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or
flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area
other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is
not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirement of
section 60.3 of the national flood insurance program regulations.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a
permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to
the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided
into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL: For purposes of the national flood insurance program, the national geodetic vertical
datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood
insurance rate map are referenced.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: For which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date
of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means
structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain
management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or subdivision for
which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final
site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle which is:
A. Built on a single chassis;
B. Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections;
C. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
D. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=10:_BUILDINGS_AND_CONSTRUCTION 15/45
START OF CONSTRUCTION (For Other Than New Construction Or Substantial Improvements Under
The Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L 97-348)): Includes substantial improvement and means the
date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of
the permit date. The "actual start" means either the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and
filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for
basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally
aboveground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring
the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market
value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure
before "start of construction" of the improvement. This includes structures that have incurred "substantial
damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
A. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications that have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary conditions, or
B. Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as a "historic structure".
VARIANCE: A grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this chapter when specific
enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or
development in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. (For full requirements see section 60.6 of
the national flood insurance program regulations.)
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's
floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate,
other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3),
(e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION: The height, in relation to the national geodetic vertical datum (NGVD)
of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the
floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2005-15 on 12/13/2005
10-4-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS
A. Lands To Which This Chapter Applies: This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood
hazard within the jurisdiction of North Ogden City.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=10:_BUILDINGS_AND_CONSTRUCTION 16/45
B. Basis For Establishing Areas Of Special Flood Hazard: The areas of special flood hazard
identified by the federal emergency management agency in a scientific and engineering report
entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study For North Ogden City", dated December 16, 2005, with
accompanying flood insurance rate maps and flood boundary-floodway maps (FIRM and FBFM)
and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this
chapter.
C. Establishment Of Development Permit: A development permit shall be required to ensure
conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
D. Compliance: No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed
without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations.
E. Abrogation And Greater Restrictions: This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair
any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever
imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
F. Interpretation: In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
1. Considered as minimum requirements,
2. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and
3. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
G. Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability: The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is
considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be
increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the
areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official
or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2005-15 on 12/13/2005
10-4-4: FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR
A. Designation: The North Ogden City building official is hereby appointed the floodplain
administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and other appropriate
sections of 44 CFR (national flood insurance program regulations) pertaining to floodplain
management.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=10:_BUILDINGS_AND_CONSTRUCTION 17/45
B. Duties And Responsibilities: Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall
include, but not be limited to, the following:
1. Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this
chapter.
2. Review permit application to determine whether proposed building site, including the
placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding.
3. Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of
this chapter.
4. Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been
obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including section 404
of the federal water pollution control act amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334) from which
prior approval is required.
5. Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of
special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a
mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the
necessary interpretation.
6. Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the Utah state office of emergency
management, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence
of such notification to the federal emergency management agency.
7. Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any
watercourse is maintained.
8. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with CCNO 10-4-
3B, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood
elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order
to administer the provisions of CCNO 10-4-7.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2005-15 on 12/13/2005
10-4-5: PERMIT PROCEDURES
A. Application for a development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms
furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale
showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and
proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the
foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is
required:
1. Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
new and substantially improved structures,
2. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be
floodproofed,
3. A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential
floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of CCNO 10-4-7B2.
4. Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development,
5. Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with CCNO 10-4-4B1.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=10:_BUILDINGS_AND_CONSTRUCTION 18/45
B. Approval or denial of a development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all
of the provisions of this chapter and the following relevant factors:
1. The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage,
2. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect
of such damage on the individual owner,
3. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others,
4. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development,
5. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency
vehicles,
6. The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including
maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems,
7. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the
floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site,
8. The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable,
9. The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the
proposed use,
10. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2005-15 on 12/13/2005
10-4-6: VARIANCE PROCEDURES
A. The appeal board consisting of the city council shall hear and render judgment on requests for
variances from the requirements of this chapter.
B. The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is
an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in
the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
C. Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision
in the courts of competent jurisdiction.
D. The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall
report variances to the federal emergency management agency upon request.
E. Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed
on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without
regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this chapter.
F. Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a
lot of one-half (½) acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in CCNO 10-4-
5B have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half (½) acre, the
technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
G. Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this chapter, the appeal board
may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the
purpose and objectives of this chapter (CCNO 10-4-1C).
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=10:_BUILDINGS_AND_CONSTRUCTION 19/45
H. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels
during the base flood discharge would result.
I. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a
determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the
historic character and design of the structure.
J. Prerequisites for granting variances:
1. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum
necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
2. Variances shall only be issued upon:
a. Showing a good and sufficient cause,
b. A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant, and
c. A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood
heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create
nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing
local laws or ordinances.
3. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the
structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood
elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased
risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
K. Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements and for other
development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
1. The criteria outlined in subsections A through I of this section are met, and
2. The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages
during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2005-15 on 12/13/2005
10-4-7: FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
A. General Standards: In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for
all new construction and substantial improvements:
1. All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and
adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
2. All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and
practices that minimize flood damage;
3. All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials
resistant to flood damage;
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=10:_BUILDINGS_AND_CONSTRUCTION 20/45
4. All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical,
heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities
that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding;
5. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
6. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into
floodwaters; and
7. On site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding.
B. Specific Standards: In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has
been provided as set forth in: 1) CCNO 10-4-3B, 2) CCNO 10-4-4B8, or 3) subsection C3 of this
section, the following provisions are required:
1. Residential Construction: New construction and substantial improvement of any
residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated to or above
the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor
shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this
subsection as proposed in CCNO 10-4-5A1, is satisfied.
2. Nonresidential Construction: New construction and substantial improvements of any
commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated to or above the base flood level or together with attendant
utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with
structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall
develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction,
and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practices as outlined in this subsection. A record of such
certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which
such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator.
3. Manufactured Homes: Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A
on a community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which
minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must
be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of
anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over the top or frame ties to ground
anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring
requirements for resisting wind forces.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=10:_BUILDINGS_AND_CONSTRUCTION 21/45
C. Standards For Subdivision Proposals:
1. All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall be consistent with CCNO 10-4-1B, C, and D.
2. All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of
manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet development permit requirements
of CCNO 10-4-3C, CCNO 10-4-5 and the provisions of this section.
3. Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other
proposed development including the placement of manufactured home parks and
subdivisions which is greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is less, if not
otherwise provided pursuant to CCNO 10-4-3B or CCNO 10-4-4-B8.
4. All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
5. All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2005-15 on 12/13/2005
10-5: RELOCATION POLICY FOR ACQUIRED PROPERTY
10-5-1: INTENT
10-5-2: POLICY DESIGNATED
10-5-3: RULES AND REGULATIONS ADOPTED
10-5-1: INTENT
It is intent of the city to provide fair equitable relocation opportunities for persons displaced by city
acquisition projects supported with CDBG funds, to avoid economic hardship and provide a clear,
concise procedure to accomplish this goal.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 15.48.010 on 1/1/1987
10-5-2: POLICY DESIGNATED
A. Services Provided: The city will provide the following services for any property owner involved in
relocation due to a city project as defined in the goal statement:
1. Fair And Reasonable Relocation Payments: The city will provide normal moving
expenses to the property owner. The final amount of the repayment will be a negotiated
figure between the city and the homeowner.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=10:_BUILDINGS_AND_CONSTRUCTION 22/45
2. Advisory Service: Provide an advisory service to:
a. Determine the needs of the various persons being relocated;
b. Identify potential suitable new locations for business or farm operations which
need to be relocated;
c. Supply information on assistance to displaced persons and businesses
concerning federal, state and local funds;
d. Minimize adjustment hardships to displaced persons;
e. Coordinate and plan all relocation projects with other community functions.
B. Plan Specifics: The specifics of each acquisition project will be written out and installed in a plan
for each homeowner according to a set outline.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 15.48.020 on 1/1/1987
10-5-3: RULES AND REGULATIONS ADOPTED
A. Provisions: The city will promulgate and adopt rules and regulations to assure:
1. All payments and assistance given under these conditions will be administered in a
manner which is fair and reasonable and which is uniform in its application;
2. That any displaced persons who make proper application for payment authorized under
the uniform relocation assistance and real property acquisition policies act of 1970 shall
be paid promptly after a move, or in hardship cases, be paid in advance;
3. That any person aggrieved by a determination of eligibility for a payment authorized by
this act, or the amount of payment, may have his application reviewed by the mayor and
city council;
4. The city agrees to adopt all other regulations and provisions of the Utah relocation
assistance actas may be necessary to carry out the act.
B. Compliance With State Statute: The city agrees to comply with all of the requirements identified
in Utah Code 57-12, as amended, when the acquisition is assisted by state or federal funds.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 15.48.030 on 1/1/1987
10-6: PUBLIC WORKS STANDARDS
10-6-1: ADOPTED BY REFERENCE
10-6-1: ADOPTED BY REFERENCE
That certain compilation entitled "North Ogden City Public Works Standards" dated December 2017,
governing subdivisions and other municipal and private improvements, one copy of which is on file with
the city recorder and available for public inspection, is adopted in its entirety by reference.
A new section 21 Complete Streets Policy in the North Ogden Public Works Standards, June 2017, is
hereby created and the language found in Attachment A shall be formatted to match the document and
included in the North Ogden Public Works Standards manual along with an updated table of contents.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=10:_BUILDINGS_AND_CONSTRUCTION 23/45
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 15.52.010 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
Amended by Ord. 2017-28 on 12/19/2017
Amended by Ord. 2019-13 on 6/25/2019
10-7: SIDEWALK, CURB AND GUTTER REPLACEMENT PROGRAM
10-7-1: FINDINGS
10-7-2: PROGRAM ESTABLISHED
10-7-3: REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS
10-7-4: PARTICIPATION IN PROGRAM
10-7-1: FINDINGS
The city council finds that the condition of the sidewalks, curbs and gutters in many parts of the city are
in need of repair and/or replacement. The condition of these sidewalks, curbs and gutters creates safety
hazards, and detract from the attractiveness of the city. The city council finds that these conditions
warrant the spending of public funds to cure the problems.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 15.56.010) on 1/1/1987
10-7-2: PROGRAM ESTABLISHED
There is established a sidewalk curb and gutter replacement program ("the program") within the city.
The purpose of the program shall be to assist residents of the city in repairing and replacing damaged
and unsightly sidewalks, curbs and gutters. The city council shall not be obligated to provide funding for
the program in each year's budget. To the extent the city council provides funding for the program,
however, the program shall be administered pursuant to the terms and requirements of this chapter.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 15.56.020 on 1/1/1987
10-7-3: REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS
Participation in the program shall be conditioned on the following requirements and restrictions:
A. Limitation Of Expenditures: City expenditures under the program shall be limited to replacement
and/or repair of existing sidewalks, curbs and gutters only; provided, however, that no city funds
will be provided for replacement of driveway approaches, driveways and/or any section of
sidewalk which is crossed by a driveway. Replacement of driveway approaches, driveways and
sidewalks crossed by driveways shall be the exclusive responsibility of the property owner.
B. Approved Repairs: City funds will be used to repair sidewalks, curbs and gutters associated with:
1. Single-family residential properties, regardless of the zoning of the property; and
2. Property within residential zones.
C. Determination Of Properties: Only those properties which have been determined by public works
director to need replacement or repair of sidewalk, curb and gutter shall be eligible to participate
in the program.
D. Condition Of Development Approval Not Eligible: Property owners who have been required to
repair or replace sidewalks, curb and/or gutters as a condition of development approval shall not
be eligible to participate in the program.
E. First Come, First Served Basis: Funds provided to the program shall be available on a first come,
first served basis.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=10:_BUILDINGS_AND_CONSTRUCTION 24/45
F. Work Performed By City: All work completed under the program shall be performed by the city or
contractors hired by the city.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 15.56.030 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
10-7-4: PARTICIPATION IN PROGRAM
Participation in the program shall be as follows:
A. Inspection Required: No property owner shall be eligible to participate in the program until after
his or her property has been inspected by the public works director, appointed by the mayor. The
public works director may conduct the inspection either at his own discretion or at the request of
the property owner.
B. Determination Of Need By Inspector: During the inspection, the public works director shall
determine whether the sidewalk, curb and/or gutter are sufficiently deteriorated to justify
participation in the program. The public works director shall also determine whether replacement
of the deteriorated areas is necessary or whether the areas can be repaired. The decision of the
public works director regarding the necessity of repair or replacement shall be final.
C. Ineligibility: In the event that the public works director determines that neither repair nor
replacement is necessary, the property owner shall not be eligible to participate in the program.
D. Certification Of Eligibility: In the event that the public works director determines that repair or
replacement is necessary, he shall certify that fact to the property owner in writing. Together with
the certification, the public works director shall provide the property owner with an application to
participate in the program. (1987 Code § 15.56.040; amd. 2006 Code)
E. Application: If the property owner desires to participate in the program, he or she shall complete
the application and return it to the city recorder within thirty (30) days of the inspection.
Application to participate in the program shall be made on a form provided by the city. All of the
information requested in the form shall be provided and the form shall be signed in ink by the
property owner.
F. Estimate By Engineer: Upon receiving an application to participate in the program, the city
recorder shall forward a copy of the application to the city engineer, who shall inspect the site
and prepare an estimate of the cost of the project, and an estimate of the city's portion of the
costs and the property owner's portion of the costs. These estimates, together with the
application, shall then be returned to the city recorder.
G. Excessive Cost; Abandonment: In the event the city engineer's estimate of the city's portions of
the costs of the project exceed the amount remaining in the appropriation for the program for the
year, the city recorder shall inform the property owner of that fact and the project shall be
abandoned.
H. Deposit By Property Owner: The city recorder shall send copies of the estimates from the city
engineer to the property owner. The property owner shall then have thirty (30) days to deposit
the amount shown on the city engineer's estimate to be the owner's share of the costs with the
city. If the property owner fails to make this deposit within thirty (30) days, the application shall be
deemed to be withdrawn. No work may begin until the deposit of the owner's share of the costs
has been made.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=10:_BUILDINGS_AND_CONSTRUCTION 25/45
I. Actual Cost; Difference: At the completion of the work, the final costs of the project shall be
determined. In the event those costs are higher than the city engineer's estimate, the property
owner shall pay his or her share of the difference to the city. In the event the costs are lower than
the city engineer's estimate, the city shall refund a portion of the property owner's deposit.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 15.56.040 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
10-8: STORM WATER AND DRAINAGE
ARTICLE A: STORM DRAINAGE
ARTICLE B: STORM WATER CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY PERMIT1
ARTICLE C: MANDATED PRACTICES AND PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES
ARTICLE D: CIVIL PENALTY, ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING
ARTICLE A: STORM DRAINAGE
10-8A-1: DEFINITIONS
10-8A-2: OBSTRUCTIONS PROHIBITED
10-8A-3: DISCHARGES PROHIBITED
10-8A-4: STORAGE AND LITTERING PROHIBITED
10-8A-5: STORM SEWER CONNECTION PERMIT
10-8A-6: BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES
10-8A-7: EASEMENTS
10-8A-8: AUTHORITY TO INSPECT
10-8A-9: REQUIREMENT TO MONITOR AND ANALYZE
10-8A-10: NOTICE OF VIOLATION
10-8A-11: DAMAGE TO STORM SEWER SYSTEM OR IRRIGATION LINES
10-8A-12: MANHOLE COVERS
10-8A-13: DRINKING WATER PROTECTION
10-8A-14: COMPLIANCE WITH FEDERAL AND STATE LAW
10-8A-15: PENALTY
10-8A-1: DEFINITIONS
The following words and phrases shall be defined as follows for the purpose of this chapter, including
articles A through D:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): A wide range of management procedures, schedules of
activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices which
have been demonstrated to effectively control the quality and/or quantity of storm water runoff and which
are compatible with the planned land use. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating
procedures and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage
from raw material storage. A list of sample BMPs can be found in the North Ogden City storm water
management plan dated August 2002.
CATCH BASIN: A drain inlet designed to keep out large or obstructive matter.
CLEAN WATER ACT: The federal water pollution prevention and control act, 33 USC 1251 et seq.
DEBRIS: Any dirt, rock, sand, sediment, vegetation, rubbish or litter.
DETENTION BASIN: A depression designed to detain storm water runoff until downstream storm sewer
resources are less heavily taxed. A detention basin contains an inlet and an outlet, allows debris to settle
out, and regulates water flow.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=10:_BUILDINGS_AND_CONSTRUCTION 26/45
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not
limited to, site preparation, filling, grading, paving, excavation and construction of buildings or other
structures.
DISTURB: To alter the physical condition, natural terrain or vegetation of land by clearing, grubbing,
grading, excavating, filling, building or other construction activity.
DRAIN OUTLET: A point of entry into a sump, detention basin or storm drain system.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL: Any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which
because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may cause, or
significantly contribute to, a substantial presence or potential hazard to human health, safety, property or
the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed.
"Hazardous material" includes, but is not limited to, any hazardous substance designated under 40 CFR
part 116 pursuant to section 311 of the clean water act.
ILLICIT CONNECTION: Either of the following:
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allow an illicit discharge
to enter the storm drain system. Examples include, but are not limited to, any conveyances which
allow nonstorm water discharge such as sewage, process wastewater, or wash water to enter
the storm drain system, and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains or
sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted or
approved by a government agency; or
B. Any drain or conveyance connected to or discharging to the storm drain system, which has not
been: 1) documented in plans, maps or equivalent records submitted to the city; and 2) approved
in writing by the city.
ILLICIT DISCHARGE: Any nonstorm water discharge to the storm sewer system. "Illicit discharges"
include both direct connections (e.g., wastewater piping either mistakenly or deliberately connected to
the storm sewer system) and indirect connections (e.g., infiltration of debris, hazardous materials or
pollutants into the storm sewer system or spills collected by drain inlets).
LAND DEVELOPMENT: Any development of a parcel, lot, subdivision plat or site plan. If there is more
than one lot in the subdivision plat or site plan, all lots in the subdivision plat or site plan shall jointly be
considered to be part of the land development.
NONSTORM WATER RUNOFF: Any runoff other than storm water.
PERSON: Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, company or body politic, including any
agency of the state of Utah and the United States government.
POLLUTANT: Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage,
sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or
discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal and agricultural waste, paints,
varnishes and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard
wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles and
accumulations that may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers;
hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate
metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure
(including, but not limited to, sediments, slurries and concrete resinates); and noxious or offensive
matter of any kind.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=10:_BUILDINGS_AND_CONSTRUCTION 27/45
REDEVELOPMENT: Alterations of a property that change the footprint of a site or building in such a way
that disturbs one acre of land or more.
STORM DRAIN: A closed conduit for conducting collected storm water.
STORM SEWER SYSTEM: The system of conveyances (including sidewalks, roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, detention basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels,
sumps, storm drains and ground water) owned and operated by the city, which is designed and used for
collecting or conveying storm water. The "storm sewer system" is also referred to as a "municipal
separate storm sewer system" or "MS4".
STORM WATER: Any flow that occurs during or following any form of natural precipitation. "Storm
water" includes only the portion of such flow that is composed of precipitation.
STORM WATER RUNOFF: Water that is generated by storm water flows over land.
SUMP: A formalized underground structure, surrounded by drain rock, which acts as a detention basin
to allow the slow release of water into the surrounding subsoil. Sumps usually receive storm water runoff
from paved areas such as streets, parking lots, building roofs, etc.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2004-07 on 7/13/2004
10-8A-2: OBSTRUCTIONS PROHIBITED
A. Specified: It is unlawful for any person to:
1. Obstruct the flow of water in the storm sewer system.
2. Contribute to the obstruction of the flow of water in the storm sewer system, e.g.,
placement of dirt and or rock in the flow line of the gutter or storm water system, and/or
construction of a ramp between the edge of the roadway and the top of the curb without
the use of permitted culvert (see BMP TCMC).
3. Cover or obstruct any drain inlet.
B. Exemptions: The following obstructions are exempt from the prohibitions of this section:
1. Street and/or storm sewer improvement projects authorized by the city.
2. Flood control and prevention activities performed by the city.
3. Obstructions approved by the city as part of a site's storm water drainage plan.
4. Obstructions occurring during cleanup periods established by the city; provided, that the
materials are placed according to city directions and do not obstruct drain inlets.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2004-07 on 7/13/2004
10-8A-3: DISCHARGES PROHIBITED
It is unlawful for any person to cause or allow an illicit discharge to the storm sewer system. The
following discharges to the storm sewer system are exempt from the prohibitions of this section:
A. Discharges regulated under a valid national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES)
storm discharge permit; provided, that the discharge complies with the terms of the permit.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=10:_BUILDINGS_AND_CONSTRUCTION 28/45
B. Discharges from water line flushing performed by the city.
C. Discharges from sprinkled landscape irrigation or sprinkled lawn watering.
D. Discharges from individual residential car washing; provided, that a biodegradable detergent is
used.
E. Discharges from natural riparian habitat or wetland flows.
F. Discharges from natural ground water flows.
G. Discharges from air conditioning condensation.
H. Discharges from firefighting or emergency management activities.
I. Discharges from swimming pools constructed prior to April 10, 1990.
J. Discharges from foundation drains, footing drains or crawl space or basement pumps if the
discharges have been approved in writing by the city.
K. Discharges allowed by a city storm sewer connection permit.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2004-07 on 7/13/2004
10-8A-4: STORAGE AND LITTERING PROHIBITED
It is unlawful for any person to maintain, store, keep, deposit or leave any pollutant or hazardous
material, or any item containing a pollutant or hazardous material, in a manner that is likely to result in
the discharge of the pollutant or hazardous material to the storm sewer system.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2004-07 on 7/13/2004
10-8A-5: STORM SEWER CONNECTION PERMIT
A. Permit Required: No person shall connect to the city storm sewer system, either directly or
indirectly, without first obtaining a storm sewer connection permit from the city.
B. When Permit Required: Any person beginning new construction (development of an undeveloped
parcel) or "redevelopment" in the city, as defined in this chapter, shall obtain a storm sewer
connection permit before commencing construction.
C. Application: The applicant for a storm sewer connection permit shall submit the following to the
city:
1. Application Form: A completed application form. Application forms will be available at the
city offices.
2. BMP Plan: A plan incorporating storm water BMPs that meet the requirements of
CCNO 10-8A-6.
3. Maintenance Plan: A plan outlining how the applicant will maintain the storm water
improvements listed in the application.
4. Fee: A fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council.
D. Submission: The application shall be submitted to the city building official.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=10:_BUILDINGS_AND_CONSTRUCTION 29/45
E. Review: The storm sewer connection permit application shall be reviewed by the building official
and either approved, approved with conditions, or denied. Either the permit applicant or the city
may appeal the building official's decision to the public works director. The appeal shall be made
according to procedures established by the public works department.
F. Factors: When deciding whether to approve, conditionally approve or deny a storm sewer
connection permit application, the following factors shall be considered:
1. Whether the application complies with applicable city ordinances and policies.
2. Whether the application complies with the city storm drainage master plan.
3. Whether the proposed connection incorporates effective best management practices.
4. Whether the proposed connection introduces pollutants into the storm drain system.
5. Whether the proposed connection creates a safety hazard.
6. Whether the proposed connection affects the integrity of the storm sewer system
infrastructure.
7. Whether the proposed connection endangers the city drinking water.
8. Whether the applicant has submitted a maintenance plan ensuring the proper
maintenance and upkeep of the applicant's connection and on site storm water
improvements.
G. Failure: Failure to construct or maintain storm water improvements in accordance with an
approved storm sewer connection permit shall be a violation of this article.
H. As Built Plans: Any person connecting to the storm sewer system shall provide the city storm
sewer utility with as built plans showing the details and the location of the connection. The plans
shall be in a format that is acceptable to the city.
I. Rate: Connections to the storm sewer system shall be designed so that the discharge to the
storm sewer system does not exceed two-tenths (0.2) cubic feet per second per acre.
J. Exempt Connections: The following connections to the storm sewer system are exempt from the
permitting requirements of this section:
1. Single-Family Residences: Connections from single-family residences; provided, that the
runoff from the residences is handled according to a plat or site plan approved by the city.
However, any person desiring to use a basement pump, foundation drain, or other related
fixture directly or indirectly connecting to the storm sewer system must obtain a storm
sewer connection permit.
2. City: Connections made by the city.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2004-07 on 7/13/2004
10-8A-6: BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES
A. Required: Any person connecting to the storm sewer system or developing a commercial or
residential site shall employ best management practices (BMPs) approved by the city. The city
shall adopt a policy establishing a menu of BMPs that may be used to satisfy this requirement.
The BMPs may be structural and/or nonstructural, depending on the needs of the site. The BMPs
shall be designed to ensure that the quality and quantity of storm water released to the city storm
sewer system meets the requirements of federal, state and local laws and regulations and the
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=10:_BUILDINGS_AND_CONSTRUCTION 30/45
city NPDES permit, and will not exceed the designed capacity of the storm sewer system or
jeopardize the integrity of the storm sewer system.
B. Failure: Failure to conform to prescribed BMPs will result in the penalties as set forth in CCNO
10-8 Article D.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2004-07 on 7/13/2004
10-8A-7: EASEMENTS
City employees may enter all private properties through which the city holds an easement for the
purpose of inspecting, observing, measuring, sampling, repairing or maintaining any portion of the storm
sewer facilities lying within the easement, or the performance of any other duties pertinent to the
operation of the storm sewer system.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2004-07 on 7/13/2004
10-8A-8: AUTHORITY TO INSPECT
A. Authorized: Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any provision of this article, or
whenever the city has cause to believe that there exists, or potentially exists, a condition which
constitutes a violation of this article, the city may enter the premises at all reasonable times to
inspect the same and to inspect and copy records related to storm water compliance.
B. Refusal: In the event the owner or occupant refuses entry after a request to enter and inspect
has been made, the city is hereby empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent
jurisdiction in obtaining such entry.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2004-07 on 7/13/2004
10-8A-9: REQUIREMENT TO MONITOR AND ANALYZE
If city tests or inspections indicate that a site is causing or contributing to storm water pollution, illegal
discharges and/or nonstorm water discharges to the storm sewer system or waters of the United States,
and if the violations continue after notice from the city, the city may require any person engaged in the
illicit activity and/or the owner of operator of the site to provide, at their own expense, monitoring and
analyses required by the city to determine compliance with this article.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2004-07 on 7/13/2004
10-8A-10: NOTICE OF VIOLATION
A. Requirements: Whenever the city finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to
comply with a requirement of this article, the city will order compliance by written notice of the
violation. Such notice may require, without limitation:
1. The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting;
2. The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
3. That violating discharges, practices or operations shall cease and desist;
4. The abatement, remediation or cleanup of storm water pollution or contamination
hazards, and the restoration of any affected property;
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=10:_BUILDINGS_AND_CONSTRUCTION 31/45
5. Payment to cover administrative, remediation, monitoring, analyses and reporting costs;
and
6. The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
B. Immediate Legal Action: The city may skip the notice requirements set forth in this section and
immediately proceed with legal action against the violator if:
1. The violator has committed the same violation in the past; or
2. The violation, in the opinion of the city, creates a serious risk to persons, the environment
or property; or
3. The city deems the violation to constitute an emergency.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2004-07 on 7/13/2004
10-8A-11: DAMAGE TO STORM SEWER SYSTEM OR IRRIGATION LINES
A. Responsibility For Repair: Any person who damages any portion of the storm sewer system, a
city owned irrigation line or a city maintained irrigation line shall be responsible for repairing the
damages. The damages shall be repaired by a licensed contractor bonded to do work in the city
and shall be repaired in accordance with the city construction standards and specifications.
B. Permission Required To Remove Or Alter: It is unlawful to remove or alter any portion of the
storm sewer system without permission from the public works director.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2004-07 on 7/13/2004
10-8A-12: MANHOLE COVERS
It shall be unlawful to open any storm sewer manhole or other storm sewer fixture (such as grates, lids
or inlets) without permission from the public works director.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2004-07 on 7/13/2004
10-8A-13: DRINKING WATER PROTECTION
All storm water and nonstorm water discharges shall comply with the city drinking water source
protection ordinance.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2004-07 on 7/13/2004
10-8A-14: COMPLIANCE WITH FEDERAL AND STATE LAW
Nothing in this article shall be interpreted to relieve any person from an obligation to comply with an
applicable federal, state or local law relating to storm water discharges or drinking water protection.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2004-07 on 7/13/2004
10-8A-15: PENALTY
See CCNO 10-8 Article D for violation and penalties.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=10:_BUILDINGS_AND_CONSTRUCTION 32/45
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2004-07 on 7/13/2004
ARTICLE B: STORM WATER CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY PERMIT1
10-8B-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT
10-8B-2: PERMIT FOR STORM WATER CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY
10-8B-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT
10-8B-4: STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN
10-8B-5: PROPER OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE
10-8B-6: INSPECTION AND ENTRY
10-8B-7: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF PERMIT
10-8B-8: EXEMPTIONS
10-8B-9: APPEAL
10-8B-10: COMPLIANCE WITH FEDERAL AND STATE LAW
10-8B-11: ENFORCEMENT; PENALTY
10-8B-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT
The purpose of this article is to prevent the discharge of sediment and other construction related
pollutants from construction sites. Sediment and debris from construction sites are a major source of
pollution to waterways and water systems located within the city and surrounding areas. Each year,
storm water runoff carries tons of sediment from construction sites into local drainage systems, irrigation
systems, canals, rivers and lakes. Sediment from storm water runoff also clogs and obstructs storm
drains, culverts and canals and causes damage to private property, wildlife habitat and water quality.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2004-07 on 7/13/2004
10-8B-2: PERMIT FOR STORM WATER CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY
A city storm water construction activity permit is required before any person or entity may excavate, grub
and clear, grade or perform any type of construction activity that will disrupt or cause a change in the
natural landscape upon any of the following types of property located within the city:
A. One Acre Or More: Any parcel, lot or land development, which is one acre (43,560 square feet)
or greater in size. A subdivision development greater than or equal to one acre in size qualifies
under this subsection even if each of the individual lots in the subdivision are smaller than one
acre.
B. Special Concern Areas: Any parcel, lot or land development for which the building official
determines that because of the nature or type of the parcel, lot or development, disturbance of
the land is likely to result in erosion or the transport of sediment off of the site by storm water to a
degree substantially greater than that which would occur under natural landscape conditions.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2004-07 on 7/13/2004
10-8B-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT
Any person or entity desiring a storm water construction activity permit must first file an application with
the city. The application shall be submitted as part of an application for a subdivision preliminary plat,
site plan approval or building permit.
A. Content: The application shall include a storm water pollution prevention plan which meets the
criteria set forth in CCNO 10-8B-4.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=10:_BUILDINGS_AND_CONSTRUCTION 33/45
B. Timing: The applicant shall file the application on the following dates:
1. Subdivision: The date that the applicant submits the subdivision preliminary plat
application if the applicant proposes to develop a subdivision.
2. Site Plan: The date that the applicant submits a site plan application if the applicant
proposes to develop a site plan or amended site plan.
3. Building Permit: The date that the applicant submits a building permit application if the
applicant proposes to construct a building on an existing lot or parcel.
4. Other: At least two (2) weeks before the developer intends to perform any type of work
not listed above that would require a storm water construction activity permit pursuant to
this article.
C. Compliance: If an applicant's development comes under more than one of the categories listed
above, then the applicant shall submit the storm water construction activity permit application on
the earliest of the listed dates. Failure to comply with the application dates set forth above is not
a criminal offense, but may delay the applicant's project. Failure to acquire a required storm
water construction activity permit is grounds for denying a related subdivision application, site
plan application, conditional use permit application or building permit application. It is unlawful to
commence work (move dirt) on a development site before obtaining a required storm water
construction activity permit.
D. Application Approval: The building official or designee shall approve the application and grant the
permit if the application is complete and meets the criteria set forth in CCNO 10-8B-4 and the
applicant has paid any permit fees that the city may prescribe by resolution. The building official
shall deny the application or approve the application with conditions if he or she determines that
the measures proposed in the plan fail to meet the criteria set forth in CCNO 10-8B-4. Conditions
the building official may impose in connection with the approval of a permit include, but are not
limited to, the establishment of specific measures and controls to prevent erosion and the
discharge of sediment, debris and other construction related pollutants from the site by storm
water.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=10:_BUILDINGS_AND_CONSTRUCTION 34/45
E. Term: Unless otherwise revoked or suspended, a storm water construction activity permit shall
be in effect for the full period of the construction activity. The construction activity will not be
considered to be completed until the following events occur:
1. Subdivisions: For permits associated with a subdivision plat approval:
a. The permittee must complete all required subdivision improvements; and
b. One of the following three (3) events must occur:
i. The city issues a final certificate of occupancy for each lot in the
subdivision; or
ii. Individual storm water construction activity permits have been issued for
each lot in the subdivision not having a final occupancy permit; or
iii. The property has been revegetated or landscaped in a manner that
eliminates erosion and sediment discharge or that brings the property back
to its natural state.
2. Site Plans: For permits associated with a site plan approval, the date that the permittee
has completed all required landscaping and all outside construction work associated with
the site plan.
3. Building Permits: For permits associated with a building permit application, the date that
the city issues a final occupancy permit for the structure covered by the building permit.
4. Other: For permits issued that are not tied to other approvals from the city, the date that
the permittee has completed all work associated with the permit and takes steps required
by the permit to prevent further erosion and runoff from the site.
F. Termination: No storm water construction activity permit shall be considered terminated until the
permittee submits a notice of termination of construction activity permit ("notice") to the city and
the notice is accepted by the city. The city shall accept the notice if the permittee has met the
requirements of the permit and this article. The permittee shall keep and maintain all permit
required improvements on the site until the city accepts the notice.
G. Amendments: In the event that the proposed construction activity for a site to which a permit
pertains is materially altered from that described in an original plan in a way that may have a
significant impact upon the effectiveness of the measures and controls described in the original
plan, the permittee shall file an amended storm water pollution prevention plan which meets the
criteria set forth in CCNO 10-8B-4.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2004-07 on 7/13/2004
10-8B-4: STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN
A. Required Information: The storm water pollution prevention plan (the "plan") shall contain the
following information:
1. Site Description: A site description (including a map with spot elevations and contour
lines) which includes a description of the nature and location of the construction activity, a
description of the intended sequence of major activities which will disturb soils for major
portions of the site (e.g., grubbing, excavation, grading, utilities and infrastructure
installation, etc.), and estimates of the total area of the site and the total area of the site
that is expected to be disturbed by excavation, grading or other activities;
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=10:_BUILDINGS_AND_CONSTRUCTION 35/45
2. Control Description: A description of the proposed measures and controls that will be
implemented during construction activity and/or while the site is not stable. The plan must
clearly describe the times during the construction process that the measures will be
implemented for each major activity identified pursuant to subsection A1 of this section.
The plan shall also state the name and phone number of the person or entity responsible
for implementation of each control measure.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=10:_BUILDINGS_AND_CONSTRUCTION 36/45
B. Goals And Criteria: The proposed measures and controls described in the plan shall be designed
to meet the following goals and criteria:
1. Prevent Or Minimize Discharge: The proposed measures and controls shall be designed
to prevent or minimize, to the maximum extent practicable, the discharge of sediment,
debris and other construction related pollutants from the construction site by storm water
runoff into the storm drainage system.
2. Prevent Or Minimize Construction Debris: The proposed measures and controls shall be
designed to prevent or minimize, to the maximum extent practicable, the deposit,
discharge, tracking by construction vehicles, or dropping of mud, sediment, debris or
other potential pollutants onto public streets and rights of way. Any such discharge shall
be cleaned up and removed immediately upon notification to the permittee or when it
otherwise comes to the attention of the permittee. At a minimum, the deposit or discharge
shall be cleaned and removed upon notification from the city within a twenty four (24)
hour period or penalty fees will be assessed.
3. BMPs: The proposed measures and controls shall consist of best management practices
(BMPs) available at the time that the plan is submitted. BMPs may include, but shall not
be limited to, temporary silt or sediment fences, sediment traps and detention ponds,
gravel construction entrances and wash down pads to reduce or eliminate off site
tracking, straw bale sediment barriers, establishment of temporary grasses and
permanent vegetative cover, use of straw mulch as a temporary ground cover, erosion
control blankets, temporary interceptor dikes and swales, storm drain inlet protection,
check dams, subsurface drains, pipe slope drains, level spreaders, rock outlet protection,
reinforced soil retaining systems, and gabions.
4. Stabilization: The proposed measures and controls shall be designed to preserve existing
vegetation, where possible. Disturbed portions of the site shall be stabilized. Stabilization
practices may include temporary seeding, permanent seeding, mulching, geotextiles, sod
stabilization, vegetative buffer strips, protection of trees, preservation of mature
vegetation and other appropriate measures. Use of impervious surfaces for stabilization
should be avoided. Stabilization measures shall be initiated as soon as practicable in
disturbed portions of the site where construction activities have temporarily or
permanently ceased, but in no case more than fourteen (14) days after the construction
activity in that portion of the site has temporarily or permanently ceased, except under the
following circumstances:
a. If the initiation of stabilization measures by the fourteenth day after construction
activity temporarily or permanently ceases is precluded by snow cover or frozen
ground conditions, stabilization measures shall be initiated as soon as practicable;
or
b. If construction activity on a portion of the site is temporarily ceased, and earth
disturbing will resume within twenty one (21) days, temporary stabilization
measures need not be initiated on that portion of the site.
5. Minimize Risk Of Discharge Of Other Materials: The proposed measures and controls
shall be employed to minimize the risk of discharge of construction related pollutants
(such as paint, thinners, solvents and other chemicals) from the construction site. Such
measures may include implementation of storage practices to minimize exposure of the
material to storm water as well as spill prevention and response.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2004-07 on 7/13/2004
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=10:_BUILDINGS_AND_CONSTRUCTION 37/45
10-8B-5: PROPER OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE
The recipient of a storm water construction activity permit (the permittee) shall install the erosion and
sediment control measures required by the approved storm water pollution prevention plan before
commencing any construction activity on the site to which the plan applies or at such times indicated in
the plan. The erosion and sediment control measures shall be properly installed and maintained in
accordance with the permit, the manufacturers' specifications and good engineering practices. The
permittee shall maintain such measures on the site until the city accepts the termination of the permit
pursuant to CCNO 10-8B-3F.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2004-07 on 7/13/2004
10-8B-6: INSPECTION AND ENTRY
The permittee shall allow any authorized employees and representatives of the city, representatives of
the state division of water quality and representatives of the EPA to enter the site to which a permit
applies at any time and to inspect the erosion and sediment control measures maintained by the
permittee. The permittee shall also allow inspection of any records pertaining to the conditions of the
permit.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2004-07 on 7/13/2004
10-8B-7: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF PERMIT
A. Revocation Or Suspension: A storm water construction activity permit may be revoked or
suspended by the building official or his designee upon the occurrence of any one of the
following events:
1. Failure of a permittee to comply with the plan or any condition of the permit; or
2. Failure of a permittee to comply with any provision of this article or any other applicable
law, ordinance, rule or regulation related to storm water; or
3. A determination by the building official or his designee that the erosion and sediment
control measures implemented by a permittee pursuant to the plan are inadequate to
prevent or minimize, to the maximum extent practicable, the discharge of sediment,
debris or other pollutants from the construction site by storm water.
B. Notice: The city shall mail a permittee written notice of noncompliance before revoking or
suspending a permit. The notice shall state the location and nature of the noncompliance and
shall also specify what action is required for the permittee to avoid revocation or suspension of
the permit. The notice shall allow the permittee a reasonable time to take the necessary
corrective action to avoid revocation or suspension of the permit which time, in the absence of
exceptional circumstances, shall not be less than ten (10) nor more than thirty (30) days. The
notice shall be mailed to the address listed for the permittee in the application. If the permittee
fails to correct the problems identified in the notice during the time specified in the notice, the
building official may suspend or revoke the permit by mailing or delivering written notice of the
suspension or revocation to the permittee. The permittee may appeal a suspension or revocation
of the permit pursuant to the appeal procedure set forth in CCNO 10-8B-9.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=10:_BUILDINGS_AND_CONSTRUCTION 38/45
C. Exceptional Circumstances: For purposes of this section, "exceptional circumstances" include,
but are not limited to, situations that involve a risk of injury to persons, damage to storm drain
facilities, or damage to other property or the environment. The city may take any steps the city
deems necessary to alleviate any such "exceptional circumstances", as defined above, and may
bill the owner, developer or contractor responsible for creating the exceptional circumstances for
the cost of alleviating said circumstances.
D. Stop Work Order: A stop work order may be issued upon the revocation or suspension of a
permit, or upon the discovery of work being conducted without a required permit. The stop work
order may be issued by the building inspection department. No construction activity may be
commenced or continued on any site for which a permit has been revoked or suspended until the
permit has been reinstated or reissued.
E. Reinstatement: A storm water construction activity permit may be reinstated or reissued upon
compliance with all provisions of this article and all permit conditions, or in the case of a
suspension for reasons provided in subsection A3 of this section, upon the filing of an amended
storm water pollution prevention plan which is designed to correct the deficiencies of the original
plan.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2004-07 on 7/13/2004
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
10-8B-8: EXEMPTIONS
The following activities are exempt from the requirements of this article:
A. Actions by a public utility, the city or any other governmental entity to remove or alleviate an
emergency condition, restore utility service or reopen a public thoroughfare to traffic;
B. Actions by any other person when the city determines, and documents in writing, that the actions
are necessary to remove or alleviate an emergency condition, restore utility service or reopen a
public thoroughfare to traffic;
C. Construction activities which disturb less than five hundred (500) square feet of land surface
area, or which consist of the excavation and/or fill of less than twenty (20) cubic yards of
material;
D. Landscape maintenance activities on fully developed properties, necessary to maintain the
existing developed landscape; and
E. Bona fide agricultural and farming operations that constitute the principal use of any lot or tract of
ground located within the city and which meet the requirements of the zoning ordinance.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2004-07 on 7/13/2004
10-8B-9: APPEAL
A. Time Limit; Information Required: An applicant for a storm water construction activity permit or a
permittee of a storm water construction activity permit may appeal any decision or directive made
by the city or its representatives pursuant to this article. The party desiring to appeal shall file a
notice of appeal with the city recorder within ten (10) days of the decision or directive being
appealed. The notice of appeal shall contain the following information:
1. The appellant's name, address and daytime telephone number;
2. A short statement describing the basis for the appeal; and
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=10:_BUILDINGS_AND_CONSTRUCTION 39/45
3. The relief sought by the appellant.
B. Informal Hearing: Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, the city recorder shall set a date for an
informal hearing to consider the appeal. The informal hearing shall be conducted before the city
hearing officer in accordance with policies established by the city administrator. The city hearing
officer shall uphold the decision or directive being appealed unless the city hearing officer finds
that there has been an error in the interpretation or implementation of this article. The city
hearing officer shall render a decision on the appeal within ten (10) days of the informal hearing
with the appellant. The city hearing officer shall have authority to affirm, reverse or modify any
decision or directive appealed pursuant to this section.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2004-07 on 7/13/2004
10-8B-10: COMPLIANCE WITH FEDERAL AND STATE LAW
Nothing contained in this article is intended to relieve any person or entity from any obligation to comply
with applicable federal and state laws and regulations pertaining to clean water and/or storm water
runoff.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2004-07 on 7/13/2004
10-8B-11: ENFORCEMENT; PENALTY
A. See CCNO Article D for violation and penalties.
B. In addition to any civil fines and/or penalties which may be assessed for a violation of this article,
the city shall have the right to issue a stop work order or to install and/or maintain appropriate
erosion and sediment control measures on any site which is required to have such measures in
the event that construction activity is commenced or continued without such measures having
been installed as required by this article. The city shall have the right to have such measures
installed or maintained by city personnel or to hire a private contractor to perform such work and
the contractor and/or the property owner shall be liable for any and all expenses related to
performing such work, plus a twenty five percent (25%) penalty charge.
C. Violators of this article may also be subject to prosecution, fines and penalties from the state and
the United States EPA.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2004-07 on 7/13/2004
ARTICLE C: MANDATED PRACTICES AND PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES
10-8C-1: INCLUSION
10-8C-1: INCLUSION
A. In addition to the mandated practices and prohibited activities described in articles A and B of
this chapter, the mandated practices and prohibited activities described in CCNO 5-5 shall also
be included in this chapter.
B. In any event that this chapter and CCNO 5-5 conflict, this chapter shall take precedence.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2004-07 on 7/13/2004
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=10:_BUILDINGS_AND_CONSTRUCTION 40/45
ARTICLE D: CIVIL PENALTY, ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING
10-8D-1: CIVIL PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS
10-8D-2: AMOUNT OF PENALTIES SET BY ORDINANCE
10-8D-3: ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS
10-8D-4: NOTICES
10-8D-5: GENERAL CONTRACTOR RESPONSIBILITY
10-8D-6: PROPERTY OWNER RESPONSIBILITY
10-8D-7: ASSESSMENT OF PENALTIES
10-8D-8: HEARINGS
10-8D-9: COLLECTION
10-8D-10: APPEALS
10-8D-1: CIVIL PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS
A. Any person violating any provision of articles A, B and C of this chapter shall be liable for a civil
penalty. Any penalty assessed under this article may be in addition to other penalties that may be
provided in other applicable laws. Each day that a violation occurs shall constitute a separate
offense.
B. If, as the result of the violation of any provision of articles A, B and C of this chapter, the city or
any other party suffers damages and is required to make repairs and/or replace any materials,
the cost of repair and/or replacement shall be borne by the violating party and shall be in addition
to any civil fines and/or penalties.
C. Violators of articles A, B and C of this chapter may also be subject to prosecution, fines and
penalties from the state and the United States EPA.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2011-15 on 9/27/2011
10-8D-2: AMOUNT OF PENALTIES SET BY ORDINANCE
The amount of any civil penalty assessed under CCNO 10-8D-1 shall be established by ordinance and
adopted by the city council.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2011-15 on 9/27/2011
10-8D-3: ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS
Employees of the building inspection department, police department or the code enforcement officer
shall have the authority to issue notices under this article.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2011-15 on 9/27/2011
10-8D-4: NOTICES
A. Requirements: Whenever the city finds that a person or company has violated, or failed to
comply with a requirement of articles A, B and C of this chapter, the city will order compliance by
written notice of the violation. Such notice may require without limitation:
1. The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting;
2. The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
3. That violating discharges, practices or operations shall cease and desist;
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=10:_BUILDINGS_AND_CONSTRUCTION 41/45
4. The abatement, remediation or cleanup of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards
and the restoration of any affected property;
5. Payment to cover administrative, remediation, monitoring, analyses and reporting costs;
and
6. The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
B. Immediate Legal Action: The city may skip the notice requirements set forth in this section and
immediately proceed with criminal and/or civil action against the violator if:
1. The violator has committed the same violation in the past; or
2. The violation, in the opinion of the city, creates a serious risk to persons, the environment
or property; or
3. The city deems the violation to constitute an emergency.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2011-15 on 9/27/2011
10-8D-5: GENERAL CONTRACTOR RESPONSIBILITY
Whenever any violation of this chapter, including articles A, B and C of this chapter, and this article D, is
found, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that the general contractor for the project from where the
violation originated is responsible for the violation and subject to the civil penalty provided.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2011-15 on 9/27/2011
10-8D-6: PROPERTY OWNER RESPONSIBILITY
Whenever any violation of articles A, B and C of this chapter, and this article D, is found, and there is no
general contractor responsible for the project, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that the property
owner for the project from where the violation originated is responsible for the violation and subject to
the civil penalty provided.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2011-15 on 9/27/2011
10-8D-7: ASSESSMENT OF PENALTIES
Civil penalties may be assessed for violation of any article of this chapter as provided in CCNO 1-9.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2011-15 on 9/27/2011
10-8D-8: HEARINGS
Hearings regarding violations of articles A, B and C of this chapter, and this article D, shall be provided
in accordance with CCNO 1-8.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2011-15 on 9/27/2011
10-8D-9: COLLECTION
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=10:_BUILDINGS_AND_CONSTRUCTION 42/45
If any penalty, expenses and/or damages imposed pursuant to this article remains unpaid after forty (40)
days from the receipt of the notice, or after ten (10) days from the date of a hearing pursuant to
CCNO 10-8D-7, the city may act to recover the penalty, expenses and/or damages.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2004-07 on 7/13/2004
10-8D-10: APPEALS
The hearing officer shall make final administrative determinations in all matters in which a violation of
articles A, B and C of this chapter, and this article D, has been alleged.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2004-07 on 7/13/2004
10-9: EXPLOSIVES
10-9-1: SCOPE
10-9-2: APPLICATION
10-9-3: DEFINITIONS
10-9-4: BLASTING PERMIT REQUIRED
10-9-5: BLASTING PERMIT REPOSITORY AND RENEWAL
10-9-6: BLASTING OPERATION PROCEDURES
10-9-7: CITY ENGINEER CONDITIONS
10-9-8: PENALTY PROVISIONS
10-9-1: SCOPE
This chapter is intended to regulate blasting operations within the city of North Ogden.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2007-04 on 2/27/2007
10-9-2: APPLICATION
This chapter shall apply to any project or construction where a blasting permit is required unless the
blast is determined to be a minor blast in which case the inspection requirements of this chapter shall
not apply. Those persons or entities conducting major blasting shall comply with all the requirements of
this chapter. The city engineer or the city engineer's authorized representative shall determine if a blast
is minor.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2007-04 on 2/27/2007
10-9-3: DEFINITIONS
APPROVED BLASTER: A blaster who has been approved by the city engineer to conduct blasting
operations in the city of North Ogden and who has been placed on the list of approved blasters.
BLASTER: Any person, corporation, contractor or other entity who uses, ignites, or sets off an explosive
device or material.
BLASTING OPERATIONS: The use of an explosive device or explosive materials to destroy, modify,
obliterate, or remove any obstruction of any kind from a piece of property.
BLASTING PERMIT: A written document issued by the city of North Ogden allowing blasting with
explosives to be done by the permittee under the conditions specified therein.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=10:_BUILDINGS_AND_CONSTRUCTION 43/45
CERTIFICATE OF INSURANCE: A written document issued by an insurance company authorized to do
business in the state of Utah stating that the insurance company has issued a policy of liability insurance
covering property damage and bodily injuries resulting from blasting operations occurring in the city of
North Ogden.
MAJOR BLASTING: Any type of blasting operation other than "minor blasting" as defined herein.
MINOR BLASTING: Any blasting operation associated with minor trenching operations, digging holes for
utility poles, and other single shot operations.
QUALIFIED BLASTING AGENCY: Someone who specializes in explosive management and that the city
feels qualified to accomplish the blasting plan.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2007-04 on 2/27/2007
10-9-4: BLASTING PERMIT REQUIRED
All blasting operations within the city of North Ogden are prohibited unless a blasting permit is first
obtained from the city of North Ogden.
A. Prerequisites: No blasting permit shall be granted or obtained unless the prerequisite conditions
listed below are complied with and proof provided to the satisfaction of the city engineer.
B. Blasting Permit: The blaster shall obtain a blasting permit from the city of North Ogden.
C. Liability Insurance: The property owner/developer or general contractor shall obtain liability
insurance covering the blaster's activities in the minimum amount of two million dollars
($2,000,000.00) for property damage and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for bodily injury.
The property owner/developer or general contractor shall file a copy of the certificate of
insurance with the city of North Ogden. The blaster shall have liability insurance, property
insurance, and bodily injury insurance in the minimum amount of five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00) each. The city of North Ogden shall be named as coinsured.
D. Blaster's Qualifications: The blaster's qualifications shall be reviewed by the city engineer.
Approval and placement on the list of approved blasters shall be based upon a review of the
blaster's qualifications, past safety record, and history of complaints of job performance. Failure
on the part of the blaster to comply with the terms and conditions under which approval is
granted may result in suspension from the list of approved blasters for a period not exceeding
one year
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2007-04 on 2/27/2007
10-9-5: BLASTING PERMIT REPOSITORY AND RENEWAL
A. Blasting Permit: The blasting permit shall be kept on file with the city of North Ogden. A copy of
the blasting permit shall be retained by the general contractor or property owner/developer and
by the blaster and shall be available at the job site for public or official inspection at all times
during blasting operations. Blasting permits will not be issued unless the owner (developer)
submits a comprehensive and detailed blasting plan prepared by a qualified blasting agency for
city review. This plan must identify in detail the blasting procedures that will be used. Additionally,
the plan must identify and address potential issues with all nearby structures including buildings,
retaining walls, swimming pools, towers or any feature that may be affected by the blasting
process. The city may ask for additional reviews if it feels that the independent analysis is
incomplete or the review agency lacks qualifications. Blasting will then be permitted once the city
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=10:_BUILDINGS_AND_CONSTRUCTION 44/45
feels that the blasting plan substantially addresses public safety and potential property damage
concerns to nearby structures.
B. Blasting Permit Cancellation: Blasting permits are required to be canceled with the city engineer
when a blaster completes or discontinues, for thirty (30) days, blasting operations at a
construction site.
C. Blasting Permit Expiration: The blasting permit shall expire in thirty (30) days and must be
renewed before any blasting operations are continued or resumed.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2007-04 on 2/27/2007
10-9-6: BLASTING OPERATION PROCEDURES
After the blasting permit has been issued, the blaster shall comply with the following procedures:
A. Notification Of Blasting Operation: The contractor or property owner/developer shall give
reasonable notice in writing, at the time of issuance of blasting permit, to all residences or
businesses within six hundred feet (600') of any potential blast location. The notice shall be a
form approved by the building official.
Any resident receiving such notice may request of the building department that the blaster give
twenty four (24) hours' advance notice of impending blasts. The general contractor or property
owner/developer shall obtain the advanced notification list of residents from the building
department and shall make every reasonable effort to contact any and all parties requesting the
second advanced notice.
B. Blasting Hours: Blasting shall only be permitted between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M.
and four o'clock (4:00) P.M. during any weekday, Monday through Friday, unless special
circumstances warrant another time of day and special approval is granted by the building
official.
C. Building Department Inspections: The blaster shall permit building department personnel to
inspect the blast site and blast materials or explosives at any reasonable time.
D. Building Department Witness Of Blasting: A North Ogden City building inspector will be present
at all blasts. Confirmation shall be made to the building department no less than one hour prior to
the blast.
E. Blast Notification To Building Department: The blasting companies are required to notify the
building department on the day of a tentative blasting operation, between the hours of eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M. and eight thirty o'clock (8:30) A.M.
F. Seismograph Monitoring: All blasting operations shall be monitored by an approved seismograph
located at the nearest constructed structure. All daily seismograph reports shall be forwarded to
the building department by the end of the blast week.
1. Exception: Public utility companies are not required to seismographically monitor minor
blasting operations.
G. Confiscation: Any explosives which are illegally manufactured, sold, given away, delivered,
stored, used, possessed, or transported shall be subject to immediate seizure by the fire chief,
issuing authority, or peace officer. When a permit has been revoked or has expired and is not
immediately renewed, any explosive is subject to immediate seizure.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2007-04 on 2/27/2007
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=10:_BUILDINGS_AND_CONSTRUCTION 45/45
10-9-7: CITY ENGINEER CONDITIONS
The North Ogden City engineer may impose such additional conditions and procedures as it deems are
reasonably necessary to protect the public health and safety based upon the peculiar and individual
facts and circumstances of a particular blasting operation. The city engineer shall provide the blaster
with the additional conditions or procedures in writing and the blaster shall comply with those
requirements until such time as the city engineer is satisfied they are no longer required and cancels the
additional requirements.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2007-04 on 2/27/2007
10-9-8: PENALTY PROVISIONS
A. Violation As Misdemeanor: Any person, firm, corporation, blaster, contractor, property owner or
other violating or causing the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for six (6) months, or by both
such fine and imprisonment.
B. False Or Misleading Information: It shall be unlawful and a violation of this code for any person,
firm, corporation, blaster, contractor or other to provide false or misleading information or
documentation to the city of North Ogden or to any of its departments during any phase of the
permit process or blasting operations.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2007-04 on 2/27/2007
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 1/279
11: ZONING REGULATIONS
11-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
11-2: DEFINITIONS
11-3: PLANNING COMMISSION
11-4: VARIANCES AND ADMINISTRATIVE INTERPRETATIONS
11-5: CONSTITUTIONAL TAKINGS PROCEDURES
11-6: ZONES AND DISTRICTS
11-7: RESIDENTIAL ZONES
11-8: COMMERCIAL AND MANUFACTURING ZONES
11-9: HILLSIDE PROTECTION ZONES HP-1, HP-2, HP-31
11-10: REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO MORE THAN ONE ZONE
11-11: PLANNED RESIDENTIAL UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PRUD)
11-12: GROUP DWELLINGS
11-13: MANUFACTURED HOUSING
11-14: CONDITIONAL USES
11-15: NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES
11-16: HOME OCCUPATIONS
11-17: PARKING AND LOADING; TRAFFIC AND ACCESS
11-18: TELEVISION SATELLITE OR DISH ANTENNAS
11-19: RESTRICTED LOT (R LOT) DEVELOPMENT
11-20: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
11-21: WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND ANTENNAS
11-22: SIGN REGULATIONS FOR ALL ZONES
11-23: VESTED RIGHTS
11-24: GRADING AND DRAINAGE STANDARDS
11-25: DEVELOPMENT CONSTRAINTS
11-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
11-1-1: TITLE
11-1-2: PURPOSE
11-1-3: INTERPRETATION; CONFLICT; PREVIOUS ORDINANCES AND MAPS
11-1-4: CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS
11-1-5: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
11-1-6: PERMITS REQUIRED AND ENFORCEMENT
11-1-7: BUILDING PERMITS
11-1-8: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
11-1-9: ANNEXED TERRITORY
11-1-10: PENALTY
11-1-1: TITLE
This title shall be known as the ZONING ORDINANCE OF NORTH OGDEN CITY.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-05 on 4/9/2002
11-1-2: PURPOSE
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 2/279
This title is designed and enacted in order to provide for the health, safety and welfare, and promote the
prosperity, improve the morals, peace and good order, comfort, convenience and aesthetics of the city,
and its present and future inhabitants and businesses, to protect the tax base, secure economy and
governmental expenditures, foster the state's agricultural and other industries, protect both urban and
nonurban development, to protect property values, and to govern uses, density, open spaces,
structures, buildings, energy efficiency, light and air quality, transportation and public alternative
transportation, infrastructure, public facilities, vegetation, trees and landscaping.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-05 on 4/9/2002
11-1-3: INTERPRETATION; CONFLICT; PREVIOUS ORDINANCES AND MAPS
A. Interpretation: In interpreting and applying the provisions of this title, the requirements contained
herein are declared to be the minimum requirements for the purpose set forth.
B. Conflict: This title shall not nullify the more restrictive provisions of covenants, agreements, other
ordinances or laws, but shall prevail notwithstanding such provisions which are less restrictive.
C. Existing Ordinances And Maps: The existing ordinances of the city governing the zoning of areas
and districts in the city in their entirety and including the maps heretofore adopted and made a
part of said ordinances are hereby superseded and amended to read as set forth herein.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-05 on 4/9/2002
11-1-4: CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS
This title, including the maps attached to the ordinance codified in this title, may be amended from time
to time by the planning commission in accordance with Utah Code § 10-9a-502 after holding a public
hearing. At least ten (10) days' notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be given in accordance
with Utah Code § 10-9a-205. All proposed amendments initiated by someone other than the planning
commission, shall first be submitted to the planning commission. If the city council initiates an
amendment, the proposed amendment shall be submitted to the planning commission for its
recommendation. The planning commission's recommendation shall be returned to the city council for its
consideration within thirty (30) days. If the planning commission needs additional time to review a
proposed amendment and make a recommendation to the city council, it must send a memorandum to
the city council explaining why the review is taking longer than thirty (30) days and must provide follow
up memoranda explaining the progress and issues the planning commission are reviewing on the
proposed amendment each additional thirty (30) days until a recommendation is made. In no case shall
an application for a proposed amendment, other than amendments initiated by the city council or
planning commission, be reviewed by the planning commission for a period not greater than ninety (90)
days, unless permission for an extension is granted by the applicant. Failure of the planning commission
to take action within the ninety (90) day period when progress memoranda are submitted every thirty
(30) days shall be deemed reviewed by the planning commission with a recommendation of denial. This
procedure does not include changes or amendments made by the city council after a public hearing.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2013-4 on 3/26/2013
11-1-5: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
A. Purpose and Intent.
The purpose of this section is to establish regulations and procedures for the processing and
consideration of applications allowed by this Land Use Code as identified in CCNO Title 11 and
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 3/279
designating the land use authority for the interpretation of this Code.
B. Administrative Authority.
1. The planning director is charged with the administration of the provisions of this title. The
planning director, or his designee, is designated as the land use authority to deny,
approve, or approve with conditions an application for the following administrative
applications:
a. home occupations
b. land use permits
c. daycares - Applications for daycares shall be processed as a site plan review as
identified in 11-10-27
d. preschools - Applications for preschools shall be processed as a site plan review
as identified in 11-10-27
The planning director may deny an application for an administrative approval if the
use fails to comply with specific standards set forth in the city code or if any of the
required findings are not supported by evidence in the record as determined by
the director. At the discretion of the planning director, the Planning Commission
can hear the request for an administrative approval. Further, the planning director
is designated as the land use authority to interpret CCNO Title 11.
2. The administrative approval process includes public notice and comment from adjacent
property owners, as required by state code and city code.
C. Fees for Processing Applications.
1. Fees for processing applications shall be established by the North Ogden City
Consolidated Fee Schedule.
2. Applications that have been deemed complete and have not been pursued with
reasonable diligence before the appropriate board shall expire after six months. The
applicant will have to submit a new application and fees to restart the process.
D. Notice of Decision.
After hearing the evidence and considering the application, the approving authority (Planning
Commission, planning director or his designee, hearing officer, and City Council on land use
applications) shall make its findings and have them entered in the minutes. Upon a decision by
the approving authority, a notice of decision shall be mailed to the applicant at the address or email
address given in the application. A notice of decision can be a new written notice, a copy of
the administrative approval form signed by the planning director or designee, or a copy of the
approved minutes. A decision by the approving authority is final at the time the notice of decision
is issued. If a notice of decision is not sent, the decision shall be final on the date the minutes
from the meeting are approved by the approving authority. The planning department shall also
mail notice of any decisions to any person or agency who, in writing, requested such notification
before the decision was rendered. Decisions are subject to requirements and conditions stated in
the staff report and listed in the meeting minutes.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 4/279
E. Hearing and Publication Notice for the Planning Commission and City Council.
At least 10 days’ notice of the time and place of which shall be given of any public hearing before
the City Council or Planning Commission as per state code.
F. Permits and Licensing.
All departments, officials, and public employees of the city, which are vested with the duty or
authority to issue permits or licenses, shall conform to the provisions of this code and shall issue
no permit or license for uses, buildings, or purposes where the same would be in conflict with the
provisions of this code. Any permit or license issued in conflict with the provisions of this chapter
shall be null and void.
G. Appeals.
Appeals from administrative decisions shall be submitted to the planning department not more
than 15 calendar days after the date of the written notice of decision in accordance with 11-4 et
seq. Appeals from administrative decisions shall be heard and decided as outlined in 11-4 et seq.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-05 on 4/9/2002
Amended by Ord. 2017-13 Amended on 7/18/2017
Amended by Ord. 2018-29 on 11/27/2018
Amended by Ord. 2018-30 on 11/27/2018
11-1-6: PERMITS REQUIRED AND ENFORCEMENT
A. Purpose and Intent.
The purpose of this section is to establish the requirements for land use permits from the
planning department and building permits from the building department. This chapter identifies
the responsibilities for enforcing the requirements of this Land Use Code.
B. Land Use Permit Required.
1. In order to verify compliance with applicable regulations, all land uses that require a land
use permit or conditional use permit by this Land Use Code are prohibited until a land use
permit or conditional use permit has received final written approval from the appropriate
land use authority.
2. No structure, including agricultural structures, shall be constructed, changed in use, or
altered, as regulated by this Land Use Code, until and unless a land use permit or, if
applicable, a conditional use permit, has received final written approval from the
appropriate land use authority.
3. No application for permits or approvals governed by this Land Use Code shall be
approved for any lot or parcel until all unresolved zoning, subdivision, building, business
license, nuisance, or other violations on the lot or parcel, or on any parcel included in any
manner as part of the application, are resolved, unless approval of the application will
resolve all of the existing violations.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 5/279
C. Land Use Permit Revocation.
A land use permit or conditional use permit may be revoked for violation of any part of this Land
Use Code related to the specific use or permit in accordance with the following:
1. Revocation shall be conducted by the land use authority which is authorized to approve
the permit.
2. Prior to permit revocation, the land owner and, if different, permittee shall be given
reasonable opportunity to resolve the violation by bringing the property into compliance or
by diligently pursuing an amendment or modification to the permit, as may be allowed by
this Land Use Code.
3. In the event compliance cannot be attained the land owner and, if different, permittee
shall be given a notice of the impending permit revocation 14 days prior to final
revocation. The notice of the impending permit revocation shall specify the violation, and
inform the land owner and, if different, permittee of the right to request a hearing.
4. The land owner and, if different, permittee shall have a right to a hearing with the land use
authority to show cause for why the permit should not be revoked, if a written request for
such is submitted prior to a final written revocation decision. If a hearing is requested,
final revocation of the permit shall be stayed until after the hearing. The hearing shall be
scheduled at a time specified by the land use authority.
5. Revocation of a permit is final upon the issuance of a final written decision. The final
written decision may be appealed pursuant to 11-4 et seq.
6. Revocation of a permit shall not prohibit prosecution or any other legal action taken on
account of the violation, as provided in this Land Use Code or any other applicable law.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 6/279
D. Code Enforcement.
1. Building Official: The building official is designated and authorized as the official charged
with the enforcement of this Land Use Code.
2. Permit and Certificates; Compliance Required: Building permits, as specified by the city,
are required for any construction, alteration, repair, removal, or occupancy of any
structure. Construction shall not be commenced, except after the issuance of a written
permit by the building official. Land use permits are subject to inspection.
The building official shall not grant a permit for the construction or alteration of any
building or structure if such construction or alteration is in violation of any provision of this
Land Use Code; nor shall any city official grant any permit or license for the use of any
building or land if such use would be in violation of this Land Use Code or any law of the
state.
3. Inspections; Abatement: The building official or his / her designee shall enforce all of the
provisions of this title. He/she shall inspect or cause to be inspected all buildings in the
course of construction, alteration or repair, and any change in the use of land. If, in the
course of such inspection, or otherwise, it shall come to his attention that any such
construction, alteration or repair, or that any use or contemplated use of land is in
violation of the provisions of this title, he /she shall issue his written order to the person
responsible therefor; ordering and directing such person to cease and desist such
construction, alteration, repair or use. If the order to cease and desist is not complied with
within thirty (30) days, then he / she shall report the violation to the city legal department
for prosecution and make complaint thereof before the court or courts having jurisdiction
of such violation. Upon the recommendation of the City Council, the legal department
shall bring a civil action for the abatement of any nuisance existing in violation of this title.
4. Request for Assistance: The building official may call for the assistance of the law
enforcement personnel whenever, in his / her opinion, such assistance is necessary or
convenient in the investigation of a suspected violation of this title or the enforcement of
the provisions of this title.
5. Fees Prescribed: The City Council may, by resolution, prescribe an exact payment of
reasonable fees to cover the expense for reviewing plans, issuing building permits,
inspecting uses and issuing certificates of occupancy, and may determine the method of
collecting such fees.
6. Fees Prescribed: The City Council may, by resolution, prescribe an exact payment of
reasonable fees to cover the expense for reviewing plans, issuing building permits,
inspecting uses and issuing certificates of occupancy, and may determine the method of
collecting such fees.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 2017-13 Amended on 7/18/2017
11-1-7: BUILDING PERMITS
A. It is unlawful for any person, whether acting as owner, occupant or contractor, or otherwise, to
erect, construct, reconstruct or alter, or change the use or occupancy of any building or other
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 7/279
structure within the city contrary to any provisions of this title, or without first obtaining a building
permit from the building official. No building permit shall be issued by the building official unless a
written land use permit has been issued by the planning director and, if otherwise required by the
provisions of this title or by the Planning Commission.
B. No application for permits or approvals governed by this Zoning Regulation shall be approved for
any lot or parcel until all unresolved zoning, subdivision, building, business license, nuisance, or
other violations on the lot or parcel, or on any parcel included in any manner as part of the
application, are resolved, unless approval of the application will resolve all of the existing
violations.
C. Effective June 13, 2017, it is unlawful for any person, whether acting as owner, occupant or
contractor, to fail to obtain a written land use permit from the director for:
1. The installation of any asphalt, concrete, or other hard surface material or structure on
any property, other than walkways, ornamental landscaping features, or for the minor
repair of existing legal hard surfaced areas; or
2. The use of, or change of use for, any lot or parcel not involving the erection, construction,
reconstruction or alteration of a building or structure; or
3. The installation of any fence over three and one-half feet (3½') in height within a required
yard area, or the installation of any fence within a "sight triangle area" of any lot, as
defined in CCNO 11-10-11.
D. All applications for building permits or land use permits shall be accompanied by a plan drawn to
scale showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the size and location of existing
buildings or structures, buildings or structures to be erected and existing buildings or structures
on adjacent property and such other information as may be deemed necessary by the building
official, or the planning director, for the enforcement of this title. Such requirement may be met by
submission of a site plan approved pursuant to CCNO 11-10-27. A record of such applications
and permits shall be kept in the office of the building official.
E. Building permits or land use permits issued on the basis of plans and specifications approved by
the building official, the planning director, or other approving official or agency, authorizes only
the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in the approved plans and applications, and no
other use, arrangement or construction. Use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that
authorized in said plans and specifications shall be deemed a violation of this title.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-11 on 10/12/2010
Amended by Ord. 2017-13 Amended on 7/18/2017
11-1-8: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
A. Issuance: No land shall be used or occupied and no building hereafter structurally altered or
erected shall be used or changed in use until a certificate of occupancy and zoning compliance
shall have been issued by the building official or the planning director stating that the building or
structure or the proposed use thereof, or the use of land, complies with the provisions of this title.
A like certificate shall be issued for the purpose of maintaining, renewing, changing or expanding
a nonconforming use. A certificate of occupancy and zoning compliance either for the whole or a
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 8/279
part of the building or structure shall be applied for coincidentally with the application for a
building or land use permit and shall be issued after the erection or structural alteration of such
building or structure, or part thereof, shall have been completed in conformity with the provisions
of this title or any condition imposed under the authority of this title. In addition, a new certificate
shall be required at any time the occupancy of the building changes to a more intensive use.
B. Information: Any applicant for a certificate of occupancy and zoning compliance shall provide
such information as needed to enforce the provisions of this title as determined by the building
official.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 2017-13 Amended on 7/18/2017
11-1-9: ANNEXED TERRITORY
At the time of annexation of new territory to the city, the city council shall, upon the recommendation of
the planning commission, classify such territory for zoning purposes according to the zones established
by this title.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 2002-05 on 4/9/2002
11-1-10: PENALTY
A violation of any provision of this title is a class B misdemeanor and is punishable as provided in CCNO
1-4-1 for each and every day such a violation occurs. The fine for a violation of any provision of this title
shall be no less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 2010-11 on 10/12/2010
11-2: DEFINITIONS
11-2-1: DEFINITIONS OF WORDS AND TERMS
11-2-1: DEFINITIONS OF WORDS AND TERMS
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 9/279
For the purpose of this title, certain words and terms used herein are defined as follows: All words used
in the present tense include the future tense, and, where appropriate, the past tense. All words in the
plural number include the singular number, all words in the singular number include the plural number,
unless the natural construction of the wording indicates otherwise. Gender shall be universal, any
reference to one gender shall also implicitly refer to the other gender, or to neutral gender. The word
"shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. Other words and phrases used in this title shall have the
following meanings:
ABUTTING: The condition of two (2) adjoining properties having a common property line or boundary,
including cases where two (2) or more lots adjoin only a corner or corners.
ACCESS OR ACCESSWAY: The place, means or way by which pedestrians and vehicles shall have
safe, adequate and usable ingress and egress to a property or use as required by this title.
ACCESSORY BUILDING, LARGE: A building which is six hundred (600) square feet or larger located on
a lot with an existing principal use. The building's use may be for any accessory use allowed in the
particular zone in which the lot is located. Allowed uses include: detached garage, personal storage,
lawn care equipment, etc. If the large accessory building meets the definition of a garage, no home
occupation may be allowed in the building.
ACCESSORY USE OR BUILDING: A subordinate use or building customarily incidental to and located
upon the same lot occupied by the main use or building.
ACRE: An area of land containing forty three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet.
ADJACENT: Nearby, not distant or having a common endpoint or border.
AGRICULTURE: The tilling of the soil, the raising of crops, horticulture and gardening. "Agriculture" does
not include any agricultural industry or business, such as fruit packing plants, fur farms, animal hospitals
or similar uses.
AIRPORT: Any area which is used or is intended to be used primarily for the taking off and landing of
aircraft, and any appurtenant areas which are used or intended to be used for airport buildings or
facilities, including open spaces, taxiways and tie down areas, hangars, transition and clear zones, and
other accessory buildings.
ALLEY: A right of way, less than twenty six feet (26') wide, dedicated to public use, affording a
secondary means of access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation.
AMBULATORY PERSON: Any individual, including one who uses a cane or other ambulatory support,
who is physically and mentally capable, under emergency conditions, of finding a way to safety without
assistance.
AMENDMENT: In reference to this title, a change in the wording or substance of this title, or an addition
or deletion or a change in the zone district boundaries or classifications of the zoning map.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL: Facilities for the care, treatment and boarding of animals, including facilities within
the term "veterinary clinic".
ANTIQUE: A product or other item of personal property that is sold or exchanged because of value
derived, in whole or in part, because of its age, and not simply because the same is not a new product.
APIARY: Any place where one (I) or more colonies of bees are located.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 10/279
APIARY EQUIPMENT: Hives, supers, frames, veils, gloves, or other equipment used to handle or
manipulate bees, honey, wax or hives.
APPEAL: An action which permits anyone to arrange for a hearing before an individual or a group other
than the individual or group from whose decision the appellant seeks redress, or a first request for
action, depending on context. CCNO 11-4-3 addresses the appeal procedures available under this title
to aggrieved parties.
AUTOMOBILE, JUNK: Any vehicle which: a) is missing one or more body parts; or b) is incapable of
operating under its own power; or c) is missing any wheels; or d) has missing or severely shattered
glass which prevents safe operation; or e) has glass which is so severely damaged or shattered that
safe operation is impossible; f) has one or more flat tires for a period of seventy two (72) or more hours;
or g) not currently registered in the state or province of the registered owner.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR: All aspects of the repair of motor vehicles, including, but not limited to,
lubrication, tune up and preventive maintenance.
AUTOMOBILE SALES: An agency selling motor vehicles and providing services commonly associated
with motor vehicle sales.
AUTOMOTIVE WRECKING: See definition of Junkyard.
BAR OR COCKTAIL LOUNGE: An establishment whose primary business is the serving of alcoholic
beverages to the public for consumption on the premises.
BARN: (See also building, agricultural) A large accessory building used exclusively for the storage of
grain, hay, and other farm products, or the sheltering of livestock or farm equipment.
BASEMENT: A story partly underground and having more than one-half (½) of its height below ground.
BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT: A dwelling in which the occupants of the dwelling provide,
for compensation, seven (7) or less days' lodging and meals for guests, occupying not more than two (2)
guestrooms, located within the same dwelling.
BEE: The common honey bee, Apis mellifera, at any state of development, but not including the African
honeybee, Apis mellifera scutellata species, or any hybrid thereof.
BEEKEEPER: A person who owns or has charge of one (I) or more colonies of bees.
BEEKEEPING: To hold a colony of bees in a hive for the purpose of pollination, honey production, study
or similar purpose
BUILDING: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, for the housing or enclosure of
persons, animals or chattel.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY: A detached subordinate building clearly incidental to and located upon the
same lot occupied by the main building.
BUILDING AREA: The total area, taken on a horizontal plane at the mean grade level, of the principal
buildings and all accessory buildings and structures, exclusive of uncovered porches, terraces and
steps. Decks over two and one-half feet (21/2') from the ground, and covered porches, are included in
the building area.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 11/279
BUILDING, AGRICULTURAL: A structure on agricultural land designed, constructed, and used to house
farm implements, livestock, or agricultural produce or products used by the owner, lessee, or sub-lessee
or their immediate families, their employees, and persons engaged in the pick up or delivery of
agricultural produce or products grown or raised on the premises. The term “agricultural building” shall
not include dwellings.
BUILDING, ATTACHED: A building which has at least part of a wall in common with another building, or
which is connected to another building by a roof.
BUILDING, DETACHED: A building which is separated from another building or buildings on the same
lot.
BUILDING FOOTPRINT: The area of the primary structure measured from the outside walls (excluding
any overhanging portions) which includes indoor uses, such as attached garage, carport, utility room,
laundry, etc. (including covered patios and breezeways), which are an integral part of the roof structure
of the structure.
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF: The vertical distance measured from the natural grade level to the highest
point of the structure directly above the natural grade when such structure is not located in a platted
subdivision. If the structure is located in a platted subdivision, the building height shall be the vertical
distance measured from the finished grade as shown on the subdivision grading plans or finished grade
as shown on the individual lot's grading plans (whichever is lower), to the highest point of the structure
directly above the finished grade. In the event that terrain problems prevent an accurate determination of
height, the zoning administrator shall rule as to height. An appeal from that decision shall be to the
administrative law judge.
The height of a building on a flat lot is measured from the highest finished grade at the building
foundation to the highest point of the roof, which can be no higher than thirty five feet (35'). The
definition of a "flat lot" is no more than three feet (3') of difference from the lowest point of the top back of
curb to the highest point of the top back of curb on the building lot.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 12/279
The height of a building on an uphill lot is measured from the lowest finished grade of the building
foundation to the highest point of the roof, which can be no higher than thirty five feet (35'). Also, the
height of the building from the top back of curb at the center of the lot to the highest point of the roof can
be no higher than forty feet (40').
The height of a building on a downhill lot is measured from the highest finished grade at the building
foundation to the highest point of the roof, which can be no higher than thirty five feet (35'). Also, the
height of the building from the lowest grade of the foundation to the highest point of the roof can be no
higher than fifty five feet (55').
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 13/279
BUILDING PERMIT: A permit required for erection, construction, modification, addition to or moving of
any building, structure or use in the incorporated area of the North Ogden City, as more fully defined in
the international building code adopted by the city council.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A building, or buildings, in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on
which it is situated. In any residential district, any dwelling shall be deemed to be the main building of the
lot on which the same is situated.
BUILDING, PUBLIC: A building owned and operated, or owned and intended to be operated by a public
agency of the United States of America or the state of Utah, or any of its subdivisions, or the city.
BUILDING SETBACK: The minimum distance as prescribed by this title between any property line and
the closest point of the foundation or any supporting post or pillar of any building or structure related
thereto. (See definitions of Yard; Yard, Front; Yard, Rear Corner; Yard, Rear Interior; Yard, Side Corner;
and Yard, Side Interior)
CAMPGROUND: Any lot, parcel or tract of land used, designed, maintained and intended for rent of
plots or sites to accommodate temporary camping by the traveling public, with or without sanitary
facilities and water, and whether or not a charge is made for the use of the site and the facilities of the
campground.
CARPORT: A roof supported by pillars or cantilevers, which shelters a car or other vehicle. May either
extend from a structure (usually a house) or be constructed separately (often to accommodate several
cars).
CEMETERY: Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead, and dedicated for such
purposes, including columbaria, crematoriums, mausoleums and mortuaries, when operated in
conjunction with and within the boundaries of such premises.
CHURCH: A permanently located building commonly used for religious worship, fully enclosed with
walls, but including windows and doors, and having a structurally solid and sound roof.
CITY COUNCIL OR COUNCIL: The mayor and council of North Ogden City.
CLASSROOM: An area of space located within a commercial or residential structure or other structure
accessory thereto, excluding nurseries and daycare use, which is utilized in bringing two (2) or more
persons together for the purpose of instruction, supervision, care, recreation or other such uses. The
number of classroom occupants is governed by the minimum egress and access requirements
pertaining to classrooms as set forth in the adopted edition of the international building code.
CLEARING: The removal and disposal of all obstructions, such as fences, walls, foundations, buildings
and existing structures, and accumulations of rubbish of whatever nature. Also the substantial removal
of trees, shrubs, cacti, and other indigenous vegetation, but not including grass and weeds considered to
be a potential fire hazard.
CLINIC: A place for the provision of group medical services, not involving overnight housing of patients.
CLUBHOUSE: A building, located on a golf course with nine (9) or more holes, that contains one or
more of the following facilities: pro shop for the retailing of clothing and golf accessories; the golf
course's own cart rental and maintenance facility (does not include golf cart sales and the maintenance
of golf carts not rented by the golf course); restaurant with or without alcoholic beverage service; and the
golf course's administrative office.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 14/279
CLUSTER HOUSING: Houses built close together with little yard space and a large common area,
rather than each house having a large separate yard.
COLONY: Bees in any hive including queens, workers, or drones.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 15/279
COMMISSION: The North Ogden City planning commission.
COMMON OPEN SPACE: Open space usable by all the people within a certain development; provided,
that such area is commonly owned by all the property owners in that development.
COMMUNITY CORRECTIONS FACILITY: A facility which provides lodging and meals and, primarily,
counseling, treatment and rehabilitation to adjudicated delinquents, parolees and individuals in
prerelease (transitional) or diversionary programs from correctional institutions.
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR: The person appointed by the mayor to be the community
development director. If there is no such person designated by the mayor, the city administrator is the
community development director.
CONDOMINIUM: Real estate, portions of which are designated for separate ownership and the
remainder of which is designated for common ownership solely by the owners of the separate portions.
Real estate is not a condominium unless a declaration is recorded submitting the real estate to the terms
of the Utah condominium act and the undivided interests in the common elements are vested in the unit
owners.
CONTIGUOUS: In actual contact.
CONVALESCENT HOME: See definition of Nursing Home.
CORRAL: A fenced space less than one acre in area, or less than one hundred feet (100') in width, used
for the confinement of animals.
COUNTY: Weber County, Utah.
DAIRY: A commercial establishment for the manufacture or processing of dairy products.
DAYCARE CENTER: Any building or structure, other than an occupied residence, furnishing care,
supervision and guidance for three (3) or more children unaccompanied by parent or guardian for
periods of less than twenty four (24) hours per day.
DENSITY: The average number of families, persons or housing units per unit of land; usually density is
expressed "per acre". Thus, the density of a development of three hundred (300) units occupying forty
(40) acres is seven and one-half (7.5) units per acre. The control of density is one of the basic purposes
of zoning.
DISTURBANCE: Clearing, grubbing, excavation and/or filling.
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT: Any establishment primarily where food or beverages are dispensed and are
primarily consumed in the patron's vehicle.
DRIVE-IN THEATER: An open air theater where the performance is viewed by all, or part, of the
audience from motor vehicles.
DWELLING: A building or portion thereof designed for residential use which is constructed in compliance
with the city's adopted building, plumbing, electrical and health codes and regulations. A dwelling is not
a unit rented or leased for less than twenty nine (29) consecutive days at a time. The term "dwelling"
includes manufactured and modular homes when the requirements of CCNO 11-13 are met.
DWELLING, FOUR-FAMILY: A dwelling arranged or designed to be occupied by four (4) families, the
structure having only four (4) dwelling units.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 16/279
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A dwelling located in a building containing more than one dwelling.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A dwelling arranged or designed to be occupied by one family, the
structure having only one dwelling unit.
DWELLING, THREE-FAMILY: A dwelling arranged or designed to be occupied by three (3) families, the
structure having only three (3) dwelling units.
DWELLING, TWIN HOME: A structure containing an attached two-car garage or carport for each unit,
with two (2) dwelling units that are legally subdivided into separate housing units and divided by a
common wall. Such structure must be located on two (2) lots that have the common property line on the
common division wall.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A dwelling arranged or designed to be occupied by two (2) families, the
structure having only two (2) dwelling units.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms in a dwelling, designed for residential use which is constructed in
compliance with the city's adopted building, plumbing, electrical and health codes and regulations. Such
unit shall only be designed for, or occupied by, one family for living or sleeping purposes.
EASEMENT: A specified area on a lot or parcel of land reserved or used for the location of and/or
access to, utilities, drainage or other physical access purposes, or for preservation of undisturbed terrain
for the benefit of the general public. An easement also includes private rights of way that one property
owner grants to another party to use the grantor's property for the grantee's purposes, such as, but not
limited to, access to the grantee's property.
ELDERLY: A person who is sixty five (65) years of age or older.
ERECT: To build, to build upon, to add to, to alter, to construct, to reconstruct, to move upon, or to
undertake any other physical operations on the land, which is required for a building or structure.
EXCAVATION: The removal of earthen material, resulting in a lowering of the grade at the location.
FAMILY: An individual, or two (2) or more persons related by blood or marriage, or a group of persons
not related by blood or marriage, living together as a single housekeeping group in a dwelling unit.
FARM: An area of not less than two (2) contiguous acres which is used for the commercial production of
farm crops, such as vegetables, fruit trees, cotton, grain and other crops, and their storage on the area,
as well as the raising thereon of "domesticated animals", defined as horses, cows, sheep, goats, rabbits
and fowl (i.e., chickens, pheasants, turkeys, ducks, geese and pigeons). The term "farm" includes the
operating of such an area for one or more of the above uses, including dairy farms, with the necessary
accessory uses for treating or storing the produce; provided, that the operation of any such accessory
use is secondary to that of the farm activities; and provided further, that the farm activities do not include
commercial feeding of offal to swine or other animals.
FENCE: A tangible barrier or obstruction of any material, or a line of obstacles interposed along a line
between two (2) portions of land above the surface of the ground on each side thereof, with the purpose,
intent, or having the effect of preventing passage or view across the fence line. This definition includes
hedges and walls when used for these purposes.
FILLING: The dumping or depositing of earthen material resulting in the raising of the grade at that
location.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 17/279
FLOOR AREA: The gross square footage of a building. When considering minimum off street parking
area, floor area may also include the open land needed for service to the public as customers, patrons,
clients or patients, including area occupied by fixtures and equipment used for display or sale of
merchandise.
FLYWAY BARRIER: A solid fence or hedge used in beekeeping, at least six feet (6') in height extending
ten feet (10') from the hive in each direction. It is used to force bees to fly at least six feet (6') above
ground over neighboring property lines.
FRONTAGE: All the property fronting on one side of the street between intersecting or intercepting
streets, or between a street and a right of way, waterway, end of dead end street, or political subdivision
boundary, measured along the street lines. An intercepting street shall determine only the boundary of
the frontage on the side of the street it intercepts.
GARAGE, CARPORT: See definition of Carport.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An accessory building designed or used for the storage of automobiles owned and
used by the occupants of the building to which it is accessory; provided, that on a lot occupied by a
multiple dwelling, the private garage may be designed and used for the storage of two (2) times as many
automobiles as there are dwelling units in the multiple dwelling. A garage shall be considered part of a
dwelling if the garage and dwelling have a roof or wall in common. A private garage may not be used for
storage of any truck which has a gross vehicle weight rating of more than twelve thousand (12,000)
pounds as specified in the vehicle's registration under the motor vehicle laws.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: A building or portion thereof, other than a private garage, designed or used for
servicing, repairing, equipping, hiring, selling or storing motor driven vehicles.
GARAGE SALE: A sale held by up to four (4) separate owners or occupants of property in a residential
zone held at one of the properties to sell used property which the owners or occupants formerly used at
their properties.
GENERAL PLAN: A document that a municipality adopts that sets forth general guidelines for proposed
future development of the land within the municipality, as set forth in Utah Code §§ 10-9-301 and 10-9-
302. "General plan" includes what is also commonly referred to as "master plan".
GRADE:
A. For buildings adjoining one street only, the elevation of the sidewalk at the center of that walk
adjoining the street.
B. For buildings adjoining more than one street, the average of the elevations of the sidewalk at the
center point of the building walls that adjoin the streets.
C. For buildings having no walk adjoining the street, the average level of the ground (finished
surface) adjacent to the exterior walls of the building. All walks approximately parallel to, and not
more than five feet (5') from, a property line are to be considered as adjoining a street.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 18/279
GRADE, FINISHED: Final elevation of the ground surface conforming to the approved grading plans.
GRADE, NATURAL: Elevation of the natural or undisturbed ground surface prior to any grading
operation. If "natural grade" can no longer be determined, then the grade elevation existing on March 17,
1999, as shown on the city's topographical maps of that date, shall be used in lieu thereof. If a parcel of
land is not shown on the March 17, 1999, topographical maps, "natural grade" shall be as shown on a
topographical map that has been both prepared after March 17, 1999 and that is acceptable to the city
engineer.
GRADING: The process of changing gradients of land by contouring, smoothing or otherwise shaping
land areas by excavating or filling, or a combination thereof.
GROUP DWELLINGS: A development containing more than two (2) dwellings on less than five (5)
acres.
GROUP HOME FOR THE DISABLED AND ADULT CARE: A dwelling shared by disabled and/or elderly
people as their primary residence and their resident staff, who live together as a single housekeeping
unit, sharing responsibilities, meals and recreation. The staff provides care for the residents. A group
home for the disabled and adult care does not include nursing homes, alcohol or other drug treatment
centers, community correction facilities, shelter care facilities or homes for the developmentally disabled
as regulated by Utah Code Annotated.
GRUBBING: The elimination of roots from the ground by digging or pulling.
GUEST: Any transient person who rents or occupies a room or structure for sleeping purposes.
GUEST HOUSE: Living or sleeping quarters within an accessory building for the sole use of occupants
of the premises, guests of such occupants or persons employed on the premises. Such quarters shall
not be rented and/or otherwise used for income producing purposes.
GUEST RANCH: A building or group of buildings containing two (2) or more guest rooms, other than a
boarding house, hotel or motel, and including outdoor recreational facilities such as, but not limited to,
horseback riding, swimming, tennis courts, shuffleboard courts, barbecue and picnic facilities, and dining
facilities intended for the use primarily by guests of the guest ranch, but not including bars and
restaurants which cater primarily to other than guests of the guest ranch.
GUEST ROOM: A room designed for occupancy by one or more guests for sleeping purposes, but
having no cooking facilities.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any substance characterized as flammable solids, corrosive liquids,
radioactive materials, oxidizing materials, highly toxic materials, poisonous gases, reactive materials,
unstable materials, hypergolic materials and pyrophoric materials, and any substance or mixture of
substances which is an irritant, a strong sensitizer or which generates pressure through exposure to
heat, decomposition or other means.
HIVE: A structure designed to contain one colony of honeybees. A frame hive, box hive, box, barrel, log,
gum skep, or other artificial or natural receptacle which may be used to house bees.
HOME DAYCARE CENTER: A residential facility in which care for nonresidents is provided for periods
of less than twenty four (24) hours per day, for nine (9) or less people without a conditional use permit
and ten (10) to twelve (12) people with a conditional use permit.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 19/279
HOME OCCUPATION: An income producing use of residential property, which is incidental, secondary,
and accessory to the primary use of the dwelling for living purposes, and compatible to the residential
uses permitted by the zone within which the property lies; provided, that each of the conditions of
chapter 16 of this title are complied with.
HOSPITAL: A place for the treatment or care of human ailments, where overnight lodging for patients is
provided, other than nursing homes.
HOTEL: A building designed for or occupied as the temporary abiding place for individuals who, for
compensation are lodged, with or without meals, and in which no provision is made for cooking in any
individual room or suite.
HOUSEHOLD PETS: Animals which are usually kept as pets and which are kept in residential areas
solely for personal pleasure. "Household pets" shall not include swine of any kind, cattle, goats, fowl or
dangerous animals. Animals which are usually kept as household pets are domesticated animals if they
are kept for profit and bred on the premises. "Household pets" include:
A. Dogs;
B. Cats;
C. Fish;
D. Gerbils;
E. Guinea pigs;
F. Hamsters;
G. Rabbits;
H. Nonpoisonous lizards less than one foot (1') long, no more than two (2);
I. Nonpoisonous snakes less than three feet (3') long;
J. Turtles less than one foot (1') long;
K. Parrots;
L. Parakeets; and
M. Budgerigars.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 20/279
INDIVIDUAL: Any private individual, tenant, lessee, owner or any commercial entity, including, but not
limited to, companies, partnerships, joint ventures or corporations.
JUNK: Any old or scrap metal, rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, wood, glass, plastic and/or rubber
debris, waste or junked, dismantled or wrecked automobiles, or parts thereof, iron, steel, and other old
or scrap ferrous or nonferrous material.
JUNKYARD: The use of any lot, portion of a lot, or tract of land for the storage, keeping or abandonment
of junk, including scrap metals or other scrap material, or for the dismantling, demolition or abandonment
of automobiles or other vehicles, or machinery or parts thereof; provided, that this definition shall not be
deemed to include such uses which are clearly accessory and incidental to any agricultural use
permitted in the zone.
KENNEL: Any premises where not more than four (4) adult dogs are either bred and/or boarded, and/or
trained. Having one litter up to three (3) months of age is not considered to be a kennel.
KITCHEN: Any room in a building or dwelling unit which is used or intended to be used for cooking or
the preparation of food.
LANDSCAPING: An area which has been improved through the harmonious combination and
introduction of trees, shrubs and ground cover, and which may contain natural topping material such as
boulders, rock, stone, granite or other approved material. The area shall be void of any asphaltic or
concrete pavement, except for pedestrian walkways.
LAUNDRY, SELF-SERVICE: A building within which clothes washing and drying machines, and clothes
dry cleaning machines, either coin operated or attendant operated, are provided on a rental basis for use
by individuals for doing their own laundry or dry cleaning. "Self-service laundry" does not include outdoor
drying facilities.
LOADING AND UNLOADING SPACES: A permanently maintained space on the same lot as the
principal building accessible to a street or alley and not less than ten feet (10') in width, twenty feet (20')
in length, and fourteen feet (14') in height.
LOT: A single piece of property located in a recorded subdivision, having frontage on a publicly
dedicated and accepted street or an approved private road, which is described and denoted as such.
LOT AREA: The total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot.
LOT, CORNER: A lot which has an interior angle of one hundred thirty five degrees (135°) or less at the
intersection of two (2) street lines. A lot abutting upon a curved street is considered a corner lot if the
tangents to the curve at the points of intersection of the side lot lines intersect at an interior angle of one
hundred thirty five degrees (135°) or less.
LOT COVERAGE: That portion of a lot or parcel which is occupied by any building or other covered
structure, excepting paved areas, walks and swimming pools.
LOT DEPTH: The horizontal length of a straight line connecting the midpoints of the front and rear lot
lines.
LOT, FLAG: A flag or L-shaped lot consisting of a staff portion contiguous with the flag portion, the staff
portion having frontage less than the required frontage on a dedicated street.
LOT FRONTAGE: The horizontal length of the front lot line.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 21/279
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot, other than a corner lot or flag lot, meeting the requirements of the zone in which
it is located.
LOT LINE: The line bounding a lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT: In the case of an interior lot, a line separating the lot from the street right of way. In
the case of a corner lot, the shorter of the two (2) lot lines adjoining a street right of way.
LOT LINE, REAR: A lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line. In the case of a lot
having five (5) or more sides, the rear lot line shall be any lot line, other than the front lot line, which
intersects a side or a street side lot line at any angle less than one hundred thirty five degrees (135°).
LOT LINE, SIDE: Those lot lines other than a street side lot line that connects the front and rear lot lines.
LOT LINE, STREET SIDE: That lot line or lines on a corner lot adjoining a street right of way that
connects the front lot line to a rear lot line.
LOT, THROUGH: A lot which has street right of way frontage on two (2) nonadjoining sides.
LOT WIDTH: For rectangular lots, lots having side lot lines not parallel, and lots on the outside of the
curve of a street, the distance between side lot lines measured at the required minimum front yard line
on a line parallel to the street or street chord; and for lots on the inside of the curve of a street, the
distance between side lot lines measured thirty feet (30') behind the required minimum front yard line on
a line parallel to the street or street chord.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, intended for residential use, transportable in one or more
sections, including the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained in such
structure. The term "manufactured home" includes mobile homes, modular homes and travel trailers.
MANUFACTURING: The fabricating or assembling of materials into finished or partially finished products
by hand or by the use of machinery.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT: Any establishment where any person, firm, association or corporation
engages in or carries on or permits to be engaged in or carried on any "massage activities", defined as
any method of pressure on, friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating,
or stimulating of external soft parts of the body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical
apparatus or electrical apparatus or appliance.
MASTER PLANNED VILLAGE: A development containing over two hundred (200) contiguous acres
contained in a master subdivision plat by a single developer.
MASTER PLANNED VILLAGE SALES AND INFORMATION CENTER: A facility that is used as an
information/sales facility by the developer of a master planned village. All master planned village sales
and information centers shall comply with the version of the international building code in effect at the
time the center is constructed.
MINIMUM VEGETATIVE AREA: The minimum area required to be vegetated to comply with the open
space requirements of the city.
MOBILE HOME: A manufactured home:
A. Which is built prior to June 15, 1976, in compliance with the federal home construction and safety
act of 1974; and
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 22/279
B. Which:
1. In traveling mode is more than eight feet (8') wide and forty feet (40') in length; or
2. When erected, containing four hundred (400) or more square feet of living space; and
3. Which is not a modular home.
MODULAR HOME: A manufactured home:
A. Which is built on or after June 15, 1976, in compliance with the federal home construction and
safety standards act of 1974; and
B. Which:
1. In traveling mode is more than eight feet (8') wide and forty feet (40') in length; or
2. When erected contains four hundred (400) or more square feet of living space; and
C. Which has been attached to a permanent foundation in accordance with the applicable building
codes adopted by the city, including meeting all applicable standards for:
1. Vertical loads;
2. Uplift;
3. Lateral forces; and
4. Frost protection; and
D. Where all of the home's appendages, including carports, garages, storage buildings, additions
and alterations comply with the applicable building codes.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 23/279
MOTEL: Any building or group of buildings containing sleeping rooms, with or without fixed cooking
facilities, designed for temporary use by automobile tourists or transients, with a garage attached or
parking space conveniently located to each unit, including auto courts, tourist courts or motor lodges.
MULTI-TENANT COMPLEX OR SHOPPING CENTER UNDER TEN ACRES: A building or a complex of
buildings on a single site, less than ten (10) acres, having uniform management and at least six (6)
potential tenants with exclusive access and independent operation.
NATIVE VEGETATION: Indigenous plant materials of northern Utah.
NATURAL: The condition of the land, vegetation, rocks and other surface features which have not been
physically disturbed, changed or added to by any action of man or machine.
NATURAL WATERWAYS: Those areas, varying in width along streams, creeks, gullies, springs or
washes which are natural drainage channels as determined by the city engineer, and within which areas
no buildings shall be constructed.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE: A building or structure which was lawfully erected prior to the
adoption of this title, but which, under this title, does not conform with the standards of coverage, yard
spaces, height of structures or distance between structures prescribed in the regulations for the district
in which the structure is located.
NONCONFORMING USE: A use of land that legally existed before its current zoning designation that
has been maintained continuously since the time the zoning regulation governing the land changed, and
because of subsequent zoning changes, does not conform with the zoning regulations that now govern
the land.
NUISANCE: Any thing, condition or use of property which endangers life or health, gives offense to the
senses and/or obstructs the reasonable and comfortable use of other property.
NURSING HOME: A structure operated as a lodging house in which nursing, dietary and other personal
services are rendered to convalescents, not including persons suffering from contagious diseases, and
in which surgery is not performed and primary treatment, such as customarily is given in hospitals and
sanitariums, is not provided. A convalescent home shall be deemed a nursing home.
NURSERY: A commercial operation for the growth and sale of plants, storage of equipment for
landscaping and the wholesale or retail sale of commercial gardening supplies.
OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES: A site or a portion of a site devoted to the off
street parking of motor vehicles, including parking spaces, aisles and access driveways.
OFFICE: A room or rooms and accessory facilities for the managing or conducting of a business.
OFFICIAL MAP: The transportation element map of the North Ogden City general plan.
OPEN MEETING: A meeting held in conformance to the Utah open meeting law as contained in Utah
Code §§ 10-3-601 through 10-3-610, and Utah Code §§ 52-4-1 through 52-4-10.
OPEN SPACE: Any parcel or area of land or water unimproved or improved only with landscaping,
boweries, picnic tables, playground equipment, or other improvements typically associated with outdoor
recreation and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for the public or private use and enjoyment
of owners and occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such open space.
OUTDOOR STORAGE: The location of any goods, wares, merchandise, commodities, junk, debris, or
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 24/279
any other item outside of a completely enclosed building for a continuous period longer than twenty four
(24) hours.
PARK: A public or private parcel of land developed and used for passive or active recreation.
PARKING AREA: An area designed and constructed and used exclusively for the parking, storage and
maneuvering of vehicles. Such area shall conform to CCNO 11-17.
PARKING SPACE: A permanently surfaced area, enclosed or unenclosed, of not less than nine feet (9')
in width, and nineteen feet (19') in depth, together with a driveway connecting the parking space with a
street and permitting ingress and egress of the automobile. (See CCNO 11-17.)
PERSON, DISABLED: A person who: a) has a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits
one or more of such person's major life's activities so that such person is incapable of living
independently; b) has a record of having such an impairment; or c) is regarded as having such an
impairment. However, "disabled" does not include current, illegal use of or addiction to a controlled
substance as defined in the controlled substance act (21 USC 802).
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL UNIT DEVELOPMENT: A development on a site of five (5) or more acres in
size, containing one-family, two-family, three-family, four-family or multiple-family dwellings, or
combination thereof, together with such recreational areas, open spaces and other facilities as permitted
in the zone in which the development is located and meeting the requirements of CCNO 11-11.
PLANNING COMMISSION: The North Ogden City planning commission.
PORTABLE STORAGE CONTAINER: A movable weather resistant container fabricated for the purpose
of transporting freight or goods on a truck, railroad or ship, including cargo containers, shipping
containers, storage units or other portable structures, which are placed on private property and used for
storage of items, including, but not limited to, clothing, equipment, goods, household or office fixtures or
furnishings, materials and merchandise. This definition shall not include accessory buildings or a
building approved for construction. Portable storage containers shall be subject to the regulations set
forth in CCNO 11-10-31.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 25/279
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE: Any building, structure, or portion thereof, used or intended to be used as an
office for a lawyer, architect, engineer, surveyor, planner, optometrist, accountant, doctor, dentist or
other similar professions.
PUBLIC BUILDING: Facilities for conducting public business occupied by various public agencies. This
includes all federal, state, county, and city offices and buildings.
PUBLIC HEARING: A hearing held to receive public testimony or comment as required by law or at the
direction of the planning commission or city council.
PUBLIC UTILITY: Private or public facilities for distribution of various services, such as water, power,
gas, communication, etc., to the public.
RECREATION FACILITIES: Includes buildings, structures or areas built or developed for purposes of
entertaining, exercising or observing various activities participated in either actively or passively by
individuals or organized groups.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicular unit other than a mobile home, primarily designed as a
temporary dwelling for travel, recreational or vacation use, which is either self-propelled or pulled by
another vehicle. "Recreational vehicle" includes a travel trailer, a camping trailer, a motor home, a fifth
wheel trailer, a van, a boat, a boat trailer, a snowmobile, a snowmobile trailer, a jet ski or wave runner,
and a trailer carrying a jet ski or wave runner, a horse trailer and a utility trailer.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK: Facilities for the temporary storage, parking and maneuvering of
recreational vehicles (motor homes, travel trailers, campers, etc.), which are occupied as temporary
residences within the park, with adequate roads and stall sites, including sanitary and water facilities.
Site locations are typically provided on a day to day basis. Does not constitute a mobile home park and
may not allow mobile homes.
RESIDENTIAL FACILITY FOR DISABLED PERSONS: A single-family or multiple-family dwelling unit
that meets the following requirements:
A. A residential facility for disabled persons shall be consistent with existing zoning of the desired
location.
B. A residential facility for disabled persons shall:
1. Be occupied on a twenty four (24) hour basis by eight (8) or fewer disabled persons in a
family type arrangement under the supervision of a house family or manager;
2. Conform to all applicable standards and requirements of the department of human
services; and
3. Be operated under a license or certificate from the department of human services.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 26/279
RESTAURANT: An establishment whose primary business is the serving of food to the public.
RETAIL STORE: A commercial business for selling goods, services, wares or merchandise directly to
the consumers, but not including a professional office.
RETAINING WALL: A wall or terraced combination of walls used to retain earth, but not directly
supporting the wall of a building, including stacked rock and imbedded boulder walls.
REVEGETATION: The replacement of indigenous living plant materials on areas where the natural
vegetation has been removed. The areas include disturbed natural areas and manmade cut and fill
slopes.
RIGHT OF WAY (ROW): Includes any public or private right of way and includes any area required for
public use pursuant to any official plan.
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA: A device incorporating a reflective surface that is solid, open mesh, or bar
configured and is in the shape of a shallow dish, cone, horn or cornucopia. Such device shall be used to
transmit and/or receive radio or electromagnetic waves between terrestrially and/or orbitally based
stations. This definition is meant to include, but not be limited to, what are commonly referred to as
satellite earth stations, television reception only (TVROs), and satellite microwave antennas.
SCHOOL, ELEMENTARY, JUNIOR HIGH, HIGH SCHOOL, COLLEGE OR JUNIOR COLLEGE:
Institutions conducting regular academic instruction at kindergarten, elementary, secondary, and post
high school levels. Such institutions shall offer general academic instructions equivalent to the standards
prescribed by the state board of education or the state board of regents.
SCHOOL, PRESCHOOL: A school or the use of a site or a portion of a site for an organized program
devoted to the education of five (5) or more children younger than elementary school age, other than
those residents on the site.
SCHOOL, PRIVATE OR PAROCHIAL: An institution conducting regular academic instruction at
kindergarten, elementary, secondary, and post secondary levels operated by a nongovernmental
organization.
SCHOOL, TRADE: Facilities offering instruction in the technical, commercial or trade skills, such as real
estate schools, business colleges, electronic schools, automotive and aircraft technicians, technical
certification schools and similar commercial establishments.
SERVICE STATION: An occupancy engaged in the retail sales of gasoline, oil, tires, batteries, and new
accessories and which provides for the servicing of motor vehicles and operations incidental thereto,
including, automobile washing, waxing and polishing, tire changing and repairing, but not including
recapping. May also include battery service, radiator cleaning, flushing and repair, installation of minor
accessories, lubrication of motor vehicles, rental of utility trailers, testing, adjustment and replacement of
motor parts and accessories.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: A business defined in CCNO 11-20-2.
SHOPPING CENTER: A group of retail stores or professional offices planned and designed for the site
on which it is built, functioning as a unit, with off street parking, landscaped areas and pedestrian malls
or plazas provided on the property as an integral part of the unit.
SIGN: See CCNO 11-22-2.
STABLE, COMMERCIAL: A structure including, but not limited to, a corral or paddock for the keeping of
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 27/279
horses for remuneration, hire or sale.
STABLE, PRIVATE: A detached accessory building for the keeping of horses owned by the occupants of
the premises, and not kept for remuneration, hire or sale.
STABLE, PUBLIC: A stable other than a private or commercial stable.
STORE: An establishment where manufactured goods, food stuffs or ready made items can be
purchased.
STORY: The space within a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the
ceiling next above.
STORY, HALF: A story with at least two (2) of its sides situated in a sloping roof, with the floor area of
which does not exceed two-thirds (?) of the floor immediately below it.
STREET: The entire area within a public right of way, established by:
A. Deed or conveyance;
B. Dedication to the public (and accepted by proper public authority) by the owners thereof;
C. Dedication to the public by continuous use as a public thoroughfare for a period of ten (10) years;
or
D. Dedication to the public by the federal city site act of 1867 or similar law, statute or ordinance,
which affords the principal means of access to abutting property.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 28/279
STREET, CUL-DE-SAC: A single dead end street terminating with a permanent turnaround bulb that
meets the North Ogden City public works standards.
STREET LINE: The boundary line between street right of way and abutting property.
STREET, PRIVATE: A tract of land, dedicated to and accepted by a homeowners' or property owners'
association for maintenance, which provides the principal vehicular and pedestrian access to properties
within a planned residential unit development or condominium development. The city will not approve
private streets unless a homeowners' or property owners' association accepts responsibility for
maintenance of the street.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS: Any change in supporting members of a building or structure, such as
bearing walls, columns, beams or girders.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected which requires a fixed location on the ground, including
a building or mobile home, but not including a fence or wall used as a fence.
SUBDIVISION: Any land that is divided, resubdivided or proposed to be divided into two (2) or more lots,
parcels, sites, units, plots or other division of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, for offer,
sale, lease or development, either on the installment plan or upon any and all other plans, terms and
conditions. Subdivision includes: a) the division or development of land whether by deed, metes and
bounds description, devise and testacy, lease, map, plat or other recorded instrument; and b) divisions
of land for all residential and nonresidential uses, including land used or to be used for commercial,
agricultural and industrial purposes.
SWALE: A low flat depression to drain off excess water.
SWIMMING POOL: Any permanent structure, containing or intended to contain water eighteen inches
(18") or more in depth and/or eight feet (8') or more in width at any point.
TEMPORARY VEHICLE STORAGE FACILITY: Any land or building used for the temporary storage of
abandoned, wrecked or legally impounded automobiles, boats, recreational vehicles, or other vehicles
regardless of running condition. Such a facility is not a facility where dismantling of any vehicle, the
storage of any vehicle parts, the retailing or wholesaling of any vehicle or vehicle parts may take place.
TENANT: Primary occupant (i.e., owner, lessee or renter) who has the operation or temporary
possession of space in a commercial building, or rents or leases from a landlord.
TRAVEL TRAILER: Any trailer is a manufactured home which is not a mobile home or a modular home.
TREATMENT CENTER: Facilities providing lodging and meals, and primarily treatment, training or
education as a part of an alcoholism or drug addiction program.
USABLE OPEN SPACE: Open space which can be enjoyed by people outside of structures. This could
include landscaped plazas, grass and trees, fountains, sitting areas, etc., and is meant to provide an
open garden atmosphere. Usable open space does not include parking areas, vacant or undeveloped
lots or any other space which does not contribute to the quality of the environment or cannot be used for
recreation.
USE: The purpose for which a site or structure is arranged, designed, intended, constructed, moved,
erected, altered or enlarged, or for which either a site or structure is or may be occupied and maintained.
USE, ACCESSORY: A use which is incidental, related, appropriate and clearly subordinate to the main
use of the lot or building, and which does not alter the principal use of the lot or building.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 29/279
USE, CONDITIONAL: A use which is listed as a "conditional use" in any given zoning district. Such use
shall require a "conditional use permit" in order to be established within that zoning district, and shall be
subject to all conditions and requirements imposed by the planning commission in connection with the
conditional use permit.
USE, PERMITTED: A use which is listed as a "permitted use" in any given zoning district. Such use shall
be allowed to be established within that zoning district, without obtaining any additional permits or
licenses, subject to the specific requirements of this title.
USE, PROHIBITED: Any use not specifically permitted or permitted by a conditional use permit is
prohibited.
UTILITY SERVICES: Service to the public of water, sewer, gas, electricity, telephone and cable
television. The foregoing shall be deemed to include attendant facilities and appurtenances to the above
uses, including, without limitation, stations along pipelines, and substations along electric transmission
lines; but not including public utility treatment and generating plants or offices.
VARIANCE: See CCNO 11-4.
WALL: Any device forming a physical barrier which is so constructed that fifty percent (50%) or more of
the vertical surface is closed preventing the passage of light, air and vision through said surface.
WAREHOUSE: A building or buildings used for the storage of goods.
WHOLESALE: The sale of goods or materials for the purpose of resale.
YARD: A space on a lot, other than a court, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, by
buildings, structures, semipermanently parked trailers or other vehicles, except as otherwise provided
herein.
YARD, FRONT: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a building, between the front line of
the main building and the front lot line, and extending across the full width of the lot.
YARD, REAR CORNER: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a building, between the rear
line of the main building and the rear lot line, and extending from the side property line abutting an
interior lot to the corner side yard.
YARD, REAR INTERIOR: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a building, between the rear
line of the main building and the rear lot line, and extending the full width of the lot. The depth of the rear
yard is the minimum distance between the nearest part of the rear lot line and the nearest part of the
rear line of the main building.
YARD, REQUIRED: The minimum open space as specified by the regulations of this title for front, rear,
side and street side, as distinguished from any yard area in excess of the minimum required. See
definition of Building Area.
YARD, SIDE CORNER: An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a building, between the side
line of the building facing the street, exclusive of steps, and the side lot line abutting a street and
extending from the front lot line to the rear lot line. The width of the side yard shall be the minimum
distance between the nearest part of the side lot line abutting the street and the nearest part of the side
line of the building facing the street.
YARD, SIDE INTERIOR: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a building, between the side
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 30/279
line of the building, exclusive of steps, and the side lot line abutting an interior lot and extending from the
front yard to the rear yard. The width of the side yard shall be the minimum distance between the
nearest part of the side lot line and the nearest part of the side line of the building.
ZONE: A district classification established by this title, which limits or permits various and specific uses.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR: The official responsible for enforcement of the zoning ordinance. The
zoning administrator shall be the building inspector; provided, that the city council may appoint another
zoning administrator by resolution.
ZONING CLEARANCE: The approval by the building official of a plan that is in conformance with this
title.
ZONING DISTRICT: A zone area in which the same zoning regulations apply throughout the district.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-05 on 4/9/2002
Amended by Ord. 2003-19 on 9/23/2003
Amended by Ord. 2010-05 on 5/11/2010
Amended by Ord. 2010-16 on 11/30/2010
Amended by Ord. 2011-07 on 5/10/2011
Amended by Ord. 2011-11 on 5/24/2011
Amended by Ord. 2014-06 on 4/22/2014
Amended by Ord. 2014-25 on 10/14/2014
Amended by Ord. 2015-02 on 3/31/2015
Amended by Ord. 2016-03 Lot, Flag Definition on 1/20/2016
Adopted by Ord. 2016-34 on 8/23/2016
Adopted by Ord. 2016-35 on 10/12/2016
11-3: PLANNING COMMISSION
11-3-1: MEMBERSHIP
11-3-2: REMOVAL
11-3-3: COMPENSATION
11-3-4: POWERS AND DUTIES
11-3-5: MEETINGS
11-3-1: MEMBERSHIP
A. Specified; Appointment: The planning commission shall consist of seven (7) members.
Appointments to the planning commission shall be made by the mayor, with the advice and
consent of the city council. The expiration date of the terms of the planning commission shall be
as follows: Two (2) terms shall expire on January 31, 2001; one shall expire on January 31,
2002; two (2) shall expire on January 31, 2003; one shall expire on January 31, 2004; and one
shall expire on January 31, 2005. The term of office for appointed members shall be for five (5)
years and shall be staggered so as to have no more than two (2) members' terms expire each
year. Each member of the planning commission shall serve until the expiration of the term for
which (s)he is appointed, and until a successor is appointed and qualified. Any vacancy occurring
during the term of any member of the planning commission by reason of death, resignation,
removal or disqualification shall be promptly filled by appointment by the mayor, with the advice
and consent of the city council for the unexpired portion of the term.
B. Chairperson; Vice Chairperson: The planning commission shall appoint one of the seven (7)
members to serve as chairperson. The planning commission shall select one of its members to
serve as vice chairperson in the absence of the chairperson. Both appointments shall be for a
period of one year.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 31/279
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-05 on 4/9/2002
11-3-2: REMOVAL
The mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council, may remove any member of the planning
commission with or without cause.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-05 on 4/9/2002
11-3-3: COMPENSATION
Members of the planning commission shall serve and be compensated $28.00 per meeting including all
separate work sessions and field trips which do not coincide with another regularly scheduled meeting.
They may be reimbursed for reasonable expenses including travel and education as approved in the
annual budget. This adjusted pay is effective as of January 1, 2016. This regulation is intentionally
retroactive.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-05 on 4/9/2002
Repealed & Reenacted by Ord. 2016-41 on 12/20/2016
11-3-4: POWERS AND DUTIES
A. Generally: The planning commission shall:
1. Prepare and recommend a general plan and amendments to the general plan to the city
council;
2. Recommend zoning ordinances and maps, and amendments to zoning ordinances and
maps, to the city council;
3. Administer provisions of this title where specifically provided for in this title by the city
council;
4. Recommend subdivision regulations and amendments to those regulations to the city
council;
5. Recommend to the city council the approval or denial of subdivision applications;
6. Advise the city council on matters as directed by the city council;
7. Hear or decide any matters that the city council designates, including the approval or
denial of conditional use permits and the conditions to be attached to such permits;
8. Exercise any other powers:
a. That are necessary to enable it to perform its functions; and
b. Delegated to it by the city council.
B. Maintain Record Of Proceedings: The planning commission shall keep a public record of its
proceedings, which shall be filed with the city recorder.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 32/279
C. Adopt Rules And Regulations: The planning commission shall adopt rules and regulations
subject to the provisions of the laws of the state and the planning and zoning ordinances of the
city, and may amend such rules from time to time. All such rules and all amendments thereof
shall be reduced to writing and shall be filed with the city recorder. These rules and regulations
shall be public documents and will be available for inspection by the public during the city's
regular business hours and during all meetings of the planning commission.
D. Cooperation With County: The planning commission, in the exercise of its powers and the
discharge of its duties, shall seek to cooperate with the planning commission of the county and
neighboring cities to develop a coordinated plan for the future development of the city and the
county.
E. Entrance Upon Land: The planning commission or its authorized agents may enter upon any
land at reasonable times to make examinations and surveys.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-05 on 4/9/2002
11-3-5: MEETINGS
The planning commission a.k.a. the land use authority shall conduct regular meeting(s), which shall be
held as follows: The first and third Wednesday of every month shall be a regular meeting unless
otherwise noted and the second Wednesday of every month only as needed at:
North Ogden Municipal Building
505 East 2600 North
North Ogden City Council Chambers
North Ogden, Utah
The planning commission a.k.a. the land use authority meeting(s) shall begin promptly at six thirty
o'clock (6:30) P.M. during Mountain Standard Time and at six thirty o'clock (6:30) P.M. during Mountain
Daylight Time, but if the meeting date is a legal holiday then the meeting may be canceled.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2014-01 on 1/14/2014
11-4: VARIANCES AND ADMINISTRATIVE INTERPRETATIONS
11-4-1: CONSIDERATION OF VARIANCES AND CERTAIN ZONING APPEALS BY ADMINISTRATIVE
LAW JUDGE AND/OR ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICER
11-4-2: RULES AND PROCEDURES
11-4-3: APPEALS
11-4-4: VARIANCES
11-4-5: DISTRICT COURT REVIEW
11-4-6: FILING FEE
11-4-7: TIME LIMITATION ON VARIANCE
11-4-1: CONSIDERATION OF VARIANCES AND CERTAIN ZONING APPEALS BY
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE AND/OR ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICER
The administrative law judge and/or administrative hearing officer (ALJ and/or AHO) appointed pursuant
to CCNO 1-8 is granted the following powers and duties:
A. To decide petitioners for variances as defined in state law and this title;
B. To hear appeals from zoning decisions by city staff hinging on the interpretation of state or local
zoning laws; and
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 33/279
C. To decide requests for special exceptions as provided according to the terms of this title.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2013-10 on 8/27/2013
11-4-2: RULES AND PROCEDURES
A. Hearings held pursuant to this chapter shall conform to the rules and procedures established
under CCNO 1-8.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2013-10 on 8/27/2013
11-4-3: APPEALS
A. Authority: The applicant, or any other person or entity adversely affected by a decision of a city
official administering or interpreting this title, except the denial or granting of a conditional use
permit, may appeal that decision applying this title by alleging that there is error in any order,
requirement, decision or determination made.
B. Time Limit: Any person or entity adversely affected by decisions administering or interpreting this
title shall appeal the decision within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision. The ALJ and/or
AHO shall have no jurisdiction to hear untimely appeals.
C. City Appeal: Any officer, department, board or bureau of the city affected by the grant or refusal
of a building permit or by any other decisions of the administrative officer in the administration or
interpretation of this title may appeal any decision to the ALJ and/or AHO within the time limits
set forth in subsection B of this section.
D. Burden Of Proof: The person or entity making the appeal has the burden of proving that an error
has been made.
E. Decisions Applicable: Only decisions applying this title may be appealed to the ALJ and/or AHO.
F. Waiver Or Modification Not Applicable: The ALJ and/or AHO has no authority to waive or modify
the terms or requirements of this title.
G. Decision Of ALJ And/Or AHO; Power And Authority: The ALJ and/or AHO may, in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order,
requirement, decision or determination from which the appeal is taken.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2013-10 on 8/27/2013
11-4-4: VARIANCES
A. Application: Any person or entity desiring a waiver or modification of the requirements of this title
as applied to a parcel of property that that person owns, leases or in which that person holds
some other beneficial interest may apply to the ALJ and/or AHO for a variance from the terms of
the zoning ordinance.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 34/279
B. Findings Required: The ALJ and/or AHO may grant a variance only if all five (5) of the following
findings are made:
1. Literal enforcement of this title would cause an unreasonable hardship for the applicant
that is not necessary to carry out the general purpose of this title; and
2. There are special circumstances attached to the property that do not generally apply to
other properties in the same district; and
3. Granting the variance is essential to the enjoyment of a substantial property right
possessed by other property in the same district; and
4. The variance will not substantially affect the general plan and will not be contrary to the
public interest; and
5. The spirit of this title is observed and substantial justice is done.
C. Conditions Of Unreasonable Hardship: In determining whether or not enforcement of this title
would cause unreasonable hardship under subsection B of this section, the ALJ and/or AHO may
not find an unreasonable hardship unless the alleged hardship:
1. Is located on or associated with the property for which the variance is sought; and
2. Comes from circumstances peculiar to the property, not from conditions that are general
to the neighborhood.
D. Unreasonable Hardship Determination: In determining whether or not enforcement of the zoning
ordinance would cause unreasonable hardship under subsection B of this section, the ALJ and/or
AHO may not find an unreasonable hardship if the hardship is self-imposed or economic.
E. Special Circumstances: In determining whether or not there are special circumstances attached
to the property under subsection B of this section, the ALJ and/or AHO may find that special
circumstances exist only if the special circumstances:
1. Relate to the hardship complained of; and
2. Deprive the property of privileges granted to other properties in the same district.
F. Burden Of Proof: The applicant shall bear the burden of proving that all of the conditions
justifying the variance have been met.
G. Run With Land: Variances run with the land.
H. Use Variances Prohibited: The ALJ and/or AHO and any other body may not grant use
variances.
I. Additional Requirements Imposed: In granting a variance, the ALJ and/or AHO may impose
additional requirements on the applicant that will:
1. Mitigate any harmful effects of the variance; or
2. Serve the purpose of the standard or requirement that is waived or modified.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2013-10 on 8/27/2013
11-4-5: DISTRICT COURT REVIEW
A. Authority: The city or any person or entity adversely affected by any decision of the ALJ and/or
AHO may petition the district court for a review of the decision.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 35/279
B. Allegations Permitted: In the petition, the plaintiff may only allege that the ALJ and/or AHO
decision was arbitrary, capricious or illegal.
C. Time Limit: The petition is barred unless it is filed within thirty (30) days after the ALJ and/or AHO
decision is final.
D. Constitutional Takings: If a person believes that a constitutional taking issue has taken place as a
result of the ALJ's and/or AHO's action, a request may be filed with the private property
ombudsman in accordance with Utah Code § 10-9-708(3)(b).
E. Records Transmitted: The ALJ and/or AHO shall transmit to the reviewing court the record of its
proceedings, including its minutes, findings, orders and, if available, a true and correct transcript
of its proceedings.
F. Preparation Costs: The party appealing the order of the ALJ and/or AHO to the district court shall
pay all costs associated with preparation of the record of the ALJ and/or AHO proceeding,
including the cost of preparing any transcript of the recording of the hearing.
G. Tape Recordings: If the proceeding was tape recorded, a transcript of that tape recording is a
true and correct transcript for purposes of subsection E of this section.
H. Review Limited To Record: If there is a record, the district court review is limited to the record
provided by the ALJ and/or AHO.
I. Outside Evidence: The court may not accept or consider any evidence outside the ALJ and/or
AHO record unless the evidence was offered to the ALJ and/or AHO and the court determines
that it was improperly excluded by the ALJ and/or AHO.
J. No Record: If there is no record, the court may call witnesses and take evidence.
K. Affirm Decision Of ALJ And/Or AHO: The court shall affirm the decision of the ALJ and/or AHO if
the decision is supported by substantial evidence in the record.
L. Stay Of Decision: The filing of the petition does not stay the decision of the ALJ and/or AHO.
Before filing a petition under this section or a request for mediation or arbitration of a
constitutional taking issue under Utah Code § 63-34-13, the aggrieved party may petition the ALJ
and/or AHO to stay its decision. Upon receipt of a petition to stay, the ALJ and/or AHO may order
its decision stayed pending district court review if the ALJ and/or AHO finds it to be in the best
interest of the city. After the petition is filed under this section or a request for mediation or
arbitration of a constitutional taking issue is filed under Utah Code § 63-34-13, the petitioner may
seek an injunction staying the ALJ and/or AHO decision.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2013-10 on 8/27/2013
11-4-6: FILING FEE
Upon the filing of any appeal or application to the ALJ and/or AHO, the appellant or applicant shall pay
to the city a fee which will be established by resolution. Said fee shall be deposited with the city
treasurer and credited to the general fund. No appeal or application shall be considered by the ALJ
and/or AHO unless and until the fee has been paid. The fee shall be nonrefundable.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2013-10 on 8/27/2013
11-4-7: TIME LIMITATION ON VARIANCE
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 36/279
In the event the ALJ and/or AHO does grant a variance in accordance with the provisions of this chapter,
alterations in accordance with the variance must be activated within six (6) months after the date the
variance is granted or the variance becomes null and void. The time limit of the variance may be
extended an additional six (6) months by the ALJ and/or AHO and then only if the petitioner shows
adequate cause to the ALJ and/or AHO that circumstances necessitate a time extension.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2013-10 on 8/27/2013
11-5: CONSTITUTIONAL TAKINGS PROCEDURES
11-5-1: POLICY CONSIDERATIONS
11-5-2: DEFINED
11-5-3: GUIDELINES ADVISORY
11-5-4: REVIEW OF DECISION
11-5-5: REVIEWING GUIDELINES
11-5-6: RESULTS OF REVIEW
11-5-1: POLICY CONSIDERATIONS
The city strongly favors, as a matter of policy, the careful consideration of matters involving constitutional
taking claims invoked by a desire to be fair to the owner of private property bringing the claim and in
view of the uncertainty and expense involved in defending lawsuits alleging such issues. At the same
time, the legitimate role of government in lawfully regulating the use of real property and the public's
right to require the dedication or exaction of property consistent with the constitution must be preserved.
Consistent with this policy, the city desires to establish procedures to govern the review of actions that
may involve the issue of constitutional taking. These procedures are intended to assist the city in its
consideration of decisions that may involve constitutional takings. This chapter is further intended and
shall be construed to objectively and fairly review claims by citizens seeking payment of just
compensation as a result of city action, yet preserve the ability of the city to lawfully regulate real
property and fulfill its other duties and functions.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-05 on 4/9/2002
11-5-2: DEFINED
A. "Constitutional taking" means action by the city involving the physical taking or exaction of private
real property that might require compensation to a private real property owner because of:
1. The fifth or fourteenth amendment to constitution of the United States;
2. Article 1, section 22, of the Utah constitution;
3. Any court ruling governing the physical taking or exaction of private real property by a
government entity.
B. Actions by the city involving the physical taking or exaction of private real property is not a
"constitutional taking" if the physical taking or exaction bears an essential nexus to a legitimate
governmental interest and is roughly proportionate and reasonably related, on an individualized
property basis, both in nature and extent, to the impact of the proposed development on the
legitimate government interest.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-05 on 4/9/2002
11-5-3: GUIDELINES ADVISORY
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 37/279
The guidelines adopted and decisions rendered pursuant to the provisions of this chapter are advisory,
and shall not be construed to expand or limit the scope of the city's liability for a constitutional taking.
The reviewing body or person shall not be required to make any determination under this chapter,
except pursuant to CCNO 11-5-4.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-05 on 4/9/2002
11-5-4: REVIEW OF DECISION
Any owner of private real property who claims there has been a constitutional taking of his private real
property may request a review of a final decision of any city officer, employee, board, commission or
council. The following are specific procedures established for such a review:
A. Determination Received: The person requesting review must have obtained a final and
authoritative determination, internally, within the city, relative to the decision from which they are
requesting review.
B. Time Limit To File: Within thirty (30) days from the date of the final determination that gave rise to
the concern that a constitutional taking has occurred, the person requesting the review shall file
in writing, in the office of the city recorder, a request for review of that decision. A copy shall also
be filed with the city attorney.
C. Review Scheduled: The city council or an individual or body designated by the city council, shall
immediately set a time to review the decision that gave rise to the constitutional taking claim.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 38/279
D. Information Required: In addition to the written request for review, the applicant must submit,
prior to the date of review, the following:
1. Name of applicant requesting review;
2. Name and business address of current owner of the property, form of ownership, whether
sole proprietorship, for profit or not for profit corporation, partnership, joint venture or
other, and if owned by a corporation, partnership, or joint venture, name and address of
all principal shareholders or partners;
3. A detailed description of the grounds for the claim that there has been a constitutional
taking;
4. A detailed description of the property taken;
5. Evidence and documentation as to the value of the property taken, including the date and
cost as of the date the property was acquired. This should include any evidence of the
value of that same property before and after the alleged constitutional taking, the name of
the party from whom purchased, including the relationship, if any, between the person
requesting a review and the party from whom the property was acquired;
6. Nature of the protectable interest claimed to be affected (such as, but not limited to, fee
simple ownership, leasehold interest);
7. Terms (including sale price) of any previous purchase or sale of a full or partial interest in
the property in the three (3) years prior to the date of application;
8. All appraisals of the property prepared for any purpose, including financing, offering for
sale, or ad valorem taxation, within the three (3) years prior to the date of application;
9. The assessed value of and ad valorem taxes on the property for the previous three (3)
years;
10. All information concerning current mortgages or other loans secured by the property,
including name of the mortgagee or lender, current interest rate, remaining loan balance
and term of the loan and other significant provisions, including, but not limited to, right of
purchasers to assume the loan;
11. All listings of the property for sale or rent, price asked and offers received, if any, within
the previous three (3) years;
12. All studies commissioned by the petitioner or agents of the petitioner within the previous
three (3) years concerning feasibility of development or utilization of the property;
13. For income producing property, itemized income and expense statements from the
property for the previous three (3) years;
14. Information from a title policy or other source showing all recorded liens or encumbrances
affecting the property; and
15. Additional information reasonably necessary, in the opinion of the city council, to arrive at
a conclusion concerning whether there has been a constitutional taking.
E. Certification Of Completeness: An application shall not be deemed to be "complete" or
"submitted" until the city certifies to the applicant that all materials and information required
above have been received by the city. The city shall promptly notify the applicant of any
incomplete application.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 39/279
F. Review: The city council, or an individual or body designated by the city council, shall review all
the evidence related to and submitted by the applicant, city or any other interested party, and
may hold a hearing to aid in the review.
G. Final Decision: A final decision on the review shall be rendered within fourteen (14) days from the
date the complete application for review has been received by the city. The final decision shall be
given in writing to the applicant and the officer, employee, board, commission or council that
rendered the final determination that gave rise to the request for review.
H. Failure To Decide: If the city council fails to hear and decide the review within fourteen (14) days,
the decision appealed from shall be presumed to be affirmed.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-05 on 4/9/2002
11-5-5: REVIEWING GUIDELINES
If the aggrieved private property owner chooses to follow this procedure, the city council, or an individual
or body designated by the city council, shall review the facts and information presented by the applicant
to determine whether or not the action by the city constitutes a "constitutional taking", as defined in this
chapter. In doing so, they shall consider:
A. Whether the physical taking or exaction of the private real property bears an essential nexus to a
legitimate governmental interest;
B. Whether a legitimate governmental interest exists for the action taken by the city;
C. Whether the property and exaction taken is roughly proportionate and reasonably related, on an
individual property basis, both in nature and extent, to the impact caused by the activities that are
the subject of the decision being reviewed.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-05 on 4/9/2002
11-5-6: RESULTS OF REVIEW
After completing the review, the reviewing person/body shall make a determination regarding the above
issues and where determined to be necessary and appropriate, shall make a recommendation to the
officer, employee, board, commission or council that made the decision that gave rise to the request for
review.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-05 on 4/9/2002
11-6: ZONES AND DISTRICTS
11-6-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES
11-6-2: BOUNDARIES OF ZONES
11-6-3: RULES APPLICABLE WHERE BOUNDARIES UNCERTAIN
11-6-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES
For the purpose of this title, the city is divided into the following zones in which land uses shall be limited
as specified in this title. Classification will be determined on the basis of location, topographic features,
and other reasonable considerations to guide the orderly physical growth, establishment of
neighborhoods, compatibility and overall stability of the city:
Suburban residential zone RE-20
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 40/279
Single-family residential zones R-1-8, R-1-8(A), R-1-8(AG), R-1-10, R-1-12.5
Legacy planned residential unit development zone (PRUD)
Roylance Farms Phase II planned residential unit development zone (PRUD)
Quail Ponds planned residential unit development zone (PRUD)
Residential zone R-2
Multi-family residential zone R-3
Multi-family residential zone R-4
Cold Creek Village planned residential unit development (PRUD)
Residential city center zone RCC
Master Planned Community Zone MPC
Commercial zones C-1, C-2
Planned commercial zones CP-1, CP-2
Planned manufacturing zone MP-1
Hillside protection zones HP-1, HP-2, HP-3
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-05 on 4/9/2002
Amended by Ord. 2005-09 on 10/4/2005
Amended by Ord. 2005-15 on 12/13/2005
Amended by Ord. 2015-16 on 7/28/2015
11-6-2: BOUNDARIES OF ZONES
A. Zoning Map Adopted: The boundaries of each of the zones are established as described herein,
as shown on the map entitled "zoning map of North Ogden City", or as hereinafter amended, a
copy of which is attached to the ordinance codified in this title, and all boundaries, notations and
other data shown on said maps are made by this reference as much a part of this title as if fully
described and detailed herein. Said maps shall be filed in the custody of the city recorder and
may be examined by the public subject to any reasonable regulations established by the city
recorder.
B. Amendments: All amendments to the official zoning map shall only be located on property lines,
except in commercial zoning districts.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-05 on 4/9/2002
11-6-3: RULES APPLICABLE WHERE BOUNDARIES UNCERTAIN
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundary of any zone, the following rules shall apply:
A. Wherever the zone boundary is indicated as being approximately upon the centerline of a street,
alley or block, such centerline shall be construed to be the boundary of such zone.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 41/279
B. Whenever such boundary line is indicated as being approximately on the property line, the
property line shall be construed to be the boundary of the zone.
C. Where such zone boundary lines cannot be determined by the above rules, their location may be
found by the use of the scale appearing upon the map.
D. Where the application of the above rules does not clarify the zone boundary location, the
administrative law judge shall interpret the map.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2011-11 on 5/24/2011
11-7: RESIDENTIAL ZONES
ARTICLE A: SUBURBAN RESIDENTIAL ZONE RE-20
ARTICLE B: SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONES R-1-8, R-1-8(A), R-1-8(AG), R-1-10, R-1-12.5
ARTICLE C: RESIDENTIAL ZONE R-1-5
ARTICLE D: ROYLANCE FARMS PHASE II PLANNED RESIDENTIAL UNIT DEVELOPMENT ZONE
(PRUD)
ARTICLE E: QUAIL PONDS PLANNED RESIDENTIAL UNIT DEVELOPMENT ZONE (PRUD)
ARTICLE F: RESIDENTIAL ZONE R-2
ARTICLE G: MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE R-3
ARTICLE H: MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE R-4
ARTICLE I: COLD CREEK VILLAGE PLANNED RESIDENTIAL UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PRUD)
ARTICLE J: RESIDENTIAL CITY CENTER ZONE RCC
ARTICLE K: MASTER PLANNED COMMUNITY ZONE MPC
ARTICLE A: SUBURBAN RESIDENTIAL ZONE RE-20
11-7A-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT
11-7A-2: PERMITTED USES
11-7A-3: CONDITIONAL USES
11-7A-4: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
11-7A-5: SIGN REGULATIONS
11-7A-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT
The purpose of the RE-20 zone classification is to provide a regulated area for single-family residential
and agricultural uses.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-05 on 4/9/2002
11-7A-2: PERMITTED USES
The following uses shall be permitted:
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any permitted use.Accessory dwelling unit as a
second residence.Agriculture. The use of agricultural equipment that produces excessive noise and/or
light may only be used during normal hours of work allowed in the city or by variance to the hours
allowed by the city council.Agriculture experiment stations.Agriculture, nurseries and greenhouses,
provided the sale of goods is limited to materials produced on the premises, and there is no retail shop
operated in connection therewith.Animals or fowl:
A. On one acre or more, up to five (5) acres, animals and fowl will be limited to four (4) horses,
cows, sheep or goats, or combination thereof, per acre. Rabbits up to five (5) per acre shall be
permitted.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 42/279
B. On more than five (5) acres, an aggregate of a total of two (2) units of group A, B or C, or a
combination thereof, may be kept per acre.
Group A: Four (4) horses or cows, or combination thereof.
Group B: Four (4) sheep or goats.
Group C: Five (5) rabbits, or thirty (30) chickens, or thirty (30) pheasants, or ten (10) turkeys, or
ten (10) ducks, or five (5) geese, or ten (10) pigeons.
C. The keeping of swine of any species, including pigs, is not permitted within the corporate limits of
the city except two (2) pigs may be kept on a temporary basis on a one acre or larger parcel from
April 1 to August 31 as a 4-H project.
1. Shade must be provided.
2. Clean, fresh water and fresh feed must be readily available.
3. Adequate inside space must be provided:
a. Up to forty (40) pounds: Three (3) square feet per pig.
b. Forty (40) to one hundred (100) pounds: Four (4) square feet per pig.
c. One hundred (100) to one hundred fifty (150) pounds: Six (6) square feet per pig.
d. One hundred fifty (150) pounds to market: Eight (8) square feet per pig.
4. Adequate outside space must be provided:
a. Five (5) square feet under roof per pig minimum and six (6) to fifteen (15) square
feet per pig outside.
Accessory Dwelling Unit
Barn upon a lot with a minimum of one (1) acre. Barns are not subject to the accessory building design
standards found in CCNO 11-10-31.
Cemeteries.
Church, synagogue or similar permanent building used for religious worship, except temporary revival
tents or buildings.
Daycare.
Educational institution, which has a curricula substantially the same as customarily offered in the public
school system for kindergarten through twelfth grade.Golf course, except miniature golf course.
Home occupations.
Household pets.
Libraries.
Planned residential unit development in accordance with CCNO 11-11.
Public buildings, public park recreation grounds and associated buildings.
Preschools.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 43/279
Residential facilities for the disabled.Single-family dwelling.Temporary building for use incidental to
construction work. Such building shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction
work.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-05 on 4/9/2002
Amended by Ord. 2010-16 on 11/30/2010
Amended by Ord. 2012-11 on 5/23/2012
Amended by Ord. 2014-03 on 3/11/2014
Adopted by Ord. 2016-34 on 8/23/2016
Amended by Ord. 2018-29 on 11/27/2018
Amended by Ord. 2018-30 on 11/27/2018
Amended by Ord. 2019-02 on 2/12/2019
11-7A-3: CONDITIONAL USES
The following uses shall be permitted only when authorized by a conditional use permit as provided in
CCNO 11-14:
Dog kennels, not to exceed four (4) adult dogs. Kennel location must comply with requirements of
CCNO 11-10-7. Annual review of conditions will be required prior to renewal of dog license each year.
Model homes, master planned village sales and information centers, and temporary sales trailers in
accordance with CCNO 11-10-20.
Private equestrian training stable facilities on a minimum of five (5) acres of land and at a density of not
more than ten (10) horses per acre.Private park, playground or recreation area, but not including a
privately owned commercial amusement business.Public utility substation in accordance with the
standards stated in CCNO 11-10-15.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-05 on 4/9/2002
Amended by Ord. 2018-29 on 11/27/2018
Amended by Ord. 2018-30 on 11/27/2018
11-7A-4: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 44/279
A. Minimum lot area: (sq. feet)
1. Interior or corner lot 20,000
2. Interior or corner lot with animals 43,560 square feet/ 1 acre
B. Minimum lot width measured in feet 30 feet back from
the front property line
1. Interior lot 100
2. Corner lot 120
C. Minimum yard setback (in feet)
1. Front 30
2. Side
a. Dwelling 10
b. Total combination width not less than 24
c. Exception: Where there is an attached garage
with the required number of parking spaces, both
side yards may be
10
3. Side facing street on corner lot 20
4. Rear
a. Main building 30
5. Keeping of Animals or Fowl
a. Animals or fowl may be maintained on a lot,
there shall be provided a minimum spacing of 20
b. From a dwelling on an adjacent lot 75
c. Any barn, stable, coop or pen shall not be
constructed closer to a street than: 100
1. Exception: An enclosure or pasture may be
adjacent to a public street if larger than: 1 Acre
2. Exception: All utility easements must be
maintained in an open state
D. Total lot coverage
1. Minimum vegetative area 50%
E. Building height (in feet)
1. Minimum 10
2. Maximum 35
F. Accessory building regulations (in feet) (see also CCNO
11-10-31)
1. Accessory building height 15
a. Accessory building setback
(1) Accessory building
(A) Interior lot 3
(B) Corner lot (non-street side) 3
(C) Corner lot (street side) 20
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 45/279
(2) Large accessory building
(A) Interior lot
Height Maximum in Feet Setback Minimum in Feet
15 3
16 6
17 9
18 12
19 - 25 15
(B) Corner lot (non-street side) 20
(C) Corner lot (street side) 20
2. There shall be provided a minimum spacing
between main and accessory; and between accessory
buildings of at least
6
3. Rear yard coverage by accessory building shall not
exceed the following: 25%
a. On lots less than an acre the minimum rear yard
area calculation is based upon the minimum lot
width x the rear yard setback and not the actual
rear yard dimensions
4. Building size
a. Maximum size on lots or parcels less than one
acre or adjacent to any R-1 zone
One half the square footage of the main
building main floor or 2,000 square feet
whichever is less
b. On lots adjacent to any R-1 zone, the accessory
building width or length cannot exceed 40% of the
total length of the side lot lines or 40% of the rear
lot line when those lot lines are within 50 feet of
the accessory building.
5. Building Separation: Large Accessory Building to be
60 feet from neighboring dwelling on any adjoining
parcel
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-05 on 4/9/2002
Amended by Ord. 2011-07 on 5/10/2011
Amended by Ord. 2018-09 on 6/19/2018
Amended by Ord. 2019-03 on 2/26/2019
11-7A-5: SIGN REGULATIONS
The height, size and location of signs shall be in accordance with the regulations set forth in CCNO 11-
22.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-05 on 4/9/2002
ARTICLE B: SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONES R-1-8, R-1-8(A), R-1-8(AG), R-1-10, R-1-12.5
11-7B-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT
11-7B-2: PERMITTED USES
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 46/279
11-7B-3: CONDITIONAL USES
11-7B-4: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
11-7B-5: SIGN REGULATIONS
11-7B-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT
The purpose of the R-1-12.5, R-1-10, R-1-8, R-1-8(A) and R-1-8(AG) zoning classification is to provide
regulated areas for single-family residential use at three (3) different low density levels.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
11-7B-2: PERMITTED USES
The following uses shall be permitted:
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any permitted use.
Accessory Dwelling Unit
Agriculture. The use of agricultural equipment that produces excessive noise and/or light may only be
used during normal hours of work allowed in the city or by variance to the hours allowed by the city
council.
Animals or fowl, in the R-1-8(AG) zoning districts only:
A. On one acre or more, up to five (5) acres, animals and fowl will be limited to four (4) horses,
cows, sheep or goats, or combination thereof per acre.
B. On more than five (5) acres, an aggregate of a total of two (2) units of group A, B or C, or a
combination thereof, may be kept per acre.
Group A: Four (4) horses or cows, or combination thereof.
Group B: Four (4) sheep or goats.
Group C: Five (5) rabbits, or thirty (30) chickens, or thirty (30) pheasants, or ten (10) turkeys, or
ten (10) ducks, or five (5) geese, or ten (10) pigeons.
C. The keeping of swine of any species, including pigs, is not permitted within the corporate limits of
the city.
Church, synagogue or similar permanent building used for regular religious worship.
Daycare.
Home occupations.
Household pets.
Libraries.
Planned residential developments which comply with the provisions of CCNO 11-11.
Preschools.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 47/279
Public buildings, public parks, recreation grounds and associated buildings.Public schools, private
educational institutions having a curriculum similar to that ordinarily given in public schools, private
parks, playgrounds and recreation areas that meet the requirements of CCNO 11-10-14 and the
following requirements:
A. All facilities, equipment and buildings shall be set back not less than twenty feet (20') from any
property line and shall be located not less than fifty feet (50') from any main building on an
adjoining lot and from any area upon which any such main building may be constructed upon
said adjoining lot if no such main building is in existence;
B. The minimum size of the lot or site used for such recreational or other purposes shall be one
acre;
C. Any lights used to illuminate the premises shall be installed in such a manner that the source of
light shall not be visible from outside the premises, and the source of light shall be suitably
screened to avoid annoying illumination of lands outside said premises.
Residential facilities for the disabled in accordance with CCNO 11-10-28.
Single-family dwellings.
Temporary buildings, structures and uses incidental to construction work. Such building shall be
removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
Amended by Ord. 2010-16 on 11/30/2010
Amended by Ord. 2018-29 on 11/27/2018
Amended by Ord. 2018-30 on 11/27/2018
Amended by Ord. 2019-02 on 2/12/2019
11-7B-3: CONDITIONAL USES
The following uses are permitted only when authorized by a conditional use permit as provided in CCNO
11-14:
Model homes, master planned village sales and information centers, and temporary sales trailers in
accordance with CCNO 11-10-20.
Private park, playground or recreation area not open to the general public and to which no admission
charge is made and not including privately owned commercial amusement business.
Public utility substation in accordance with the standards stated in CCNO 11-10-15.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
Amended by Ord. 2018-29 on 11/27/2018
Amended by Ord. 2018-30 on 11/27/2018
11-7B-4: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 48/279
R-1-12.5 R-1-10 R-1-8 R-1-8(A) R-1-8(AG)
A. Minimum lot area (sq. ft.):
1. Interior lots 12,500 10,000 8,000 8,000 8,000
2. Corner lots 13,500 11,000 9,000 8,000 9,000
B. Minimum lot width measured in feet 30 feet back
from the front property line 100 90 80 80 80
C. Minimum yard setback (in feet):
1. Front 30 30 30 30 30
2. Side:
a. Dwelling-interior 10 10 8 4 8
b. Total combination width not less than 24 24 18 12 18
c. Exception: Where there is an attached
garage with the required number of parking
spaces, both side yards may be
10 10 8 4 8
1. Side facing street on corner lot 20 20 20 20 20
2. Rear:
a. Main building 20 20 20 20 20
D. Total lot coverage:
1. Under roof 35% 35% 35% 35% 35%
2. Minimum vegetative area 50% 50% 50% 50% 50%
E. Building height (in feet):
1. Minimum 10 10 10 10 10
2. Maximum 35 35 35 35 35
F. Accessory building regulations (in feet) (see also
CCNO 11-10-31)
1. Accessory building height
a. Accessory building setback
(1) Accessory/Large building
(A) Interior lot
Height Maximum in Feet Setback Minimum in Feet
10 3
11 6
12 9
13-18 12
19-25 15
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 49/279
(B) Corner lot (non-street side) 3
(C) Corner lot (street side) 20
2. There shall be provided a minimum spacing
between main and accessory buildings of at least 6
3. Rear yard coverage by accessory building
shall not exceed the following 25%
4. Building Separation: Large accessory building
to be 60 feet from any neighboring dwelling on
any adjoining parcel
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2011-07 on 5/10/2011
Amended by Ord. 2016-25 on 8/16/2016
Amended by Ord. 2018-19 on 8/28/2018
Amended by Ord. 2019-03 on 2/26/2019
11-7B-5: SIGN REGULATIONS
The height, size and location of signs shall be in accordance with the regulations set forth in CCNO 11-
22.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
ARTICLE C: RESIDENTIAL ZONE R-1-5
11-7C-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT
11-7C-2: ZONE CHANGE CRITERIA
11-7C-3: PERMITTED USES
11-7C-4: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
11-7C-5: SIGN REGULATIONS
11-7C-6: STREET STANDARDS
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 2018-07 on 4/3/2018
11-7C-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT
The purpose of the Residential Zone R-1-5 zone classification is to provide a regulated area for singlefamily
residential uses in a small lot configuration to provide flexibility for infill, redevelopment, and other
similar well planned projects in a planned residential unit development. Property designated in the
General Plan as low density may be rezoned to this designation with a maximum density of six (6)
dwelling units per acre as averaged across the developable acreage. Property designated in the General
Plan as medium density may be rezoned to this designation with a maximum density of ten (10) dwelling
units per acre as averaged across the developable acreage.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
Amended by Ord. 2018-07 on 4/3/2018
11-7C-2: ZONE CHANGE CRITERIA
The R-1-5 zone will only be applied in the designated low density areas of the General Plan with a
planned residential development which complies with the provisions of CCNO 11-11. A concept plan is
required to be submitted with the zone change application. The R-1-5 zone will only be applied in the
designated medium density areas of the General Plan with a neighborhood group dwelling development
which complies with the provisions of CCNO 11-12 or a planned residential development which complies
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 50/279
with the provisions of CCNO 11-11. A concept plan is required to be submitted with the zone change
application.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 2018-07 on 4/3/2018
11-7C-3: PERMITTED USES
The following uses shall be permitted:
Agriculture. The use of agricultural equipment that produces excessive noise and/or light may only be used during
normal hours of work allowed in the city or by variance to the hours allowed by the city council.
Church, synagogue or similar permanent building used for regular religious worship.
Neighborhood group dwelling developments which comply with the provisions of CCNO 11-12 are allowed in the
medium density designation on the General Plan map.
Home occupations.
Household pets.
Parking lots accessory to uses permitted in this zone.
Planned residential developments which comply with the provisions of CCNO 11-11.
Public buildings, public or private parks, recreation grounds and associated buildings.
Residential facility for disabled persons in accordance with CCNO 11-10-28 of this title.
Single-family dwellings.
Temporary buildings, structures and uses incidental to construction work. Such building shall be removed upon
completion or abandonment of the construction work.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
Amended by Ord. 2010-16 on 11/30/2010
Amended by Ord. 2018-07 on 4/3/2018
11-7C-4: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 51/279
A. Minimum zone area
5 Acres in low density General Plan areas
1 Acre in medium density General Plan areas
B. General Plan Low Density Areas Maximum Density 6 dwelling units per acre
C. General Plan Medium Density Areas Maximum Density 10 dwelling units per acre
D. Minimum lot area (square feet)
1. Interior with single-family dwelling
4,600 square feet low density area
4,000 square feet medium density area
2. Corner with single-family dwelling
5,600 square feet low density area
5,000 square feet medium density area
E. Minimum lot width (in feet) 55
F. Minimum yard setback (in feet)
1. Front
20
2. Interior side 7
3. Street side
20
Exception: The street side setback can be reduced to 10
feet along all streets which do not extend beyond the
depth of the lot for which the exemption shall apply
4. All utility easements must be maintained
in an open state
5. Rear
20
Exception: The rear yard setback for the main
use/dwelling may be reduced by 10% provided that the
combined distance between the neighboring structures
remains 40 feet or greater
G. Building height (in feet)
1. Minimum one story 10
2. Maximum one and a half story 27
H. Maximum lot coverage:
1. Under roof 45%
2. Minimum vegetative area 40%
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
Amended by Ord. 2015-03 on 3/31/2015
Amended by Ord. 2016-24 on 8/9/2016
Amended by Ord. 2017-16 on 6/27/2017
Amended by Ord. 2018-07 on 4/3/2018
11-7C-5: SIGN REGULATIONS
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 52/279
The height, size and locations of signs shall be in accordance with the regulations set forth in CCNO 11-
22.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
11-7C-6: STREET STANDARDS
The Standard Street cross section must be installed unless a low impact development design reduces
the storm water runoff to 85% or less of the standard right of way width runoff as approved by the city
engineer. If low impact development design is employed the following modifications are allowed:
A. Street right of way width: 48 feet or more
B. Street pavement width: 32 feet or more
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 2018-07 on 4/3/2018
ARTICLE D: ROYLANCE FARMS PHASE II PLANNED RESIDENTIAL UNIT DEVELOPMENT ZONE
(PRUD)
11-7D-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT
11-7D-2: PERMITTED USES
11-7D-3: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
11-7D-4: SIGN REGULATIONS
11-7D-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT
The purpose of the Roylance Farms phase II planned residential unit development zone classification is
to provide a regulated area for single-family residential uses in a planned residential unit development.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
11-7D-2: PERMITTED USES
The following uses shall be permitted:
Agriculture. The use of agricultural equipment that produces excessive noise and/or light may only be
used during normal hours of work allowed in the city or by variance to the hours allowed by the city
council.
Church, synagogue or similar permanent building used for regular religious worship.
Home daycare center for up to nine (9) people. The operator must be a resident of the home. The home
daycare area shall not be greater than three hundred (300) square feet or twenty five percent (25%) of
the house, whichever is less. The daycare area of the home shall conform to the standards of IBC table
1003.2.2.2.
Home occupations.
Home preschool for up to nine (9) children and no session shall be longer than four (4) hours. The
operator shall be a resident of the home. The preschool area shall not be greater than three hundred
(300) square feet or twenty five percent (25%) of the house, whichever is less. The daycare area of the
home shall conform to the standards of IBC table 1003.2.2.2.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 53/279
Household pets.
Residential facility for disabled persons in accordance with CCNO 11-10-28.
Single-family dwellings.
Temporary buildings, structures and uses incidental to construction work. Such building shall be
removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
Amended by Ord. 2010-16 on 11/30/2010
11-7D-3: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
1. Minimum lot area (square feet) 2,232
2. Minimum lot width 37
3. Minimum yard setback (in feet)
a. Front 20
b. Interior side 7
c. Street side 20
d. Rear 20
e. All utility easements must
be maintained in an open state
5.Building height (in feet)
a. Minimum one story 10
b. Maximum one story 20
6. Minimum green area coverage
percentage 50%
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
Amended by Ord. 2016-24 on 8/9/2016
11-7D-4: SIGN REGULATIONS
The height, size and location of signs shall be in accordance with the regulations set forth in CCNO 11-
22.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
ARTICLE E: QUAIL PONDS PLANNED RESIDENTIAL UNIT DEVELOPMENT ZONE (PRUD)
11-7E-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT
11-7E-2: PERMITTED USES
11-7E-3: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
11-7E-4: SIGN REGULATIONS
11-7E-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 54/279
The purpose of the Quail Ponds planned residential unit development zone classification is to provide a
regulated area for single-family residential uses in a planned residential unit development.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
11-7E-2: PERMITTED USES
The following uses shall be permitted:
Agriculture. The use of agricultural equipment that produces excessive noise and/or light may only be
used during normal hours of work allowed in the city or by variance to the hours allowed by the city
council.
Church, synagogue or similar permanent building used for regular religious worship.
Home occupations.
Household pets.
Planned residential developments which comply with the provisions of CCNO 11-11.
Public buildings, public or private parks, recreation grounds, and associated buildings.
Residential facility for disabled persons in accordance with CCNO 11-10-28.
Single-family dwellings.
Temporary buildings, structures and uses incidental to construction work. Such building shall be
removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
Amended by Ord. 2010-16 on 11/30/2010
11-7E-3: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 55/279
1. Minimum lot area (square feet) 4,290
2. Minimum lot width (square feet) 55
3. Minimum yard setback (in feet)
a. Front 18
b. Interior side 5
c. Street side 15
d. All utility easements must
be maintained in an open state
e. Rear
On the lots numbered on the July 31, 1998 preliminary
plat: 10 feet on lots 1 through 28 and lots 46 through 63;
20 feet on lots 29 through 45
4. Building height (in feet)
a. Minimum one story 10
b. Maximum one and a half story 27
5. Maximum lot coverage percentage:
a. Under roof 45%
b. Minimum vegetative area 40%
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2003-18 on 9/9/2003
Amended by Ord. 2016-24 on 8/9/2016
11-7E-4: SIGN REGULATIONS
The height, size and location of permitted signs shall be in accordance with the regulations set forth in
CCNO 11-22.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
ARTICLE F: RESIDENTIAL ZONE R-2
11-7F-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT
11-7F-2: PERMITTED USES
11-7F-3: CONDITIONAL USES
11-7F-4: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
11-7F-5: SIGN REGULATIONS
11-7F-6: SITE PLAN APPROVAL
11-7F-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT
The purpose of the R-2 zone is to provide residential areas that will accommodate the development of
dwelling types from single-family through two-family dwelling units, with their associated necessary
public services and activities. It is also to provide an orderly transition from less intensive, lower density
uses to more intensive, higher density uses.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 56/279
11-7F-2: PERMITTED USES
The following uses shall be permitted:
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any permitted use.
Agriculture. The use of agricultural equipment that produces excessive noise and/or light may only be
used during normal hours of work allowed in the city or by variance to the hours allowed by the city
council.Church, synagogue or similar permanent building used for regular religious worship.
Daycare.
Educational institutions, public schools, private parks, playgrounds, and recreational areas that meet the
requirements of CCNO 11-10-14.
Golf course, except miniature golf.
Home occupations.
Household pets.
Planned residential developments which comply with the provisions of CCNO 11-11.Public buildings,
public parks, recreation grounds and associated buildings.
Preschools.
Residential facility for disabled persons in accordance with CCNO 11-10-28.
Single-family dwellings.
Temporary buildings, structures and uses incidental to construction work. Such building shall be
removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work.Two-family dwellings and twin
homes.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
Amended by Ord. 2010-16 on 11/30/2010
Amended by Ord. 2018-29 on 11/27/2018
Amended by Ord. 2018-30 on 11/27/2018
11-7F-3: CONDITIONAL USES
The following uses shall be permitted only when authorized by a conditional use permit as provided in
CCNO 11-14:
Cemeteries with customary incidental buildings.
Model homes, master planned village sales and information centers, and temporary sales trailers in
accordance with CCNO 11-10-20.
Private park, playground or recreation area, but not including privately owned commercial amusement
business.Public utility substation in accordance with the standards stated in CCNO 11-10-15.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
Amended by Ord. 2018-29 on 11/27/2018
Amended by Ord. 2018-30 on 11/27/2018
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 57/279
11-7F-4: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
A. Minimum lot area:
1. Interior with single-family dwelling: Eight thousand (8,000) square feet.
2. Interior with two-family dwelling or other main building: Twelve thousand (12,000) square
feet.
3. Corner with single-family dwelling: Nine thousand (9,000) square feet.
4. Corner with two-family dwelling or main building with other than dwelling: Twelve
thousand (12,000) square feet.
5. Twin homes: Twelve thousand (12,000) square feet.
B. Minimum lot widths:
1. For a single-family dwelling at a distance thirty feet (30') back from the front property line:
Eighty feet (80').
2. For a two-family dwelling at a distance thirty feet (30') back from the front property line:
Ninety feet (90').
C. Minimum yard setback:
1. Front: Thirty feet (30').
2. Side:
a. Dwelling: Eight feet (8').
i. Exception: The total of the two (2) side yards shall not be less than
eighteen feet (18').
ii. Exception: On interior lots where there is an attached garage with the
required number of parking spaces, each side yard may be eight feet (8').
b. Other main buildings (each side): Twenty feet (20').
c. Twin home: Eighteen feet (18').
3. Side facing street on corner lot: Twenty feet (20').
4. All utility easements must be maintained in an open state, unless written permission is
secured from all utility companies to place a structure over the easements.
5. Rear:
a. Main building: Twenty feet (20').
b. There shall be provided a minimum spacing between main and accessory
buildings of at least six feet (6').
6. Building height:
a. Minimum: Ten feet (10').
b. Maximum: Thirty five feet (35').
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 58/279
D. Accessory buildings:
1. Minimum setback requirements:
a. Three feet (3') from the property line.
b. Large accessory building, fifteen feet (15').
c. Six feet (6') from the main dwelling.
2. Building height:
a. Maximum: Fifteen feet (15') if set back three feet (3') from property line.
i. Exception: Twenty five feet (25') if set back twenty feet (20') from the
property line and sixty feet (60') from a neighboring dwelling.
ii. Exception: On parcels larger than one acre location proposed closer than
fifteen feet (15') may be allowed by conditional use permit.
3. No accessory building or group of accessory buildings shall cover more of the rear yard
than twenty five percent (25%).
4. No building or group of buildings with the accessory buildings shall cover more of the total
lot area than thirty five percent (35%).
E. Minimum vegetative open space lot: Fifty percent (50%).
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
Amended by Ord. 2011-07 on 5/10/2011
11-7F-5: SIGN REGULATIONS
The height, size and location of signs shall be in accordance with the regulations set forth in CCNO 11-
22.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
11-7F-6: SITE PLAN APPROVAL
For any permitted or conditional uses other than single-family dwellings and agricultural uses, a site plan
shall be required in accordance with CCNO 11-10-27.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
ARTICLE G: MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE R-3
11-7G-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT
11-7G-2: PERMITTED USES
11-7G-3: CONDITIONAL USES
11-7G-4: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
11-7G-5: SIGN REGULATIONS
11-7G-6: SITE PLAN APPROVAL
11-7G-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 59/279
The purpose of the R-3 zone is to provide higher density residential areas with associated necessary
public services and activities. It is also to provide an orderly transition from less intensive, lower density
uses to more intensive, higher density uses.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
11-7G-2: PERMITTED USES
The following uses shall be permitted:
Agriculture. The use of agricultural equipment that produces excessive noise and/or light may only be
used during normal hours of work allowed in the city or by variance to the hours allowed by the city
council.
Church, synagogue or similar permanent building used for regular religious worship.
Daycare.
Golf course, except miniature golf.
Home occupations.
Household pets.
Public buildings, public libraries, public museums (nonprofit), public schools, public educational
institutions having a curriculum similar to that ordinarily given in public schools; private parks,
playgrounds and public recreation grounds, and associated buildings.
Preschools.
Residential facility for disabled persons in accordance with CCNO 11-10-28.Single-family dwellings.
Temporary buildings, structures and uses incidental to construction work. Such building shall be
removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work.
Two-family dwellings and twin homes.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
Amended by Ord. 2010-16 on 11/30/2010
Amended by Ord. 2018-29 on 11/27/2018
Amended by Ord. 2018-30 on 11/27/2018
11-7G-3: CONDITIONAL USES
The following uses shall be permitted only when authorized by a conditional use permit as provided in
CCNO 11-14:
Group dwellings with not more than four (4) dwelling units per building on sites less than five (5) acres,
in accordance with CCNO 11-12.
Model homes, master planned village sales and information centers, and temporary sales trailers in
accordance with CCNO 11-10-20.
PRUD dwellings with not more than four (4) dwelling units per building on sites less than five (5) acres,
in accordance with CCNO 11-11.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 60/279
Public utility substation in accordance with standards stated in CCNO 11-10-15.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
Amended by Ord. 2018-29 on 11/27/2018
Amended by Ord. 2018-30 on 11/27/2018
11-7G-4: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
A. Specified: Site development standards for all uses, other than multi-family developments
containing three (3) or more units, shall follow the standards specified in CCNO 11-11 or CCNO
11-12.
B. Minimum Lot Area:
1. Interior with single-family dwelling: Eight thousand (8,000) square feet.
2. Corner with single-family dwelling: Nine thousand (9,000) square feet.
3. Interior and corner - multi-family dwelling: Twelve thousand (12,000) square feet.
4. Interior - nonresidential building: Eight thousand five hundred (8,500) square feet.
5. Corner - nonresidential building: Nine thousand five hundred (9,500) square feet.
C. Minimum Lot Widths: Minimum lot widths at a distance thirty feet (30') back from front lot line,
eighty feet (80').
D. Minimum Yard Setback:
1. Front: Thirty feet (30').
2. Side:
a. Single-family dwelling: Eight feet (8').
i. Exception: The total of the two
ii. side yards shall be not less than seventeen feet (17').
b. Other main buildings (each side): Twenty feet (20').
c. All utility easements must be maintained in an open state.
3. Side facing street on corner lot: Twenty feet (20').
4. Rear:
a. Main building: Twenty feet (20').
E. Building Height:
1. Minimum: Ten feet (10').
2. Maximum: Thirty five feet (35').
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 61/279
F. Accessory Buildings:
1. No accessory building or group of accessory buildings shall cover more of the rear yard
than twenty five percent (25%).
2. No building or group of buildings with the accessory buildings shall cover more of the total
lot area than fifty percent (50%).
3. Minimum setback requirements:
a. Three feet (3') from the property line.
b. Large accessory building, fifteen feet (15').
c. Six feet (6') from the main dwelling.
4. Building height:
a. Maximum: Fifteen feet (15') if set back three feet (3') from property line.
i. Exception: Twenty five feet (25') if set back twenty feet (20') from the
property line and sixty feet (60') from a neighboring dwelling.
ii. Exception: On parcels larger than one acre location proposed closer than
fifteen feet (15') may be allowed by conditional use permit.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2011-07 on 5/10/2011
11-7G-5: SIGN REGULATIONS
The height, size and location of signs shall be in accordance with the regulations set forth in CCNO 11-
22.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
11-7G-6: SITE PLAN APPROVAL
For any permitted or conditional uses other than single-family dwellings and two-family dwellings, a site
plan shall be required in accordance with CCNO 11-10-27.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
ARTICLE H: MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE R-4
11-7H-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT
11-7H-2: PERMITTED USES
11-7H-3: CONDITIONAL USES
11-7H-4: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
11-7H-5: SIGN REGULATIONS
11-7H-6: SITE PLAN APPROVAL
11-7H-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT
The purpose of the R-4 zone is to provide higher density residential areas with associated necessary
public services and activities. It is also to provide an orderly transition from less intensive, lower density
uses to more intensive, higher density uses.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 62/279
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
11-7H-2: PERMITTED USES
The following uses shall be permitted:
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any permitted use.
Agriculture. The use of agricultural equipment that produces excessive noise and/or light may only be
used during normal hours of work allowed in the city or by variance to the hours allowed by the city
council.
Church, synagogue or similar permanent building used for regular religious worship.
Daycare.
Golf course, except miniature golf.
Home occupations.
Household pets.
Office.
Preschools.
Professional office.
Public schools, private educational institutions having a curriculum similar to that ordinarily given in
public schools.
Residential facility for disabled persons in accordance with CCNO 11-10-28.
Single-family dwelling.
Temporary building for use incidental to construction work. Such building shall be removed upon
completion or abandonment of the construction work.
Two-family dwelling and twin homes.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
Amended by Ord. 2007-15 on 8/28/2007
Amended by Ord. 2010-16 on 11/30/2010
Amended by Ord. 2018-29 on 11/27/2018
Amended by Ord. 2018-30 on 11/27/2018
11-7H-3: CONDITIONAL USES
The following uses shall be permitted only when authorized by a conditional use permit as provided in
CCNO 11-14:
Hospital, sanatorium and clinic.
Master planned village sales and information centers and temporary sales trailers in accordance with
CCNO 11-10-20.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 63/279
Multi-family dwellings on sites five (5) acres or greater, with less than eight (8) units per building in
accordance with CCNO 11-11.
Multi-family dwellings with less than eight (8) dwelling units per building on sites less than five (5) acres,
in accordance with CCNO 11-12.
Nursing home.
Private park, playground or recreation area, but not including privately owned commercial amusement
business.
Public utility substation in accordance with standards stated in CCNO 11-10-15.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
Amended by Ord. 2018-29 on 11/27/2018
Amended by Ord. 2018-30 on 11/27/2018
11-7H-4: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
A. Specified: All uses, other than multi-family developments containing three (3) or more units, shall
follow the standards specified in CCNO 11-11 or CCNO 11-12.
B. Minimum Lot Area:
1. Interior with single-family dwelling: Eight thousand (8,000) square feet.
2. Corner with single-family dwelling: Nine thousand (9,000) square feet.
3. Interior and corner - two-family dwelling: Twelve thousand (12,000) square feet.
4. Interior with nonresidential main building: Eight thousand five hundred (8,500) square
feet.
5. Corner with nonresidential main building: Nine thousand five hundred (9,500) square feet.
6. Nursing home, in addition to minimum, for each patient: Five hundred (500) square feet.
7. Hospital, fraternal, beneficial society or wedding chapel: Twenty thousand (20,000)
square feet.
C. Minimum Lot Width: Minimum lot widths at a distance thirty feet (30') back from front lot line,
eighty feet (80').
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 64/279
D. Minimum Yard Setback:
1. Front: Thirty feet (30').
2. Side:
a. Single-family dwelling: Eight feet (8').
i. Exception: The total of the two (2) side yards shall be not less than
seventeen feet (17').
ii. Exception: On interior lots where there is an attached garage with the
required number of parking spaces, each side yard may be eight feet (8').
b. Other main buildings (each side): Twenty feet (20').
c. All utility easement must be maintained in an open state.
d. Twin homes: Sixteen feet (16').
e. Side facing street on corner lot: Twenty feet (20').
3. Rear:
a. Main building: Twenty feet (20').
4. Building height:
a. Minimum: Ten feet (10').
b. Maximum: Thirty five feet (35').
E. Accessory Buildings:
1. Minimum setback requirements:
a. Three feet (3') from rear and side property lines.
b. Large accessory building, fifteen feet (15').
c. Six feet (6') from the main dwelling.
2. Building height:
a. Maximum: Fifteen feet (15') if set back three feet (3') from property line.
i. Exception: Twenty five feet (25') if set back twenty feet (20') from the
property line and sixty feet (60') from a neighboring dwelling.
ii. Exception: On parcels larger than one acre location proposed closer than
fifteen feet (15') may be allowed by conditional use permit.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2011-07 on 5/10/2011
11-7H-5: SIGN REGULATIONS
The height, size and location of signs shall be in accordance with the regulations set forth in CCNO 11-
22.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 65/279
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
11-7H-6: SITE PLAN APPROVAL
For any permitted or conditional uses other than single-family dwellings and agricultural uses, a site plan
shall be required in accordance with CCNO 11-10-27.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
ARTICLE I: COLD CREEK VILLAGE PLANNED RESIDENTIAL UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PRUD)
11-7I-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT
11-7I-2: PERMITTED USES
11-7I-3: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
11-7I-4: SIGN REGULATIONS
11-7I-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT
The purpose of the Cold Creek planned residential unit development zone classification is to provide a
regulated area for single-family and multi-family residential uses in a planned residential unit
development.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2005-09 on 10/4/2005
11-7I-2: PERMITTED USES
The following uses shall be permitted:
Agriculture. The use of agricultural equipment that produces excessive noise and/or light may only be
used during normal hours of work allowed in the city or by variance to the hours allowed by the city
council.
Home occupations.
Household pets.
Multi-family dwellings.
Single-family dwellings.
Temporary buildings incidental to construction work.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2005-09 on 10/4/2005
Amended by Ord. 2010-16 on 11/30/2010
11-7I-3: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 66/279
1. Minimum lot area (in square feet)
a. Interior with single-family dwelling 5,565
b. Corner with single-family dwelling 6,825
2. Minimum single-family lot width (in feet) 53
3. Minimum yard setback single-family (in feet)
a. Front 20
b. Interior side 15 feet between one-story buildings
20 feet between two-story buildings
c. Street side 20
d. Rear 20
4. Minimum yard setback multi-family (in feet)
a. Front 6
b. Interior side 15 feet between one-story buildings
20 feet between two-story buildings
c. Street side 20
d. Rear 20
5. Minimum street width 30 feet from back of curb to back of curb
6. Building height (in feet)
a. Minimum one story 10
b. Maximum two story 30
7. Minimum green area coverage 50%
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2005-09 on 10/4/2005
Amended by Ord. 2016-24 on 8/9/2016
11-7I-4: SIGN REGULATIONS
The height, size and locations of signs shall be in accordance with the regulations set forth in CCNO 11-
22.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2005-09 on 10/4/2005
ARTICLE J: RESIDENTIAL CITY CENTER ZONE RCC
11-7J-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT
11-7J-2: PERMITTED USES
11-7J-3: CONDITIONAL USES
11-7J-4: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
11-7J-5: SIGN REGULATIONS
11-7J-6: SITE PLAN APPROVAL
11-7J-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 67/279
The purpose of this zone is to provide a residential area that encourages the preservation of singlefamily
dwellings in the historical area of North Ogden City, but also will accommodate the development
of dwelling types from single-family through two-family dwelling units with their associated necessary
public services and activities, which fits the character of the existing city center. It is also to provide an
orderly transition from less intensive, lower density uses to more intensive, higher density uses.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2005-12 on 12/13/2005
11-7J-2: PERMITTED USES
A permanent church, synagogue, or similar building used for regular religious worship.
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any permitted use.
Accessory Dwelling Unit.
Agriculture. The use of agricultural equipment that produces excessive noise and/or light may only be
used during normal hours of work allowed in the city or by variance to the hours allowed by the city
council.
Daycare.
Educational institutions, public schools, private parks, playgrounds, and recreational areas that meet the
requirements of CCNO 11-10-14.
Golf course, except miniature golf.
Home occupations.
Household pets.
Planned residential developments which comply with the provisions of CCNO 11-11.
Preschools.
Public buildings, public park, recreation grounds, and associated buildings.
Residential facility for disabled persons in accordance with CCNO 11-10-28.
Single-family dwellings.
Temporary buildings, structures, and uses incidental to construction work. Such building shall be
removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2005-12 on 12/13/2005
Amended by Ord. 2010-16 on 11/30/2010
Amended by Ord. 2016-18 on 7/19/2016
Amended by Ord. 2017-10 on 5/16/2017
Amended by Ord. 2018-29 on 11/27/2018
Amended by Ord. 2018-30 on 11/27/2018
11-7J-3: CONDITIONAL USES
The following uses shall be permitted only when authorized by a conditional use permit as provided in
CCNO 11-14:
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 68/279
Cemeteries with customary incidental buildings.
Model homes, master planned village sales and information centers, and temporary sales trailers in
accordance with CCNO 11-10-20.
Private park, playground, or recreation area but not including privately owned commercial amusement
business.
Public utility substation in accordance with the standards stated in CCNO 11-10-15.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2005-12 on 12/13/2005
Amended by Ord. 2018-29 on 11/27/2018
Amended by Ord. 2018-30 on 11/27/2018
11-7J-4: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 69/279
A. Minimum lot area (square feet):
1. Interior with single-family dwelling 8,000
2. Corner with single-family dwelling 9,000
B. Minimum lot widths (in feet):
1. For a single-family dwelling at a distance 30 feet back from the front property line 80
C. Minimum yard setback (in feet):
1. Front 30
2. Side:
a. Single-family dwelling: 8
(1) Exception: The total of the 2 side yards shall not be less than 18
(2) Exception: On interior lots where there is an attached garage with the
required number of parking spaces, each side yard may be 8
b. Other main buildings (each side) 20
3. Side facing street on corner lot 20
4. All utility easements must be maintained in an open state, unless written
permission is secured from all utility companies to place a structure over the
easements
5. Rear:
a. Main building 20
6. Building height (in feet):
a. Minimum 10
b. Maximum 35
7. No building or group of buildings with accessory buildings shall cover more of the
total lot area than
35%
D. Minimum vegetative open space lot 50%
E. Accessory building regulations (in feet) (see also CCNO 11-10-31)
1. Height 15
a. Exception: The maximum height if the accessory building is set back at least 20
feet; rear and side setback 25
2. Rear and side setback
a. Accessory building:
(1) Interior lot (side and rear) 3
(2) Corner lot (side only) (non-street side) 3
(3) Corner lot (side only) (street side) 20
b. Large accessory building:
(1) Interior lot 15
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 70/279
(2) Corner lot (non-street side) 15
(3) Corner lot (street side) 20
3. There shall be provided a minimum spacing between main and accessory
buildings of at least 6
4. No accessory building or group of accessory buildings shall cover more of the rear
yard than 25%
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2011-07 on 5/10/2011
Amended by Ord. Ordinance 2016-02 on 1/20/2016
Amended by Ord. 2016-18 on 7/19/2016
Amended by Ord. 2016-25 on 8/16/2016
11-7J-5: SIGN REGULATIONS
The height, size, and locations of signs shall be in accordance with the regulations set forth in CCNO 11-
22.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2005-12 on 12/13/2005
11-7J-6: SITE PLAN APPROVAL
For any permitted or conditional uses other than single-family dwellings, a site plan shall be required in
accordance with CCNO 11-10-27.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2005-12 on 12/13/2005
ARTICLE K: MASTER PLANNED COMMUNITY ZONE MPC
11-7K-1: PURPOSE
11-7K-2: MASTER PLANNED COMMUNITY REZONE REQUIRED
11-7K-3: PROCESS AND APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS
11-7K-4: PRINCIPAL REVIEWS
11-7K-5: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
11-7K-6: LAND USES
11-7K-7: ZONE DESIGNATION ON THE OFFICIAL ZONING MAP OF NORTH OGDEN
11-7K-8: MODIFICATIONS OF THE APPROVED PLANS
11-7K-9: MASTER PLANNED COMMUNITY ZONE CONFLICTS WITH OTHER REQUIREMENTS IN
THE CITY CODE
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2015-16 on 7/28/2015
11-7K-1: PURPOSE
The purpose of the Master Planned Community Zone is to provide opportunities for creative and unique
developments within North Ogden City. This ordinance includes guidelines for creating neighborhood
oriented village projects that may include a mix of residential, commercial, recreational and/or public
uses.
An integral part of this Zone is a multistep review process to assure compatibility of proposed land uses
with existing, and proposed adjacent neighborhoods, as well as the vision of the General Plan. The
desired goal is to move toward vibrant, sustainable, and walkable neighborhood centers, with integrated
streets.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 71/279
Proposed plans for development must follow or exceed design standards found within this ordinance.
Specific plans shall be a reflection of a required development agreement.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2015-16 on 7/28/2015
11-7K-2: MASTER PLANNED COMMUNITY REZONE REQUIRED
Not all properties will be eligible for the Master Planned Community zone designation. Each proposed
parcel shall be evaluated on its own merits and a rezone is required. All of the following criteria shall be
used to assess the suitability of the parcel to be considered for the Master Planned Community zone:
1. The proposed parcel shall encompass a minimum of 5 acres; however, projects on smaller
parcels may be considered if they fulfill the objectives of the City.
2. The proposed parcel shall be located within or adjacent to the North Ogden Downtown,
Southtown, between those nodes along Washington Boulevard, or to the west of Downtown,
where more diverse and intense uses are anticipated in the General Plan.
3. The primary use shall be residential.
4. At least 5% of the total square footage of all buildings in the entire proposal shall be devoted to a
secondary use, such as residential mixed with commercial uses or office uses. Greater mixes are
encouraged.
5. Proposals shall demonstrate an excellence in architecture, site design, and walkability.
6. Proposers shall be willing to enter into a development agreement that runs with the land.
7. Proposals shall demonstrate how the potential project will address the specific goals and values
found in the North Ogden General Plan and within the Downtown chapter.
8. The entire parcel shall be reflected in a specific site plan.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2015-16 on 7/28/2015
11-7K-3: PROCESS AND APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS
A. A pre-application meeting with North Ogden City planning department is required prior to
application submittal to review the approval process and requirements of the Zone.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 72/279
B. Zoning Application – completely fill out the current North Ogden zoning application. The
application shall generally include:
1. The applicant's name, address, telephone number, and interest in the property;
2. The property owner's name, address, and telephone number, if different than the
applicant, and the property owner's signed consent to the filing of the application;
3. The street address and legal description of the subject property;
4. The zoning classification, zoning district boundaries, and present use of the subject
property;
5. A complete description of the proposed planned development as per the previous section;
6. Specific Plan and Development Agreement submittal, following site plan guidance from
the City code.
7. The list of proposed uses which the applicant shall commit to with the development
agreement.
8. Other information or documentation the planning department and/or North Ogden City
may deem necessary for proper review and analysis of a particular application.
C. The applicant shall submit a written statement describing the terms and conditions under which
the property shall be developed and maintained subsequent to development. Such statements
shall include any conditions, performance standards, and other reasonable restrictions as may
be necessary to ensure the development and maintenance of the property in accordance with the
approved development plan. The applicant shall submit a description of the objectives to be
achieved by the development concept. The statement shall include, but is not limited to: The
manner in which the proposed development meets or exceeds the intent of the North Ogden
General Plan. The proposed architectural and site design concepts including style, colors, and
type of materials, placement of structures to maximize views and take advantage of the site's
natural characteristics. Specific concepts by which the proposed development shall make an
orderly transition from existing or planned adjacent development including varied setbacks and
facade treatment, open space elements, screening of parking areas, and landscaping of public or
private open spaces and recreational facilities. The combination and coordination of architectural
styles, building forms, building materials, and building relationships;
1. Preservation and enhancement of desirable site characteristics such as natural
topography, springs and streams, vegetation and geologic features, and the prevention of
soil erosion.
2. Preservation of buildings which are architecturally or historically significant or contribute to
the character of the City.
3. Use of design, landscape, or architectural features to create a pleasing environment;
4. Inclusion of special development amenities that are in the interest of the general public.
5. Elimination of blighted structures or incompatible uses through redevelopment or
rehabilitation.
6. Inclusion of varied types of housing.
7. Utilization of "green", “Traditional Neighborhood” and “walkable” building techniques in
development.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 73/279
D. Provide a Specific Plan including: a conceptual site plan, conceptual architectural renderings,
exterior building materials lists, conceptual landscape plan, conceptual streetscapes, phasing
plans, interior site walkways and street connections. Consider addressing the Site Design and
Architectural features list found in section 11-8: and the design standards found in this plan.
E. Complete the Development Agreement Template and include the following, as a minimum:
1. Duration of agreement.
2. Legal description of the subject property.
3. Proposed uses including a table of land use percentages and the number and type of
dwelling units.
4. Maximum density or intensity of the allowed uses and construction requirements,
including, but not limited to, minimum and maximum building heights and building size.
5. The Specific Plan described in #4 above, and/or Subdivision Layout Plan identifying, but
not limited to, the location and arrangement of all allowed uses, circulation patterns, and
all required dedications and improvements.
6. A Phasing Schedule for all project phases and the timing for the provision of all features,
dedications, and improvements.
7. A listing of all project features and facilities both private and proposed to be public.
8. A property management plan.
9. Other conditions, terms, restrictions, and requirements for subsequent actions and
approvals.
F. Failure to provide accurate and full information concerning the above shall result in rejection of
the application. Only complete applications shall be processed.
G. City Evaluation through the Technical Review Committee.
H. Planning Commission review – one or more public hearings following the procedure set forth by
City Ordinance for the rezoning of property shall be held and a recommendation made to the City
Council, subject to any continuances as needed.
I. City Council review - a public hearing shall be held, following the procedure set forth by City
Ordinance for rezoning of property. The City Council may take any action permitted by law,
including: approve the zone change and development agreement, modify as warranted, continue
the application for additional information, or deny the application.
J. Planning Commission review of the site plans as a Conditional Use.
K. Final Development agreement approval with final plans by City Council.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2015-16 on 7/28/2015
11-7K-4: PRINCIPAL REVIEWS
Principal reviews shall be conducted by the following:
City Planner, Building Official, Public Works, City Engineer, Fire Department, Parks & Recreation
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2015-16 on 7/28/2015
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 74/279
11-7K-5: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Development Standards. The following standards apply specifically to development in the Master
Planned Community zone (MPC) and shall supersede any other standards found elsewhere in this
Code. These standards are guidelines that should be reinforced through the required development
agreement. Significant deviations from these standards are possible, but only if coupled with a
development agreement.
A. Building Placement and Massing
1. Setbacks. Building facades should comprise at least 65% of the frontage facing
Washington Blvd. and 50% of all other public street edges. Building facades must be
located 0-10 feet from the public right-of-way (typically inside edge of sidewalk) on major
streets. Minor streets may include increased setbacks with a minimum of 15’. Awnings,
balconies, and architectural features may project beyond building facades, but not over
the sidewalk, as approved by the Planning Commission. Street side setback variations
are encouraged when an activity related to pedestrian use is maintained, i.e. special
landscaping, outside seating for a restaurant, patios, recessed plazas, courtyards, and
trellises are encouraged.
2. Zero lot line side setbacks with attached structures, in compliance with the International
Building Code are anticipated except for necessary rear lot driveway access, pedestrian
access, open space, transitions to other uses and landscape areas. Rear setbacks should
be of sufficient depth to allow proper parking and landscaped areas to the rear of the
buildings, coupled with appropriate transitions to adjacent uses. Unless otherwise
approved by the land use authority, rear yards and the rear of buildings shall not directly
abut streets. If the rear of building is approved adjacent to a street, pedestrian access and
street oriented building treatment must be adequately addressed.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 75/279
3. Building Orientation. The entrances of all retail, civic, residential, institutional uses, and
office buildings shall always front onto major streets, with the exception of center block
residences (which still must front pedestrian ways) and anchor stores greater than 30,000
square feet in size. On minor streets this requirement is suggested but may be waived
with an appropriately landscaped buffer yard adjacent to the minor street. Secondary
entries may be required at the rear of street-facing buildings. Where possible, 'like land
uses' shall face 'like land uses' or open space, i.e. retail across the street from retail,
townhomes from townhomes, etc. Loading docks and service areas shall be screened
from streets and adjacent properties through architectural design and landscaping.
Anchor store entrances must front onto the street, and be connected to adjacent streets
via landscaped, publicly accessible walkways. Access from parking areas may be via
mid-block passageways or "paseos," to the street.
B. Building Height. Buildings shall have a minimum and maximum height as indicated on the table
by building type, with height to be measured in accordance with the City's adopted ordinances
and standards.
C. Land Use Impact and Buffering. Landscape buffers are strongly preferred over fences and walls
where a separation is desirable. A visually open look should be encouraged between compatible
uses. Visual screening which creates 'outdoor rooms' is often more important than a physical
separation and the Planning Commission may, at its own option, require special treatment of
such areas. Fences or walls, if determined to be necessary or desirable, must be reviewed for
their effectiveness in protecting private space while not creating isolated uses or dead space void
of natural surveillance. Approved fences or walls shall be compatible in color, texture, and design
in relationship to building materials.In order to mitigate any negative impacts, the land use
authority, after due consideration, may modify building setbacks and heights to create better
separation, and/or require additional architectural and/or landscape elements, as needed to
mitigate anticipated detrimental impacts between uses. Transitions between buildings in the MPC
and other zones shall generally reflect a setback of 20’ for buildings up to 24’ in height
(measured to the peak of the roof) and then additional height shall be allowed with an additional
foot of setback equal to one additional foot of height.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 76/279
D. Architectural Design and Materials. The treatment of building mass, façade variation, materials
and exterior appurtenances shall create an aesthetically pleasing building and site that is in
character with the proportions of other surrounding buildings, and yet provides diversity in
design. A mix of materials is required. Requirements applicable to all buildings are stated below:
1. All sides of buildings shall receive substantial design consideration, with an emphasis on
areas visible to pedestrians, vehicular traffic, and neighbors. Repetitive design for any
project over 5 buildings is not acceptable. Within projects, sub-neighborhoods created by
design shall be incorporated in the overall scheme, with a general intent of significant
building façade changes every 5 to 10 buildings or as approved in the site plan. A mix of
materials is required.
2. Screening: All building equipment and service areas, including on grade and roof
mechanical equipment, utility meters, and transformers that are readily visible from the
public right of way, shall be screened from public view. These elements shall be sited to
minimize their visibility and impact, especially from major streets, or they may be
enclosed as to appear to be an integral part of the architectural design of the building.
Dumpsters (shall not be located closer than 20’ from any property line), and other
necessary equipment shall be located or screened so as not to be visible from streets,
pedestrian areas, and adjacent. Screening elements shall be aesthetically incorporated
into the design of the site whether located on the ground or on a structure.
3. Basic building materials shall include, but are not necessarily limited to, architecturally
treated pre-cast concrete, brick, stone, granite, ceramic tile, cement/fiber board,
architectural metals, and/or glass. All residential uses shall have substantial brick and/or
masonry exteriors. Limited amounts of stucco, vinyl siding and metal may be considered
as accent materials, if the quality of the design merits such consideration. The use of
exposed concrete (architectural concrete excepted), or vinyl for storefront facades is not
permitted. All buildings within the development shall incorporate some common
architectural theme and/or architectural elements, creating a unifying development.
4. No more than four colors may be used per development excluding the roof. Earth tone
colors are encouraged to help buildings blend into the environment, however, color may
vary if approved by the land use authority as being compatible with surrounding
developments. Approved tinted glass surfaces shall be considered as one of the colors
allowed and shall conform to the color requirements included herein.
5. Buildings shall be designed to relate to grade conditions with a minimum of grading and
exposed foundation walls, creating easy pedestrian access from sidewalks, parking
areas, etc. Commercial buildings shall be designed with ground floor architectural
distinction/separation in order to enhance street activity and walkability. All buildings shall
have expansive windows, balconies, bay and/or box windows, terraces, or other design
features which are oriented to the street, or other people spaces. Windows shall make up
at least 50% of street-facing facades on the first story of commercial developments.
Window shapes and sizes shall be so designed to be compatible from building to building.
Substantially tinted windows and windows with reflective film or glass are not permitted at
street level; however windows with a minimum of tinting to meet low-e and other energy
efficiency standards are highly encouraged. Building facades should provide at least one
operable building entrance per elevation that faces a public street.
6. Maximum Length: The maximum length of any blank wall uninterrupted by windows,
doors, art or architectural detailing at the first floor level shall be fifteen feet (15').
7. Plans shall include any existing buildings that will be incorporated into the project and any
modifications to such buildings.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 77/279
E. Signage. Proper design and placement of signs and their lighting is critical. All developments
shall have a sign theme which promotes use compatibility. Permitted signs within the MPC Zone
shall be, directional signs, or signs located on the building. Wall signs, projecting wall signs, and
window signs, approved as part of a sign theme, are encouraged.
Where approved, a monument sign must comply with the following limitations: the sign shall have
as the prominent feature the name of the development. Font styles shall be consistent.
Monument signs shall be constructed with materials similar to that of the main building.
Monument signs may not obstruct the clear of view of any intersection or driveway.
Only A-frame signs and painted murals on the inside of a storefront window are encouraged as
temporary signs.
F. Open Space. Significant usable open space equal to 20% of the project shall be provided within
the MPC development, depending upon the size, scale, and nature of the development as
determined by the Planning Commission. Usable open space means spaces that serve a
recreation function and not leftover non-usable pieces such as landscaped islands in parking
lots. Such spaces should be appropriately sized for the development and should include at least
one usable space with a minimum dimension of 50’ by 100’. Approved open space may include
but is not limited to: commons, pocket parks, plazas, courtyards, landscape features, water
fountains and features, greenbelts, and trail connections. A 'Village Green” or other commons
area, may be required adjacent to mass transit connections or other significant activity. Building
materials used within open space areas shall be related to the materials of adjacent buildings
and shall be a non-skid finish. Design shall encourage comfortable and safe pedestrian use,
including landscaping, seating areas, WIFI, and lighting as appropriate. Fruit tree, community
gardens, and water themes are encouraged. Areas of environmental concern or interest may
be required to be preserved or enhanced, i.e. water drainages, connections to trail systems, and
water features. Unless otherwise specified through the development agreement with the City, all
open space areas shall be maintained by the property owners or homeowner associations.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 78/279
G. Landscaping. Landscaping guidelines are established to improve and maintain site qualities.
Landscaping, in general, shall conform to the following principles:
1. No plans for any building, structure or other improvements shall be approved by the Land
Use Authority unless there shall also have been submitted landscape and streetscape
plans satisfactory to the Planning Commission. All such plans shall promote water–wise
landscaping designs and include xeriscape, where appropriate.
2. Landscaping in accordance with the plans submitted shall be installed in a proportional
manner within 30 days following the occupancy of buildings on the site or as otherwise
approved by the City Planner as seasonal conditions may dictate.
3. Street trees are required along major streets unless this requirement is specifically waived
by the City in exchange for other types of street landscaping, such as, flowering pots,
shrubbery, rain gardens, etc. When available, the City’s Street Tree Plan should be
consulted.
4. Future development areas or land area not occupied by buildings, structures, hard
surfacing, vehicular driveways or pedestrian walkways shall be kept in a weed-free
condition or landscaped, as approved by the Land use authority.
5. Plant Materials:
a. 60% medium size trees; deciduous trees with a caliper from 2 to 3 inches and
evergreen trees with a height from 5 to 8 feet. 40% small size trees and shrubs in
a combination with deciduous trees with a caliper of 1 to 2 inches and evergreen
trees with a minimum height of 4 feet. Where possible, a 50/50 mix of deciduous
and evergreen trees and shrubs shall be used for on-site landscaping.
b. Where required, street trees with a minimum 2 inch caliper shall be installed along
public rights-of-way by the developer. The species-type, location, and spacing of
trees shall be as shown on the approved landscape plan, in coordination with
streetscape designs.
6. Installation. It shall be the responsibility of the developer to grade, place topsoil, seed,
sod, install sprinkler irrigation systems, and properly plant trees, shrubs, and other
approved plant materials.
7. Maintenance. It shall be the responsibility of the developer and/or property association to
properly maintain landscaped areas including watering, mowing, pruning, fertilizing, and
the removal and replacement of dead plant materials in a timely manner.
8. Vegetation Modification/Removal. Pruning vegetation for "exposure," which results in
unnatural plant specimens, is prohibited. Necessary vegetation removal shall be replaced
with equal or better quality plant materials. Trees that are necessarily removed shall be
replaced with trees with comparable total caliper. Street tree replacement shall be at the
discretion of the City Planner.
9. Utility Connections. When disturbances are made to existing landscaped areas, the
existing landscaping must be replaced to its previous condition. Other modification of
landscaped areas shall require approval by the City Planner.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 79/279
H. Outdoor Lighting. The lighting of streets, pedestrian areas, parking lots, and open space is
required. Exterior wall mounted floodlights are expressly prohibited. Indirect lighting, bollard
lighting, and landscape lighting is encouraged. Lighting of a building and site identification signs
are permitted as allowed elsewhere in this Code.
Lighting along Washington Blvd., the Downtown and Southtown, and 2700 N. shall be an
approved fixture as selected by the City.
Lighting shall be evaluated as to how adequately it meets its intended purpose. Design and
location of standards and fixtures shall be specified on the site development drawings and a
lighting plan provided. Intensities shall be controlled so that 'safety' lighting is provided while
neighboring areas are protected from glare or excessive direct light. All lighting shall be directed
to the ground to protect the visibility of the night sky.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 80/279
I. Streets and Pedestrian Ways
1. Streets. All accesses within a MPC should have connectivity with existing and future
street patterns. A grid street pattern or modified grid pattern is required where possible.
Cul-de-sac streets shall not be approved unless it can be demonstrated that no other
practical way exists to make connectivity. In order to uphold and enhance traditional
neighborhood development principles, private streets are discouraged and gated
communities are prohibited.
2. Widths. Street widths shall be determined during site plan review as may be
recommended by staff and approved by the land use authority. In general, streets shall be
designed to meet the level of travel and service, while incorporating principles of traffic
calming and pedestrian compatibility, i.e. tree lined streets with pedestrian ways and
linkages, decreasing the need for pavement width by spreading traffic through a grid or
modified street hierarchy system.
3. Sidewalks and Walkways. The design of pedestrian ways may include a solitary
meandering pathway or trail, a 'pedestrian street' and the many possible designs inbetween.
Walkways and connections to trail systems shall be incorporated into the
project. Choice of appropriate pedestrian access shall be made based upon the scale and
type of mixed use project being proposed and by the way uses are intermingled. A ten
foot cross-section (five foot park strip, five foot sidewalk) is a minimum standard, while
sidewalks widths of 10’ are suggested for properties that front on Washington Blvd. and/or
2700 N. All public streets shall have walkways for pedestrians.
4. Pavers, borders, colored/textured concrete and other sidewalk design materials with
compatible colors shall be used as needed in order break up expanses of hard-surfacing
and to encourage pedestrian interest and activity. In vertical mixed use areas, wider
sidewalks are required in order to enhance street and land use connectivity. Portions of
the park strip may be paved or crushed rock, to accommodate street furniture, leaving
tree wells for street trees. Corner plazas are encouraged. Street furniture, including but
not limited to benches, trash receptacles, artwork, drinking fountains, bike racks, etc. may
be required depending upon the nature of approved uses. Street furniture requirements
shall include an overall design theme for compatibility.
5. Crosswalks. Extensive use of crosswalks shall be incorporated within the project.
Crosswalks shall be so configured to be a design feature of the development, i.e. heavy
painted lines in patterns, pavers, edges, and other methods of emphasizing pedestrian
use. Bulb-outs and other pedestrian design shall be used to shorten walking distances
across open pavement. Planted medians shall be used in appropriate areas to encourage
walking and to act as a 'refuge' for crossing pedestrians.
6. Street widths. The widths of streets shall be established as per the General Plan
suggestions and through review by the City Engineer and City Planner.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 81/279
J. Other Forms of Transportation. All forms of transportation shall be considered within and without
the MPC with the intent to improve convenience and reduce automobile trips. All forms of
transportation should be encouraged, including, walking, bus, bicycle, and pedestrian. Access
connections shall be required where deemed essential to provide circulation or access to
churches, schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation, and other community
facilities.
Conveniently located short term bicycle racks shall be required in every development along the
street frontage with the ratio of one rack that accommodates at least 2 bikes per business with up
to 25 employees and one rack that accommodates at least 4 bikes for businesses with over 25
employees. Long term bike rack/storage is required for residential developments with a ratio of
one rack that accommodates at least 5 bikes for every 50 units.
Appropriate bus turnouts, shelters, and stops shall be coordinated and planned as part of the
development review process. Based upon land use and the level of demand, bicycle parking
shall be provided in appropriate locations, i.e. visible from store fronts and entrances to office
buildings and residential structures.
K. Parking Areas. Parking areas shall be considered as structures since they present a threedimensional
appearance when occupied.
Location of parking shall be determined not only from its visual relationship to the building and
site, but also as it relates to safe convenient pedestrian and vehicular circulation patterns. Where
possible, parking lots shall be broken up and planned as 'outdoor rooms'. When approved, larger
parking lots shall be broken up with substantial tree and ground cover. Large parking lots should
be broken up into 'rooms' of no more than 300 parking stalls thru the use of connecting
walkways. Where practical, parking lots shall incorporate interior retention through the use of
internal islands for storm water retention with a ratio of an island for every 16 parking spaces.
Unless otherwise approved by the Land Use Authority, parking lots are prohibited adjacent to any
street and/or between a building and the street. Parking shall be located to the rear of the
building or to the side. Parking lots located to the side of a building shall incorporate adequate
screening, such as short walls and hedge type landscaping between the lot and the public
sidewalk.
Underground parking, deck or terrace parking, and parking garages are encouraged. Parking
structures with first level parking immediately adjacent to the frontage of a street are prohibited.
Parking structures shall be designed around natural light with 'safety' lighting added as needed.
Landscaping, within and without, may be required to enhance compatibility and safety.
Developments may be approved with less than required parking if evidence can be shown that
the nature of the land use proposed will not need the number of stalls as recommended in the
City's parking ordinance, as may be approved by the land use authority. Developments may also
be 'under parked' if justified with a walkable design that demonstrates such, and/or where local
multi-modal transit systems exist or are immediately planned, which would help reduce the
number of needed parking stalls and/or automobile trips. Shared parking arrangements may be
required in order to reduce necessary parking areas and to encourage pedestrian activity. A
parking study may be required and may be used to reduce the City parking standards.
Where possible, on-street parking shall be provided adjacent to developments, and a pro-rated
share of such, may be used to satisfy overall parking requirements. Parallel or angle parking may
be approved based upon the overall design and width of the street, as recommended by the City
Engineer and approved by the land use authority. UDOT coordination and approvals may be
required.
Visitor parking shall be carefully considered using the standard of 1 visitor parking space for
every 2 units. Tandem parking may be considered for up to 50% of this requirement.
RV storage lots and stalls occupied by RVs shall not be allowed.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 82/279
L. Environmental. Building, landscape, and solar design should adjusted, where possible, to be
compatible with the local climate. Such design should include, but may not be limited to, window
placement, building recesses, overhangs, trellises, awnings, porches, and landscape placement,
planned in such a way to enhance livability and reduce energy costs.
The use of lighter colored building materials (i.e. roof tops), fences/walls, and extensive
deciduous and evergreen tree cover shall be incorporated into developments in order to reduce
the urban heat island effect. Where possible, streets, driveways, parking lots, etc., should use
concrete or other materials which absorb less sunlight. Interior and perimeter parking lot
landscaping shall be provided at the ratio of at least one tree per six parking stalls.
Where practical, drought resistant ground covers, shrubs, and trees shall be incorporated into the
landscape to reduce water usage and storm runoff. Extensive areas of grass or other high water
use plants without a public purpose are discouraged.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 83/279
M. Requirements Unique to Residential Uses. The following shall apply to residential uses:
1. Multi-family residential use shall comprise a variety of types of housing, fulfilling housing
needs with a wide assortment of housing choices.
a. The following standards shall be required for multi-family residential:
i. Properly designed off-street surface parking hidden from streets, parking
terraces, or underground parking. Attached or detached garage units
associated with multi-family development should be rear loaded. Where
only front loaded garages are possible, they shall be subservient and
setback 5 feet from the front façade and at least 20’ from the front property
line.
ii. Flat roofs with a parapet and pitched roofs with a 4/12 pitch or greater,
unless otherwise approved by the Land Use Authority.
iii. Extensive windows facing streets, alleys and pedestrian connections.
iv. Covered porch entrances.
v. Entry sidewalks that connect directly to public sidewalks.
vi. Livable balconies of 50 square feet or larger with a minimum of 5’ in depth
vii. Material variety
viii. Building relief
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 84/279
b. The following standards for multi-family residential shall be encouraged:
i. Multi-level structures.
ii. Dormers and/or shutters, and other window treatments such as bay or box
type windows.
iii. Enhanced corner treatments on major streets including towers and larger
corner setbacks for plazas
iv. Street side balconies/decks.
v. Streets which de-emphasize the need and speed of automobiles.
vi. Other pedestrian oriented design
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 85/279
2. Small lot Single family residential uses, if approved, shall be carefully designed using the
following design principles. Front setbacks shall range between fifteen (15) and twenty
(20) feet typically measured from the inside edge of sidewalk to the porch. Front loaded
garages shall be subservient to the dwelling and shall not have a setback less than
twenty feet. Side and rear setbacks shall be determined by the Planning Commission
based upon acceptable subdivision layout and design. The following standards shall be
required for single family residential:
a. Subservient garages, i.e. back loaded detached with alley access, front loaded
detached, attached but setback from the front line of the home by at least five feet
(and 20’ from the public ROW), side entry attached, or a combination of the
above.
b. Roofs with a 4/12 pitch or greater.
c. Covered open front porches comprising at least 50% of the front elevation (not
including the garage), in no case being no less than fifteen feet (15’) in width and
six feet (6’) in depth.
d. Entry sidewalks that connect directly to public sidewalks.
e. Lamp posts and/or entry door lighting with downward directed illumination
3. The following standards for small lot single family residential shall be encouraged:
a. Two-story dwellings.
b. House dormers and/or shutters, and other window treatments.
c. Street side balconies/decks.
d. Wrap-around porches, particularly on comer lots.
e. Streets which de-emphasize the need and speed of automobiles.
f. Other pedestrian oriented design
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 86/279
4. Service Areas. Loading and refuse collection areas shall be screened from public view.
These areas are not permitted between buildings and streets unless they can be
adequately screened thru landscaping and architectural design. Streets shall not be used
as maneuvering areas for commercial loading, unloading, or refuse collection. Building
and improvements upon lots shall be designed to properly accommodate loading,
unloading and refuse collection. Screen walls and enclosures shall be constructed with
materials compatible with the structures they serve. Loading and refuse collection areas
shall be properly maintained in a debris-free condition. Dumpsters shall not be located
within 20’ of any property line.
N. Density. It is anticipated that a Master Planned Community will fall in the medium to high density
categories as established in the General Plan. Currently (2015) those densities are 6 to 18 units
per acre for medium density and 18 to 40 units per acre for high density.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2015-16 on 7/28/2015
11-7K-6: LAND USES
Land uses shall be established through the development agreement. The general categories of uses
include: retail, service, office, and residential uses but all uses shall be enumerated in the development
agreement.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2015-16 on 7/28/2015
11-7K-7: ZONE DESIGNATION ON THE OFFICIAL ZONING MAP OF NORTH OGDEN
All Master Planned Community zoning shall be designated MPC with a suffix that refers to the actual
development. As an example, if a project is approved and built with the name “Coldwater Springs”, it
would be designated on the Zoning Map as MPC-CS.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2015-16 on 7/28/2015
11-7K-8: MODIFICATIONS OF THE APPROVED PLANS
After adoption of the MPC, there may be a need for deviations from the approved plans to address
building code revisions, unknown existing conditions, material availability, and other unforeseeable
issues. The City Planner, the City Engineer, and their designees may approve changes that are
consistent with the intent of the original approval, so long as such changes do not constitute more than
5% of the original project area. Any changes shall be approved only if the modifications include
improved or equivalent quality of materials or design. Any proposed changes that exceed 5% of the
project area or that are deemed materially significant by the City Planner or City Engineer shall require
an amendment to the MPC per the approval process set forth in this ordinance. Planning Commission
shall hold a hearing and may make a determination in favor of, against, or require a modification to the
proposal. Any significant change shall require that the Development Agreement be updated with the City
Council.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2015-16 on 7/28/2015
11-7K-9: MASTER PLANNED COMMUNITY ZONE CONFLICTS WITH OTHER REQUIREMENTS IN
THE CITY CODE
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 87/279
When the requirements of this chapter are found to be in conflict with other provisions of the City Code,
the standards, requirements, and processes of this chapter shall take precedence, especially where a
development agreement has been approved.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2015-16 on 7/28/2015
11-8: COMMERCIAL AND MANUFACTURING ZONES
ARTICLE A: COMMERCIAL ZONES C-1, C-2
ARTICLE B: PLANNED COMMERCIAL ZONES CP-1, CP-2
ARTICLE C: PLANNED MANUFACTURING ZONE MP-1
ARTICLE D: DESIGN STANDARDS FOR COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT
ARTICLE E: ENTERTAINMENT OVERLAY ZONE (EOZ)
ARTICLE A: COMMERCIAL ZONES C-1, C-2
11-8A-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT
11-8A-2: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
11-8A-3: SITE PLAN APPROVAL
11-8A-4: SIGN REGULATIONS
11-8A-5: SPECIAL REGULATIONS
11-8A-6: PERMANENT OUTDOOR DISPLAYS
11-8A-7: USES
11-8A-8: PROTECTION OF ADJOINING RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES
11-8A-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT
The purpose of C-1 and C-2 commercial zones is to provide suitable areas for the location of the various
types of commercial activity needed to serve the people and commerce of the city. It is also to separate
into two (2) zones uses based upon type of activity which are compatible and complementary as well as
intensity of land utilization and accessory use needs.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
11-8A-2: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
A. Minimum Lot Area: Eight thousand (8,000) square feet.
B. Minimum Lot Width: None.
C. Minimum Yard Setbacks:
1. Front: Twenty feet (20') for all buildings and walls or fences over three feet (3') high;
buildings that front onto Washington Boulevard, 2550 North, or 2700 North may be
required to have a reduced 0 foot setback as determined by the Planning Commission.
2. Side: None, except ten feet (10') adjacent to residential boundary;
3. Side facing street on corner lot: Twenty feet (20');
4. Rear: None, except ten feet (10') where building rears on a residential zone.
D. Building Height:
1. Minimum: Ten feet (10').
2. Maximum: Thirty five feet (35').
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 88/279
E. Lot Coverage: No building or accessory buildings shall cover over eighty percent (80%) of lot
area.
F. Minimum Standards Determined: Minimum site development standards for dwelling units shall be
determined by the planning commission.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 89/279
G. Building Orientation and Utilities
1. Building Entrances. Building facades should provide at least one operable/ functioning
building entrance per elevation that faces a public street.
a. In the case of corner lots the building owner may select which street the main
entrance faces. A corner entrance that faces the intersecting streets satisfies the
two entrance requirement.
b. In the case where the Planning Commission does not require a reduced front
setback the Planning Commission may adjust the number and locations of
building entrances.
c. In the case of a commercial center, where there is intended to be more than one
commercial building, with or without a subdivision, a master site plan is required,
Subdivision shall comply with 12-6-2. The site plan shall consist of the
components found in 11-10-27 and the parking requirements found in 11-17.
i. The streets and other accessways shall be planned in connection with the
grouping of buildings, and the provision for alleys, truck loading and
maneuvering areas, walks and parking areas so as to minimize conflict or
movement between the various types of traffic, including pedestrian.
ii. Access to the center will be through joint access points with cross access
easements between buildings or lots.
iii. Parking and interior access lanes will be designed to be on the interior or
rear of the commercial building. Off-street parking shall not occupy any
required front yard area unless the planning commission determines that
the site plan demonstrates that the parking location improves the
functionality of the site.
d. In the case where a commercial project adjoins a residential zone appropriate
buffering shall be established as approved by the planning commission, e.g.,
architectural design, building materials, access points if allowed, landscaping, etc.
2. Loading Facilities. Commercial loading and unloading facilities shall be designed to be to
the rear of the building and not visible from the public street. The planning commission as
part of a master site plan review may approve a side yard location in a commercial center,
if the site plan demonstrates that the location improves the functionality of the site and
provides adequate screening thorough architectural design and landscaping. Loading
facilities shall not occupy any required front yard area.
3. Trash Enclosures. Trash receptacles must comply with 11-10-25. The planning
commission as part of a master site plan review may approve a side yard location in a
commercial center, if the site plan demonstrates that the location improves the
functionality of the site and provides adequate screening.
4. Windows. Windows shall make up at least 50% of the horizontal length street-facing
facades on the first story of commercial developments. Window shapes and sizes shall be
so designed to be compatible from building to building. Substantially tinted windows and
windows with reflective film or glass are not permitted at street level; however windows
with a minimum of tinting to meet low-e and other energy efficiency standards are highly
encouraged.
5. Utility Meters. All utilities meters shall be directly attached to the main building or other
location as approved by planning commission, but shall not be located between the main
building and public right of way.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 90/279
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
Amended by Ord. 2006-13 on 11/28/2006
Amended by Ord. 2019-01 on 2/12/2019
Amended by Ord. 2019-09 on 6/11/2019
11-8A-3: SITE PLAN APPROVAL
For any development or use in a commercial zone, a site plan shall be submitted in accordance with
CCNO 11-10-27.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
11-8A-4: SIGN REGULATIONS
The height, size and location of the permitted signs shall be in accordance with the regulations set forth
in CCNO 11-22.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
11-8A-5: SPECIAL REGULATIONS
Hereinafter specified permitted and conditional uses shall be permitted only when the following
conditions are complied with:
A. All business shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building, except for the sale of
gasoline and oil by service stations, the parking of automobiles, service to persons in
automobiles, temporary businesses, Christmas tree sales, fruit and vegetable stands, fireworks
stands and garden supplies;
B. All uses shall be free of emissions such as odor, dust, smoke or noise;
C. All products, whether primary or incidental, shall, if sold, be sold at retail on the premises. Unless
a specific beer license is issued by the city council, no beer shall be sold for consumption on the
premises, no entertainment, except as provided by ordinance, shall be permitted in cafes,
confectioneries or refreshment stands.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
Repealed & Reenacted by Ord. 2014-23 on 9/16/2014
11-8A-6: PERMANENT OUTDOOR DISPLAYS
All outdoor displays shall be designed to increase sales of goods and services available on the premises
rather than simply provide additional warehousing space. All outdoor displays shall be maintained in
good condition so as not to detract from the aesthetics of the business and community. Any business
proposing to have outdoor displays and/or outdoor display areas shall submit to the community
development staff a plan for their display area which shows proposed location and designated area of
the outdoor display. In addition the following standards shall apply:
A. Standards For Outdoor Displays:
1. Businesses with permanent outdoor display areas shall provide a site plan showing the
area proposed for the displays. The site plan shall be submitted to the community
development staff for review and approval. At their discretion, said business or staff may
forward the plan to the planning commission for further review and/or approval.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 91/279
2. Displays shall be on private property and not encroach on the public right of way.
3. Displays should provide clear line of sight for drivers of motor vehicles and pedestrians.
4. Displays shall allow safe pedestrian circulation through and around display areas and
provide emergency access needs.
5. Merchandise shall be kept in good condition and removed if it becomes a hazard due to
wind or weather conditions or if it is found to be in disrepair by the building official,
community development director or code enforcement officer.
6. The minimum amount of parking required for a business shall be maintained on the site.
7. Any structure in the outdoor display area shall meet the city's building code.
8. Displays in landscaped area shall be located on display pads within the landscape.
9. If merchandise is to be left unassembled or in shipping materials the city planning
commission shall review the proposed plan. Pallets may be used to protect the
merchandise from ground conditions.
10. Signage shall meet city sign regulations.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-12 on 10/12/2010
11-8A-7: USES
A. In the following list of uses:
1. Uses designated with a "P" are permitted uses;
2. Use designated with a "C" shall be conditional uses, which shall not be established or
maintained unless authorized by a conditional use permit as described in CCNO 11-14;
and
3. Uses designated with an "N" shall not be permitted in the zone.
B. No list of specific uses can be complete. Therefore decisions regarding whether a specific use is
included in one of the categories of use in the following list as a permitted use or a conditional
use will be made by the planning commission, with an appeal to the city council.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 92/279
C. Uses not included in the following categories of uses are prohibited. If the city council desires to
allow such a use as a permitted or conditional use, it must amend this title as described in CCNO
11-1-4. If the amendment is made, the use will only be allowed as provided by the city council.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 93/279
C-1 C-2
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to a permitted use C C
Agriculture. The use of agricultural equipment that produces excessive noise
and/or light may only be used during normal hours of work allowed in the city or
by variance to the hours allowed by the city council
P P
Air conditioning sales and service N P
Amusement arcades C P
Animal grooming, small animals only, and provided business is conducted within
completely enclosed building N P
Animal hospital, small animals only, and provided business is conducted within
completely enclosed building C C
Antique, import, or souvenir shop C P
Archery shop, provided business is conducted within completely enclosed
building N P
Art and artist's supply store P P
Athletic and sporting goods store P P
Athletic club C P
Automobile, fuel dispensing C P
Automobile parts sales N P
Automobile service repair, including paint, body and fender, brake, muffler,
upholstery, or transmission work, provided business is conducted within
completely enclosed building
N P
Awning sales and service N P
Bakery manufacture limited to goods retained on premises P P
Bank or financial institution P P
Barber shop P P
Beauty shop P P
Bed and breakfast P P
Bicycle sales and service P P
Blueprinting or photostating C P
Boarding house N P
Boat sales and service N P
Bookstore, other than adult bookstores P P
Bowling alley N C
Building materials sales or yard; provided, that all storage items must be stored
in an enclosed building N C
Bus terminal N C
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 94/279
Cafe or cafeteria P P
Camera store P P
Candy store or confectionery P P
Carpenter and cabinet shops, all storage items must be stored in an enclosed
building N C
Car wash, automatic N C
Car wash self-service manual spray C P
Carpet, rug and linoleum cleaning service N P
Catering establishment P P
Christmas tree sales in conformance with CCNO 4-1-10 P P
Church C C
Circus, carnival, or other transient amusement N C
Clinics, medical or dental P P
Clothing and accessory stores C P
Communication equipment building C C
Convenience Store P P
Costume rental N P
Dairy products store P P
Data processing service and supplies N P
Daycare center P P
Delicatessen P P
Department store C P
Drapery and curtain store C P
Drive-in refreshment stands C P
Drug store C P
Dry cleaning, including shirt laundry P P
Educational institution with curricula similar to public schools K-12 N P
Electrical and heating appliances and fixtures sales and service, all storage
items must be stored in an enclosed building N P
Electrical equipment sales and service all storage items must be stored in an
enclosed building N P
Employment agency N P
Fabric and textile store N P
Film exchange establishment N P
Flooring or floor repair N P
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 95/279
Florist shop P P
Furniture sales and repair N P
Garden supplies and plant materials sales P P
Gift store P P
Glass sales and service P P
Greenhouses and nursery C C
Grocery store P P
Gunsmith C P
Hardware store P P
Health club N P
Health food store P P
Hobby and crafts store P P
Home improvement store N P
Hospital supplies N P
Hotel and motel N P
House cleaning and repair N P
Household appliance sales and incidental service N P
Ice cream parlor P P
Insurance agency C P
Interior decorating and designing establishment C P
Jewelry store sales and service P P
Laboratory, dental or medical P P
Laundry or dry cleaners, laundromat type P P
Lawn mower sales N P
Leather goods, sales and service P P
Library P P
Licensed massage therapist P P
Linen store C P
Locksmith P P
Miniature golf N P
Monument works and sales N P
Mortuary N C
Museum C P
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 96/279
Music store C P
Needlework, embroidery or knitting store P P
Newsstand P P
Notions store P P
Novelty store N P
Nursery school C P
Office in which goods or merchandise are not commercially created, exchanged,
or sold P P
Office machines sales and service N P
Office, professional P P
Office supply P P
Park and playground P P
Parking lot or garage for passenger autos C C
Pest control and exterminator N P
Pet and pet supply store N P
Pharmacy P P
Photo studio P P
Photographic supplies P P
Plumbing shop, all storage items must be stored in an enclosed building C C
Post office C P
Printing, lithographing, publishing or reproduction sales and service C P
Propane retail sales as an accessory use N P
a. Subject to CCNO 11-10-27 Site Plan Review
b. Tank located outside of any setback Be located in side or rear yards,
however, the planning commission may approve a front yard location for a
500 gallon tank if sufficient landscape screening is provided around the tank
c. Horizontal tank maximum 16 feet in length; vertical tank maximum 12 feet
in height
d. Not exceed a volume of 500 gallons
e. Be limited to 1 tank per site
f. No signage is allowed on the tank except for required safety signs and the
word Propane on two sides of the tank with the maximum size of 6 square
feet per word
g. The tank color will comply with CCNO 11-8D-3 (C) 2 Colors and Materials
Public utilities substation C C
Real estate agency C P
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 97/279
Reception center or wedding chapel N C
Recreational vehicle sales and service N P
Rental agency for home and garden equipment N C
Restaurant P P
Restaurant drive-in C P
Roller skating rink N C
School of professional or quasi-professional training N P
Seed and feed store N P
Sewing machines sales and service C P
Shoe repair or shoeshine shop P P
Shoe store N P
Single family dwelling as an accessory use to an existing commercial business
on lots that are no larger than 15,000 square feet p p
a. Subject CCNO 11-10-27 Site Plan Review
b. Sideyard and Rear Setbacks: 10 feet if the residence is a detached
dwelling unit; no setbacks if the residence is located within the commercial
building
c. ParkingRequirements: 2 parking stalls
d. No recreational vehicle parking is allowed
e. The occupant of the single family dwelling is required to be an employee
or owner of the commercial business
Tanning salon P P
Taxidermist C P
Temporary building for uses incidental to construction work. Such building shall
be removed upon the completion of construction work P P
Temporary Business including Christmas tree sales, blanket stand, fireworks
stand, food vendors, fruit store or stand, vegetable store or stand and other
similar uses as determined by the zoning administrator, in accordance with
CCNO 4-1-9.
P P
Theater, indoor N P
Theater, outdoor N C
Tobacco shop P P
Towel, uniform and linen supply service N P
Travel agency P P
Upholstery shop N P
Used car lot N P
Video, DVD, sales and rental (nonadult) P P
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 98/279
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
Amended by Ord. 2006-14 on 11/28/2006
Amended by Ord. 2009-10 on 7/28/2009
Amended by Ord. 2010-12 on 10/12/2010
Amended by Ord. 2010-16 on 11/30/2010
Repealed & Reenacted by Ord. 2014-23 on 9/16/2014
Amended by Ord. 2018-01 on 1/9/2018
Amended by Ord. 2018-02 on 1/9/2018
Amended by Ord. 2019-01 on 2/12/2019
11-8A-8: PROTECTION OF ADJOINING RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES
When a commercial development abuts a residential zoning district, a solid screen wall must be erected.
In addition to the landscaping required, the screen wall shall be eight feet (8') in height along the rear
and interior side yards. In the front yard and street side yard areas of either zoning district, the solid
walls shall maintain the maximum fence height regulations for front and street side areas. The solid
screen wall shall have at least a ninety five percent (95%) screen value. The owner of the commercial
property shall construct, maintain and keep the screen wall in good repair.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
Amended by Ord. 2010-12 on 10/12/2010
ARTICLE B: PLANNED COMMERCIAL ZONES CP-1, CP-2
11-8B-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT
11-8B-2: USE REGULATIONS
11-8B-3: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
11-8B-4: SITE PLAN APPROVAL
11-8B-5: PROTECTION OF ADJOINING RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES; BUFFER ZONE
11-8B-6: SPECIAL PARKING AND SIGN LIMITATIONS
11-8B-7: GENERAL REGULATIONS
11-8B-8: SUBMISSION OF APPLICATION
11-8B-9: PLANNING COMMISSION APPROVAL
11-8B-10: CITY COUNCIL ACTION
11-8B-11: BUILDING PERMIT ISSUANCE
11-8B-12: TIME LIMITATION
11-8B-13: APPLICATION TO EXISTING COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
11-8B-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT
A. The intent of the planned commercial zones is to permit establishment of a well designed
complex of retail facilities for a neighborhood, community or region which will provide goods and
services for the people to be served, minimize traffic congestion on public streets in the vicinity,
and which shall best fit the general environment and land use pattern of the area to be served.
The protective standards contained in this article are intended to minimize any adverse effect of
the planned commercial zone on nearby property values by achieving maximum compatible
integration of land uses, by preserving the aesthetic qualities of the area, and to provide for safe
and efficient use of the planned commercial zone itself.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 99/279
B. The two (2) types of planned commercial zones provided for in this chapter are as follows:
1. CP-1, Neighborhood: Provides for the sale and supply of daily living needs for the people
in the neighborhood;
2. CP-2, Community: Provides, in addition to the convenience goods, a wider range of
facilities for the sale of rental goods and personal services for the neighborhood and
major segments of the community.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
11-8B-2: USE REGULATIONS
Any permitted use or any conditional use, allowed in the C-1 or C-2 zone, shall be permitted in their
respective CP-1 or CP-2 zone provided, where applicable, a conditional use permit is obtained as
provided in CCNO 11-14 of this title. Such uses shall be indicated on the final development plan.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
11-8B-3: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
A. Minimum Lot Area: Eight thousand (8,000) square feet.
B. Minimum Lot Width: None.
C. Minimum Yard Setbacks:
1. Front: Twenty feet (20') for main building or walls or fences over three feet (3') high;
buildings that front onto Washington Boulevard, 2550 North, or 2700 North may be
required to have a reduced 0 foot setback as determined by the Planning Commission.
2. Side: None, except ten feet (10') adjoining a residential zone.
3. Side facing street on corner lot: Twenty feet (20').
4. Rear: None, except ten feet (10') adjoining a residential zone.
D. Building Height:
1. Minimum: Ten feet (10').
2. Maximum: Thirty five feet (35').
E. Lot Coverage: The aggregate of all buildings and hard surfaced areas shall not exceed eighty
percent (80%) of the entire area.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 100/279
F. Building Orientation and Utilities
1. Building Entrances. Building facades should provide at least one operable / functioning
building entrance per elevation that faces a public street.
a. In the case of corner lots the building owner may select which street the main
entrance faces. A corner entrance that faces the intersecting streets satisfies the
two entrance requirement.
b. In the case where the Planning Commission does not require a reduced front
setback the Planning Commission may adjust the number and locations of
building entrances.
c. In the case of a commercial center, where there is intended to be more than one
commercial building, with or without a subdivision, a master site plan is required,
The site plan shall consist of the components found in 11-10-27 and the parking
requirements found in 11-17.
i. The streets and other accessways shall be planned in connection with the
grouping of buildings, and the provision for alleys, truck loading and
maneuvering areas, walks and parking areas so as to minimize conflict or
movement between the various types of traffic, including pedestrian.
ii. Access to the center will be through joint access points with cross access
easements between buildings or lots.
iii. Parking and interior access lanes will be designed to be on the interior or
rear of the commercial building. Off-street parking shall not occupy any
required front yard area unless the planning commission determines that
the site plan demonstrates that the parking location improves the
functionality of the site.
d. In the case where a commercial project adjoins a residential zone appropriate
buffering shall be established as approved by the planning commission, e.g.,
architectural design, building materials, access points if allowed, landscaping, etc.
2. Loading Facilities. Commercial loading and unloading facilities shall be designed to be to
the rear of the building and not visible from the public street. The planning commission as
part of a master site plan review may approve a side yard location in a commercial center,
if the site plan demonstrates that the location improves the functionality of the site and
provides adequate screening thorough architectural design and landscaping. Loading
facilities shall not occupy any required front yard area.
3. Trash Enclosures. Trash receptacles must comply with 11-10-25. The planning
commission as part of a master site plan review may approve a side yard location in a
commercial center, if the site plan demonstrates that the location improves the
functionality of the site and provides adequate screening.
4. Windows. Windows shall make up at least 50% of the horizontal street-facing facades on
the first story of commercial developments. Window shapes and sizes shall be so
designed to be compatible from building to building. Substantially tinted windows and
windows with reflective film or glass are not permitted at street level; however windows
with a minimum of tinting to meet low-e and other energy efficiency standards are highly
encouraged.
5. Utility Meters. All utilities meters shall be directly attached to the main building or other
location as approved by planning commission, but shall not be located between the main
building and public right of way.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 101/279
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
Amended by Ord. 2019-01 on 2/12/2019
Amended by Ord. 2019-09 on 6/11/2019
11-8B-4: SITE PLAN APPROVAL
For any development or use in a commercial zone, a site plan shall be submitted in accordance with
CCNO 11-10-27.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
11-8B-5: PROTECTION OF ADJOINING RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES; BUFFER ZONE
When a commercial development takes place that abuts a residential zoning district, a solid screen wall
must be erected. In addition to the landscaping required, the screen wall shall be eight feet (8') in height
along the rear and interior side yards. In front yards and street side yards of either zoning districts, the
solid walls shall maintain the maximum fence height regulations for front and street side areas. The solid
screen wall shall have at least a ninety five percent (95%) screen value. The owner of the commercial
property shall construct, maintain and keep the screen wall in good repair.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
11-8B-6: SPECIAL PARKING AND SIGN LIMITATIONS
Notwithstanding the provisions of CCNO 11-17, there shall be provided off street parking facilities in the
ratio of not less than three (3) square feet for each one square foot of sales floor area within the
development. Notwithstanding the provisions of CCNO 11-8 Article A and CCNO 11-22, off premises
signs shall not be permitted in any CP zone.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
11-8B-7: GENERAL REGULATIONS
A. Ownership: A CP zone may be established only upon land held in single ownership or under
unified control or where the planning commission determines that commercial development on
separate adjoining properties should be coordinated to form a physically unified commercial
facility which will be compatible with the surrounding land uses. At the time a CP zone is
established and before building permits are issued, deed restrictions on the property or
properties covered under the zone change shall be filed by the applicant or owners of the
property with the county recorder and shall provide that development take place on such property
or properties in accordance with a final site development plan approved by the city council and
on file with the city recorder.
B. Nonconforming Uses: A CP zone shall not be established upon a tract of land which would
contain a nonconforming use after the passage of such amendment to this title unless the
development planned for the tract includes the limitation of the nonconforming use or its
integration into planned development.
C. Relate To Master Plan: The location of the CP zone shall have an acceptable relationship to and
further the purposes of the master plan for the city as determined by the planning commission.
D. Minimum Acres: No area zoned as CP-1 or CP-2 shall be less than two (2) acres.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 102/279
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
11-8B-8: SUBMISSION OF APPLICATION
A rezoning petition for a planned commercial zone shall be submitted to the planning commission and
shall be accompanied by a preliminary development plan for the commercial center, showing a unified
and organized arrangement of building structures and their proposed uses, off street parking, internal
and external traffic circulation and service facilities, and schematic architectural drawings, landscaping
plans and sketches demonstrating the design and character of the proposed development. The
developer shall submit all evidence deemed necessary by the city council and/or planning commission of
his ability to undertake the proposed project.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
11-8B-9: PLANNING COMMISSION APPROVAL
The planning commission shall recommend approval or denial of the zoning petition and preliminary
development plan to the city council. The recommendation of the planning commission may contain
conditions, limitations or amendments to the preliminary development plan to ensure that the planned
commercial development is integrated into its surroundings and serves the public interest to the greatest
extent possible. The planning commission shall also recommend a reasonable dollar amount to be
provided by the developer by escrow or bond to ensure the completion of the landscaping for the entire
plan or phase thereof.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
11-8B-10: CITY COUNCIL ACTION
The city council, after holding a public hearing thereon, may approve or disapprove a petition for a
planned commercial zone. In approving a zoning petition, the city council shall concurrently approve a
preliminary development plan, the dollar amount required to ensure completion of the landscaping,
together with whatever amendments, conditions or requirements as it may deem necessary to secure
the purpose of this article.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
11-8B-11: BUILDING PERMIT ISSUANCE
After the rezoning of the site to a CP zone, a final development plan for the entire district or for the initial
phase, if a phase development plan has been approved, shall be submitted to and approved by the
planning commission as complying with the regulations and requirements attached thereto prior to the
issuance of any building or land use permits. The final development plan shall show in detail the
proposed areas and locations of buildings, off street parking, internal and external traffic circulation,
improvements, landscaping, signs and service facilities. No changes shall be made in the final
development plan during the course of construction pursuant thereto without first obtaining prior written
approval of the planning commission. Copies of the approved final development plan shall be kept on file
in the office of the planning commission, building inspector and city recorder, and only changes which
may be subsequently approved shall be added thereto.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
11-8B-12: TIME LIMITATION
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 103/279
A. Specified; Extension: A building permit shall be secured and construction begun in accordance
with the approved final development plan within eighteen (18) months from the effective date of
the ordinance establishing such zone or other period of time as determined by the city council.
Application may be made for not more than one six (6) month extension of the time limit for
commencement of construction. Use and building permits shall be issued only for those uses and
buildings indicated on the approved final development plan.
B. Revocation: In the event that construction is not started within the specified time limit, the
planning commission shall review the classification of the zone and the progress which has taken
place and, if deemed necessary, revoke the plan approved and initiate proceedings to rezone
said property to its prior classification or to a zone consistent with the comprehensive master
plan.
C. Completion Of Construction: All construction authorized in the approved final development plan
shall be completed within three (3) years of the date construction has commenced. A plan for
stage development which will require more time than the limits contained herein may be
approved by the city council, after recommendation by the planning commission.
D. Failure To Complete Construction: In the event that construction is not completed within the time
limits specified, the planning commission shall review the development which has taken place
and, if necessary, initiate proceedings to reclassify the property or part thereof in a manner
consistent with the comprehensive master plan.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
11-8B-13: APPLICATION TO EXISTING COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
In the case of existing commercial districts, the planning commission and the city council may proceed to
rezone such districts to an equivalent planned commercial zone without the requirements of a
preliminary development plan and other necessary information; but, after being so zoned to a planned
commercial zone, a preliminary and final development plan of each development shall be submitted to
and approved by the planning commission and city council in accordance with the provisions of this
article prior to the issuance of building permits; provided, however, that improvements already in
existence at the time of rezoning shall not be affected.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
ARTICLE C: PLANNED MANUFACTURING ZONE MP-1
11-8C-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT
11-8C-2: PERMITTED USES
11-8C-3: CONDITIONAL USES
11-8C-4: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
11-8C-5: PROTECTION OF ADJOINING RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES; BUFFER ZONE
11-8C-6: SITE PLAN APPROVAL
11-8C-7: SPECIAL PROVISIONS
11-8C-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT
A. The intent of the planned manufacturing zone is to permit the establishment of a well designed
complex of manufacturing facilities for the community or region which will minimize traffic
congestion on public streets in the vicinity, and which shall best fit the general environment and
land use pattern of the area to be served. The protective standards contained in this article are
intended to minimize any adverse effect of the planned manufacturing zone on nearby property
values by achieving maximum compatible integration of land uses, by preserving the aesthetic
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 104/279
qualities of the area, and to provide for safe, efficient use of the planned manufacturing zone and
its built in control processes which would be highly beneficial in protecting the established
surrounding environment, especially residential uses in abutting residential zones.
B. The type of planned manufacturing zone provided for in this chapter is MP-1 light industrial use
zone.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
11-8C-2: PERMITTED USES
In planned manufacturing zone MP-1, no building or structure or land shall be used and no building or
structure shall be erected which is arranged, intended or designed to be used for other than one or more
of the following uses:
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 105/279
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to a permitted use.
Agriculture, animals and fowl.
Assembling of electric appliance, electronic instruments and devices.
Automobile, sales and service.
Bicycle assembling, painting, upholstering, rebuilding, repairing, rentals, sales and reconditioning,
provided such uses are conducted within a building.
Blueprinting, photostating and duplicating.
Boat building and repair.
Bookbinding.
Bottling works, soft drinks.
Bus terminal.
Cabinet shop.
Car or truck rental agency.
Carpet or rug cleaning.
Carpenter shop.
Clothes cleaning and dyeing.
Construction of buildings to be sold and moved off the premises.
Dairy.
Egg handling, processing and sales.
Employment agency.
Express office.
Garage, enclosed recreational vehicle storage.
Honey extraction.
Ice cream manufacture.
Ice manufacture.
Knitting mills.
Laboratories.
Laundry.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 106/279
Lithographing, including engraving and photoengraving.
Machine shop.
Machinery assembling, painting, upholstering, rebuilding, repairing, rentals, sales and reconditioning,
provided such uses are conducted within a building.
Manufacture and maintenance of billboards, commercial advertising structures, light sheet metal
products, including heating and ventilating ducts and equipment, cornices and eaves, Venetian blinds,
window shades and awnings.
Manufacture, compounding, assembling or treatment of merchandise from the following previously
prepared materials: felt, bone, canvas, cellophane, ceramics, clay, cloth, cork, fiber, leather, glass, paint,
plastic, precious or semiprecious metals or stones, textiles, wood, wool and yarn.
Manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging or treatment of such products as bakery goods,
candy, cosmetics, dairy products, drugs, perfumes, pharmaceuticals, perfumed toilet soap, toiletries and
food products, except the following: fish, sauerkraut, pickles, vinegar, yeast, and the rendering of fats
and oils.
Manufacture of musical instruments, toys, novelties, rubber and metal stamps, cameras and
photographic equipment, business machines including typewriters and calculators.
Mattress manufacturing, rebuilding and renovating.
Motor vehicle assembling, painting, upholstering, rebuilding, repairing, rentals, sales and reconditioning,
provided such uses are conducted within a building.
Offices, business.
Parking lot.
Printing and newspaper publishing.
Public buildings and utilities, including central plants and substations.
Radio and stereo assembling.
Radio and television transmitting towers.
Sexually oriented business in accordance with chapter 20 of this title.
Sign painting.
Stone monument works; provided, however, that such uses are conducted wholly within a building.
Television sets assembling.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 107/279
Temporary Business including Christmas tree sales, blanket stand, fireworks stand, food vendors,
vegetable store or stand, and other similar uses as determined by the zoning administrator in
accordance with CCNO 4-1-9.
Trailer assembling, painting, upholstering, rebuilding, repairing, rentals, sales and reconditioning,
provided such uses are conducted within a building.
Typesetting.
Upholstering.
Veterinary.
Warehouse.
Weaving.
Welding shop.
Wholesale business.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
Repealed & Reenacted by Ord. 2014-23 on 9/16/2014
11-8C-3: CONDITIONAL USES
Permitted uses in the C-2 zone are conditional uses in the MP-1 zone. Conditional uses in zone C-2 will
not be considered in zone MP-1.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
11-8C-4: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
A. Area, Width, Yard And Height Regulations: None for buildings, except that no building or
structure shall be built to a height in excess of thirty five feet (35') or closer than fifty feet (50') to
any state highway or ten feet (10') to any other street or residential zone boundary.
B. Lot Coverage: No building or structure or group of buildings with their accessory buildings shall
cover more than eighty percent (80%) of the area of the lot.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
11-8C-5: PROTECTION OF ADJOINING RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES; BUFFER ZONE
When a commercial/manufacturing development takes place that abuts a residential zoning district, a
solid screen wall must be erected. In addition to the landscaping required, the screen wall shall be eight
feet (8') in height along the rear and interior side yards. Along the front yard lines and street side yard
lines, of either zoning districts, the solid walls shall maintain the maximum fence height regulations for
front and street sides. The solid screen wall shall have at least a ninety five percent (95%) screen value.
The owner of the commercial/manufacturing property shall construct, maintain and keep the screen wall
in good repair.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 108/279
11-8C-6: SITE PLAN APPROVAL
For any development or use in a manufacturing zone, a site plan shall be submitted in accordance with
CCNO 11-10-27.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
11-8C-7: SPECIAL PROVISIONS
A. Ownership: An MP-1 zone may be established upon land held in single ownership or under
unified control, or where the planning commission determines the manufacturing development on
separate adjoining properties should be coordinated to form a physically unified manufacturing
area wherein permitted uses will be compatible with the surrounding land uses.
B. Nonconforming Uses: An MP-1 zone shall not be established upon a tract of land which would
contain a nonconforming use after the passage of such amendment to this title unless the
development planned for the tract includes the elimination of the nonconforming use or its
integration into planned development.
C. Relate To General Plan: The location of the MP-1 zone shall have an acceptable relationship to
further the purpose of the general plan as determined by the city council.
D. Hazards: The permitted uses of an MP-1 zone shall not create a hazard using flammable,
explosive, or other dangerous materials and shall not be associated with noise, dust, odors,
noxious fumes, glare, or other hazards to safety and health which may be discernable beyond
the premises.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
ARTICLE D: DESIGN STANDARDS FOR COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT
11-8D-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT
11-8D-2: SCOPE
11-8D-3: ARCHITECTURE
11-8D-4: SITE DESIGN
11-8D-5: LANDSCAPING
11-8D-6: ALTERNATIVE LANDSCAPING OPTIONS
11-8D-7: LANDSCAPING MATERIALS
11-8D-8: SIGNS
11-8D-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT
The purpose of these design standards and regulations is to preserve property values, enhance the
economic viability and aesthetic value of commercial properties, to provide a quality environment for
both citizens and visitors.
We feel that the architecture found in our community ought to reflect the natural environment found in
this area. We envision cut stone and/or rocks, wood or wood like materials consistent with the natural
colors native to the area. We value creativity in landscaping including mature vegetation, pedestrian
friendly open spaces, Xeriscaping and water features.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2009-11 on 8/11/2009
11-8D-2: SCOPE
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 109/279
All development proposals in commercial or manufacturing zones, including all new structures and
parking lots and expanded structures, remodels and renovations when the cost of such expansion,
remodel or renovation (as determined by the building inspector) is equal to or exceeds fifty percent
(50%) of the current assessed value of the structure, shall be subject to the standards and regulations of
this article. Such standards and regulations are intended to be in addition to existing standards and
regulations of the underlying zone of the property and other applicable regulations of this title. In cases
of expansion, remodel or renovation costing less than fifty percent (50%) of the current assessed value
of the structure, though not required, it is recommended that these standards be considered.
A. This article establishes two (2) kinds of design criteria: design standards and design guidelines.
1. Design standards are required in addition to all other standards set forth in this title and
are indicated by the verb "shall". In the event of conflict between this article and other
applicable provisions of this title, the more restrictive provision shall apply.
2. It is the intent of the city that every development subject to this article be designed in
conformity to the purpose and requirements of this article. However, the city also
recognizes that it cannot anticipate all possible circumstances, nor the best means for
dealing with them, in the preparation and adoption of these regulations. For example,
criteria established herein may be more germane to larger projects than to smaller ones,
depending on the individual characteristics of the site, such as size, configuration,
topography and location.
Therefore, the approval authority, unless expressly stated to the contrary in this article,
shall have reasonable discretion in implementing the purpose of this article by modifying
both mandatory and recommended criteria as individual circumstances may merit. In
deviating from the adopted standards, it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to
show why the requirements would be an unreasonable burden, and how the project would
still meet the purpose and intent of this article. In the same vein, the approval authority
may also require that certain provisions of this article, which are not mandatory, be
included in a project based on individual circumstances.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2009-11 on 8/11/2009
11-8D-3: ARCHITECTURE
A. Articulation:
1. A building should reflect a human scale and be inviting to the public. Large buildings
should be "stepped", both vertically and horizontally, to break up the building mass and
provide aesthetic relief.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 110/279
2. Buildings shall be accessible for pedestrians and public transit users, not just for people
driving private automobiles.
a. Building entrances shall be identifiable and directly accessible from public
sidewalks via on site pedestrian walkways. (Drive aisles and other vehicular
accesses shall not be considered pedestrian walkways.)
b. Pedestrian walkways shall have at least five feet (5') of unobstructed width, and
shall be part of an approved pedestrian circulation plan.
B. Public Amenities:
1. Overhangs and canopies should be integrated into the building design so as to enhance
pedestrian walkways but shall not be backlit.
2. Comfortable and attractive amenities such as benches, tables, drinking fountains, trash
receptacles, information kiosks, plazas, fountains, etc., should be provided for public
enjoyment and comfort.
3. A minimum of twenty percent (20%) decorative (i.e., colored, stamped or exposed
aggregate), pavers or brick is required in walkways.
4. Bus shelters are encouraged.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 111/279
C. Colors And Materials:
1. All applicants for commercial or other site plan review or construction within North Ogden
City's commercial districts shall include a color board or architectural renderings
indicating the colors and materials to be used on site. Proposed materials should typically
harmonize with existing, surrounding development.
2. External surfaces shall be predominantly natural, muted earth tones (non bright colors
representing natural, earth colors and values, including browns, black, grays, greens,
rusts, etc.). The roof of an addition to an existing structure, when matching existing colors,
may be exempt.
a. White may be used as an accent color only.
b. The planning commission may allow contrasting accent colors.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 112/279
3. Exposed fronts and street sides of buildings shall be constructed of non reflective
materials and shall include, but not be limited to, textured concrete (split face or honed
block), brick, stone and/or considered wood/wood like materials.
a. Concrete masonry units or block CMUs shall not be considered acceptable
materials unless it is specifically colored and textured.
b. The planning commission shall review all siding and stucco proposals (samples
must be submitted).
c. At least twenty five percent (25%) of the front shall have architectural features
such as canopies, pillars, archways and other treatments.
d. At least ten percent (10%) of all other facades shall be of similar architectural
features.
e. In cases where a building has double frontage, each street facing side shall be
treated as a front.
4. The use of glass to allow visual access to interior spaces shall be encouraged.
a. Mirrored glazing is not recommended.
b. Tinted or solar absorption glazing may be used.
5. Metal as a window framing support or mounting material shall be painted, stained,
anodized or vinyl clad in approved colors.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 113/279
6. Buildings and fence runs longer than fifty (50) linear feet shall be broken up at periodic
intervals using architectural features in order to provide visual relief.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2008-11 on 6/10/2008
11-8D-4: SITE DESIGN
A. Overall Design Concepts:
1. Dedicated walkways, plazas and other pedestrian oriented hardscape areas may be
included as landscaping, provided that they do not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the
required minimum landscaping requirement.
2. The landscaping plan shall include a pedestrian circulation element that shows
interconnectivity with surrounding sidewalks, urban trails and surrounding uses. The city
encourages appropriate pedestrian connections to adjacent neighborhoods.
a. The size and spacing of landscape elements should be consistent with the size of
the project and should relate to the structures and the streetscape. No landscape
element may be constructed, erected or otherwise placed on site without city
approval.
b. Trees overhanging pedestrian walkways and drive areas shall be of appropriate
species and pruned to have a general canopy clearance of at least nine feet (9').
B. Site Grading:
1. Site design should minimize the removal of mature trees and shrubs. Where removal is
necessary, mature trees should be salvaged or replaced on a three to one (3:1) basis.
Any trees prohibited by resolution, ordinance or statute shall be removed and not be
replaced.
2. Abrupt or unnatural changes in grade may create barriers or disrupt drainage patterns.
Proposed grading should be designed to take advantage of the natural grade and land
features.
3. Steep slopes, generally three to one (3:1) or greater, shall be stabilized with vegetation,
retaining walls or other appropriate measures. Sites shall be designed to minimize
erosion.
4. Landscape plans should preserve and incorporate natural land features such as streams,
washes, springs, etc., into the overall site plan.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 114/279
C. Water Elements:
1. Fountains and other water features should be sited and designed so that they are efficient
users of water.
2. Filtered backwash effluent should be discharged into landscaped areas whenever
possible.
D. Art And Furnishings:
1. If public art is used, it should be integrated into the overall design of a project.
2. Lighting fixtures and illumination should complement a structure and be of similar design
and character as the project's building components.
3. Street furniture and related features are encouraged.
E. Maintenance:
1. Projects should demonstrate that maintenance factors have been considered in the
landscape design.
2. Irrigation systems should be designed to minimize maintenance and water consumption.
3. Phased developments shall indicate a mechanism for dust, weed and debris control on
undeveloped portions of the site and shall ensure continuing compliance.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2009-11 on 8/11/2009
11-8D-5: LANDSCAPING
A. General Requirements:
1. All plantings shall be maintained in a healthy and attractive way.
2. Landscaping materials shall be contained so as not to spill into the public right of way.
3. Park strip landscaping shall not exceed a maximum height of two feet (2') for shrubs or
grasses, and trees in the park strip shall have a minimum height of seven feet (7') for the
lowest branches of a tree when they extend above the curb or sidewalk. Notwithstanding
the branch height, no evergreen tree is allowed in the park strip.
4. A minimum of twenty percent (20%) of commercial sites (excluding the building footprint
and park strip) shall be landscaped. Any damage to city property created by vegetation
will be the responsibility of the property owner.
5. All landscaping shall be serviced by an acceptable underground sprinkling or irrigation
system which includes an automatic timer.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 115/279
B. Landscaping Objectives:
1. Landscaping should be encouraged that will serve the function of enhancing the visual
environment by:
a. Adding visual interest through texture, color, size and shape, etc.
b. Enhancing perspective by framing views, complementing architecture, screening
and creating points of interest and activity, and
c. Defining and screening parking areas and associated access lanes from adjacent
residential zones and public rights of way.
2. Landscaping should be encouraged that will serve the function of ensuring public safety
by:
a. Guiding the circulation of cars and people;
b. Controlling access to parking lots;
c. Making traffic diverters prominent; and
d. Defining the relative importance of streets by varying the species, height and
location of landscaping.
3. Landscaping and other design elements, such as pavers, lighting, seating, etc., as
deemed appropriate, should enhance the visual environment by creating a visually
obvious and definite entry point or entry corridor, framing views, complementing the
architecture, screening objectionable views and creating points of interest.
C. Size Of Required Landscape Materials At Time Of Planting: Unless specified elsewhere in this
code:
1. Deciduous shade trees shall have a minimum caliper size of two inches (2") measured six
inches (6") above ground and a minimum height of six feet (6') tall.
2. Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of four feet (4') tall.
3. Shrubs shall be of a size generally known in the landscape industry as requiring at least a
two (2) gallon container.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 116/279
D. Installation And Maintenance:
1. Landscaping shall be installed in all areas not occupied by building, parking, storage,
future phased plan areas or accessways and in accordance with the approved landscape
plan.
2. Landscaping shall be installed prior to occupancy of any unit in the structure. In the case
of inclement weather that prevents the installation of the required improvements, the time
completion of the improvements may be extended, in writing, upon the approval of the
applicable reviewing body or designee. However, in no case shall the time for completion
be extended beyond June 1 immediately following the completion date. A financial
guarantee shall be required prior to issuing building permits.
3. All landscaping, fencing, walls and other buffering/screening materials shall be
maintained in a good, healthy, weed free, effective condition by the owner. Diseased or
dead plant material shall be removed and replaced by June 1 if due to winterkill or
October 1 if the plant material dies during summer months. Deteriorated or ineffective
fencing material shall be removed and replaced within three (3) months of notice of
correction. Failure to comply is a class B misdemeanor punishable by up to one thousand
eight hundred dollars ($1,800.00) in fines and six (6) months in jail.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 117/279
E. Landscaping Requirements:
1. Side And Rear Yard Areas Within Commercial Zones:
a. Adjacent to properties with a less intense zoning designation: Ten feet (10')
minimum, and must be planted with trees at the ratio of at least one per every fifty
feet (50') of side and rear yard, and may be planted in groups or singularly, as
long as there is no less than one grouping or one tree per side and rear yard. The
remainder of the side and rear yard area must be planted with lawn or shrubbery;
not more than one-half (1/2) of the required area is used for nonliving landscape
material. Ground cover or shrubbery must provide minimum ground coverage of
fifty percent (50%) within three (3) years of initial planting.
b. Adjacent to properties with the same zoning designation: None required. However,
an area equal to one-fourth (1/4) of that which would have been required must be
relocated to other portions of the site.
2. Adjacent To Residential Zones: Side and rear yard landscaping must contain a minimum
eight foot (8') high continuous fence or solid landscape screen at the time of installation
when adjacent to any residential zone.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 118/279
3. Interior Landscaping Of Parking Areas:
a. Lots having fifty (50) or less, but more than five (5) stalls: A minimum of six
percent (6%) of the gross parking area must be landscaped.
b. Lots having fifty one (51) to ninety nine (99) stalls: A minimum of seven percent
(7%) of gross parking area must be landscaped.
c. Lots having ninety nine (99) or more stalls: A minimum of eight percent (8%) of
gross parking area must be landscaped.
d. Landscaped areas must be adequately protected from damage by vehicles. The
overhang of a vehicle may project over a landscaped area a maximum of one foot
(1') when such an area is at least five feet (5') in depth per each abutting parking
space. Curbing must protect landscaped areas.
e. No parking stall shall be located more than seventy five feet (75') from the edge of
any landscaped area.
f. Trees are required at a rate of one per two hundred (200) square feet on required
landscaped area, with a one tree minimum, and shall be the primary landscaping
material. Shrubbery and hedges or living ground cover may also be used to
complement tree landscaping as long as not more than seventy five percent (75%)
of the required landscaped area will be used for nonliving material.
g. Parking lots that utilize trees that exceed the standards set forth in subsection C of
this section will be allowed to reduce the total square footage of required street or
side/rear yard landscaping at the following rates:
50 percent increase in required trees 20 percent
60 percent increase in required trees 30 percent
70 percent increase in required trees 40 percent
80 percent increase in required trees 50 percent
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2009-11 on 8/11/2009
11-8D-6: ALTERNATIVE LANDSCAPING OPTIONS
A. The planning director may approve a modification of these requirements if:
1. The proposed alternative meets the purpose of this article; and
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 119/279
2. The landscaping better accommodates the existing physical conditions of the property or
provides significant elements for wind protection, solar access and shading, and the
proposed landscaping represents an equal or superior result than would be achieved if
the requirements of this article were strictly followed; or
3. The proposed alternative incorporates a distinct coloring scheme utilizing the planting or
annuals in areas of high visibility.
B. The city council may authorize the city's participation in the installation of landscaping and
landscaping improvements required by this article when it is in the city's best interest.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2009-11 on 8/11/2009
11-8D-7: LANDSCAPING MATERIALS
A. No landscape material may be used unless approved in conformance with this section. Species
may be approved for use if it can be determined that such species will not cause adverse
impacts to public improvements, such as sidewalk heave or root infiltration of utility pipes or lines,
and will not adversely affect private property (weeping on vehicles, malodorous fruits or flowers,
and similar effects). A suggested planting list is on file in the planning department.
B. Planting and staking must conform to the standards contained in: "Planting Landscape Plants";
EB #1505; Washington State University, College of Agriculture and Home Economics, which is
available at the North Ogden City planning office.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2009-11 on 8/11/2009
11-8D-8: SIGNS
A. Signs shall comply with CCNO 11-22.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2009-11 on 8/11/2009
ARTICLE E: ENTERTAINMENT OVERLAY ZONE (EOZ)
11-8E-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT
11-8E-2: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
11-8E-3: SITE PLAN APPROVAL
11-8E-4: SIGN REGULATIONS
11-8E-5: SPECIAL REGULATIONS
11-8E-6: ENTERTAINMENT USES
11-8E-7: PROTECTION AND ADJOINING PROPERTIES
11-8E-8: ADDITIONAL PARKING GUIDELINES
11-8E-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT
The purpose of the entertainment overlay zone (EOZ) is to encourage development of entertainment
uses and complementary uses in close proximity to each other through the use of incentives while
preserving rights under the existing district design. The zone should create an active commercial area(s)
which attracts entertainment and correlated activities where various attractions entice the public to seek
entertainment and enjoyment during the day and evening while also being able to find fine dining and
unique retail and other activities.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 120/279
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2011-13 on 6/28/2011
11-8E-2: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
A. Minimum Lot Area: Eight thousand (8,000) square feet.
B. Minimum Lot Width: None.
C. Minimum Yard Setbacks:
1. Front: Twenty feet (20') for all buildings and walls or fences over three feet (3') high;
2. Side: None, except ten feet (10') adjacent to residential boundary;
3. Side facing street on corner lot: Twenty feet (20');
4. Rear: None, except ten feet (10') where building rears on a residential zone.
D. Building Height:
1. Minimum: Ten feet (10').
2. Maximum: Thirty five feet (35').
a. Exception: Anything over thirty five feet (35') with a maximum of sixty five feet (65')
may be approved with a conditional use permit.
E. Lot Coverage: No building or accessory buildings shall cover over sixty percent (60%) of lot area.
F. Minimum Standards Determined: Minimum site development standards for dwelling units shall be
determined by the planning commission.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2011-13 on 6/28/2011
11-8E-3: SITE PLAN APPROVAL
For any development or use in a commercial zone, a site plan shall be submitted in accordance with
CCNO 11-10-27.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2011-13 on 6/28/2011
11-8E-4: SIGN REGULATIONS
A. Commercial Signs: Commercial signs shall be in accordance with the existing sign ordinance and
the following regulations:
1. The total aggregate area of all commercial signs pertaining to one or more businesses in
any single building or suite shall not exceed forty percent (40%) of the front wall plane of
the building or suite or two hundred (200) square feet, whichever is less, unless the
portion of the building or suite adjacent to its lot's street-property line measures more than
two hundred (200) linear feet. In that case, the aggregate area of all such signs on the
premises may be increased in area to the rate of one square foot of sign area for each
linear foot of building or suite frontage in excess of two hundred (200) linear feet. If two
(2) or more businesses occupy a single building or suite, each business shall be entitled
to an equal proportional share of the total aggregate sign area and no business shall be
entitled to use more than its proportionate share of the aggregate signs because another
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 121/279
business is not using its entire proportionate share. For buildings or suites on a corner lot,
only the frontage on the building, which contains the main entrance, shall be measured to
compute the aggregate sign area.
2. Freestanding commercial signs shall not be counted as a portion of the total aggregate
sign area of the premises and shall be restricted to the following:
a. One freestanding commercial sign for each street upon which the lot has frontage.
b. Such signs shall have a maximum area determined by the total square footage of
the building. The following guidelines only apply to entertainment uses as listed in
CCNO 11-8E-6, "Entertainment Uses", of this article. All other uses must meet the
requirements listed in CCNO 11-22.
i. Less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet: Ninety (90) square feet with
any mix of changeable and unchangeable copy; maximum height of twenty
feet (20').
ii. Between ten thousand (10,000) square feet and nineteen thousand
(19,000) square feet: One hundred twenty (120) square feet with any mix
of changeable and unchangeable copy; maximum height of twenty feet
(20').
iii. Greater than nineteen thousand (19,000) square feet: Two hundred fifty
(250) square feet with any mix of changeable and unchangeable copy;
maximum height of twenty five feet (25').
c. Such signs shall not be closer than thirty feet (30') to any residential district.
d. The minimum setback shall be ten feet (10') from behind the curb, but not in the
street right of way.
Unless mentioned in this section the permitted signs shall be in accordance with
the regulations set forth in CCNO 11-22.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2011-13 on 6/28/2011
11-8E-5: SPECIAL REGULATIONS
A. Public infrastructure:
Architectural controls.
Decorative street lighting.
Design standards.
Public accessway.
Public spaces.
Street width.
Streetscape/furniture.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2011-13 on 6/28/2011
11-8E-6: ENTERTAINMENT USES
A. Definitions:
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 122/279
COMPLEMENTARY USES: A use that provides a one stop area for people to shop, eat and
pursue leisure and recreational activities and includes uses such as restaurants, retail shopping,
ice cream parlors and other similar uses.
ENTERTAINMENT USES: Businesses that provide entertainment opportunities to the
surrounding community such as motion picture theaters, live theater, musical performance
venues, art galleries, commercial recreation, dance halls, amusement businesses, etc.
B. Mixture; Deemed Conditional: The entertainment overlay zone should contain a mix of
entertainment uses and complementary uses. All permitted and conditional uses in the
underlying zone shall be considered conditional uses within the entertainment overlay zone,
unless specified as permitted below.
C. Uses Designated: In the following list of uses:
1. Uses designated with a "P" are permitted uses; and
2. Uses designated with a "C" shall be conditional uses, which shall not be established or
maintained unless authorized by a conditional use permit as described in CCNO 11-1;
and
3. Uses designated with an "E" shall be entertainment uses; and
4. Uses designated with an "N" shall not be permitted in the zone.
D. Decision Of Use Inclusion: No list of specific uses can be complete. Therefore decisions
regarding whether a specific use is included in one of the categories of use in the following list as
a permitted use or a conditional use will be made by the planning commission, with an appeal to
the city council.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 123/279
E. Uses Prohibited: Uses not included in the following categories of uses are prohibited. If the city
council desires to allow such a use as a permitted or conditional use, it must amend this title as
described in CCNO 11-1-4. If the amendment is made, the use will only be allowed as provided
by the city council.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 124/279
EOZ
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to a permitted use C
Amusement arcades E
Animal grooming, small animals only, and provided business is conducted within
completely enclosed building P
Animal hospital, small animals only, and provided business is conducted within
completely enclosed building C
Antique, import, or souvenir shop P
Archery shop, provided business is conducted within completely enclosed building P
Art and artist's supply store P
Art gallery E
Athletic and sporting goods store P
Athletic club P
Automobile parts sales P
Bakery manufacture limited to goods retained on premises P
Bank or financial institution P
Barbershop P
Beauty shop P
Bed and breakfast P
Bicycle sales and service P
Blueprinting or photostating P
Bookstore, other than adult bookstores P
Bowling alley E
Cafe or cafeteria P
Camera store P
Candy store or confectionery P
Catering establishment P
Church C
Circus, carnival, or other transient amusement C
Clinics, medical or dental P
Clothing and accessory stores P
Comedy club E
Costume rental P
Dairy products store P
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 125/279
Dance club E
Data processing service and supplies P
Delicatessen E
Department store P
Drapery and curtain store P
Drive-in refreshment stands P
Drugstore P
Electrical and heating appliances and fixtures sales and service, all storage items
must be stored in an enclosed building P
Electrical equipment sales and service all storage items must be stored in an
enclosed building P
Employment agency P
Fabric and textile store P
Film exchange establishment P
Flooring or floor repair P
Florist shop P
Furniture sales and repair P
Gift store P
Glass sales and service P
Grocery store P
Gunsmith P
Hardware store P
Health food store P
Health or recreation club E
Hobby and crafts store P
Home improvement store P
Hotel and motel P
Household appliance sales and incidental service P
Ice cream parlor P
Insurance agency P
Interior decorating and designing establishment P
Jewelry store sales and service P
Laboratory, dental or medical P
Laser tag E
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 126/279
Leather goods, sales and service P
Licensed massage therapist P
Linen store P
Live theater E
Locksmith P
Miniature golf E
Motion picture theater, indoor E
Museum E
Music performance venue E
Music store P
Needlework, embroidery or knitting store P
Newsstand P
Notions store P
Novelty store P
Nursery school N
Office in which goods or merchandise are not commercially created, exchanged, or
sold P
Office machines sales and service P
Office, professional P
Office supply P
Paintball P
Park and playground P
Pet and pet supply store P
Pharmacy P
Photo studio P
Photographic supplies P
Post office P
Printing, lithographing, publishing or reproduction sales and service P
Real estate agency P
Reception center or wedding chapel C
Rental agency for home and garden equipment C
Restaurant P
Restaurant drive-in P
Retail P
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 127/279
Roller skating rink E
School of professional or quasi-professional training P
Sewing machines sales and service P
Shoe repair or shoeshine shop P
Shoe store P
Skatepark indoor E
Tanning salon P
Taxidermist P
Temporary building for uses incidental to construction work. Such building shall be
removed upon the completion of construction work P
Theater, indoor P
Theater, outdoor C
Tobacco shop P
Travel agency P
Upholstery shop P
Video, DVD, sales and rental (nonadult) P
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2011-13 on 6/28/2011
11-8E-7: PROTECTION AND ADJOINING PROPERTIES
Contact city for guidelines regarding this section.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2011-13 on 6/28/2011
11-8E-8: ADDITIONAL PARKING GUIDELINES
A. Public Accessway: Access points to city streets should be kept to a minimum. Use of shared
accessways is required wherever feasible.
B. Shared Parking: Where all uses within a development are permitted, the separate uses may be
considered as one single enterprise for purposes of calculating parking requirements. The city
may also permit additional reductions where it can be demonstrated that there is sufficient
variability in peak demand for parking by different uses within the zone.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2011-13 on 6/28/2011
11-9: HILLSIDE PROTECTION ZONES HP-1, HP-2, HP-31
11-9-1: PURPOSE
11-9-2: PERMITTED USES
11-9-3: CONDITIONAL USES
11-9-4: SUBMISSION AND REVIEW PROCESS
11-9-5: GRADING AND DRAINAGE STANDARDS
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 128/279
11-9-6: DEVELOPMENT CONSTRAINTS
11-9-7: SIGN REGULATIONS
11-9-8: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
11-9-1: PURPOSE
A. The principal purpose of the hillside protection zones are to allow for the reasonable use and
development of the hillside land in the city while promoting the public health, safety, convenience
and general welfare of the citizens. These standards are to help maintain the character, identity,
and image of the city. These zoning districts implement the "North Ogden City North Hillside
Development Study".
B. To meet these objectives, it is necessary during planning and implementation of development
activities to give consideration to the following: 1) conservation of the natural environmental
function of the site; 2) compatibility with the surrounding land; 3) stabilization of hillsides, slopes
or other areas subject to erosion or mass movement; and 4) preservation of the natural capacity
of drainage courses and protection of natural drainageways.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
11-9-2: PERMITTED USES
Uses permitted in the HP-1, HP-2 and HP-3 zoning districts shall be limited to the following:
Accessory buildings in the rear yard only and shall not be used as living quarters.
Agriculture. The use of agricultural equipment that produces excessive noise and/or light may only be
used during normal hours of work allowed in the city or by variance to the hours allowed by the city
council.
Church, synagogue or similar permanent building used for regular religious worship.
Educational institutions, public schools, public playgrounds and recreational areas that meet the
requirements of CCNO 11-10-14.
Golf course, except miniature golf.
Home occupations.
Household pets.
One single-family dwelling per lot or parcel.
Public buildings, public parks, recreation grounds and associated buildings.
Residential facility for disabled persons in accordance with CCNO 11-10-28.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
Amended by Ord. 2010-16 on 11/30/2010
11-9-3: CONDITIONAL USES
The following uses shall be permitted only when authorized by a conditional use permit as provided in
CCNO 11-14:
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 129/279
Cemeteries with customary incidental buildings.
Daycare center.
Private park, playground or recreation area, but not including privately owned commercial amusement
business.
Public utility substation or water storage reservoir developed by a public agency.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
11-9-4: SUBMISSION AND REVIEW PROCESS
A. Steps Outlined: The submission and review process consists of three (3) basic review steps:
1. The first step is submission of a conceptual sketch plan to evaluate the appropriateness
of the development based on the consideration of the existing features and perceived
constraints of the proposed site.
2. The second step is submission and review of the development plan, which reflects the
results of the engineering studies addressing site specific constraints identified in the
engineering studies. If the developer is subdividing the property, a preliminary plat in
accordance with the procedures specified in the subdivision ordinance must also be
submitted at this step. The engineering studies are to review the geomorphology,
geology, faults, hydrology, slopes, soils, recharge, vegetation and wildlife, fire, and utility
and parks constraints of the site. The purpose of this step is to determine if the site is safe
to be developed as proposed by the development plan and, if applicable, preliminary plat.
This step allows the reviewers to evaluate the mitigation measures proposed by the
developer's engineers.
3. The third step is submission of the final development plan or final plat and improvement
plans. The purpose of this step is to review compliance with the stipulations of the
development plan or preliminary plat. It allows for a review of the improvement plans to
assure that the development plans or subdivision improvement plans are designed in
accordance with the public works standards of the city and with the mitigation measures
required by the city. The review of the final plat is to assure that the plat conforms to the
subdivision ordinance and the zoning ordinance of the city. Upon compliance with final
approval, a final plat shall be recorded.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 130/279
B. Conceptual Sketch Plan Review Process: Prior to the submission of a preliminary plat or a
development plan in this zoning district, the applicant shall meet with the community
development director to discuss the proposal and what constraints for development are believed
to exist. Upon completion of this preapplication meeting with the community development
director, the applicant may choose to present the conceptual sketch plan to the planning
commission. The purpose of this presentation is to provide the applicant with an opportunity to
present why the proposed development is appropriate for the site. The application shall provide a
conceptual sketch plan which shall include the following:
1. Basic site analysis which includes existing features of the site, such as existing plant
materials, steep slopes or rock outcroppings, views, and how they will be incorporated
into the proposed development;
2. Traffic flow patterns into, through, and out of the proposed development, including
vehicular, pedestrian and other;
3. The general location of housing units by type (i.e., detached dwelling units and attached
dwelling units), along with other appropriate uses and amenities; and
4. The existing land uses bordering the proposed site.
C. Preliminary Plat Review Process:
1. An application for a preliminary plat shall be processed in accordance with CCNO 12-3.
2. Engineering studies addressing the possibility of development constraints as specified in
CCNO 11-9-7.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 131/279
D. Development Plan Review Process:
1. Submission: A development plan shall be presented to the planning commission and shall
include the following information:
a. Topographic maps of the entire site, in accordance with CCNO 11-9-5F2a(1) of
this chapter.
b. A tabulation of the total acreage of the site and the percentages to be designated
for parking, streets and travelways, various types of residential units, other
buildings and structures, open space and waterways, along with other relevant
aspects of the site;
c. The proposed circulation patterns, including private and public streets, and any
other path system;
d. The proposed location of all parking and ingress and egress;
e. The proposed location of parks, common open spaces, playgrounds, school sites,
recreation facilities, and other similar types of improvements;
f. The proposed location of all dwellings by type and number of dwelling units per
building, along with other buildings (e.g., recreational buildings or club houses) or
structures (e.g., fencing, lighting and signage);
g. The proposed location of each phase, if the project is to be done in phases;
h. A table of densities for each development phase with an overall density for the
development;
i. A general landscape plan showing the areas to be landscaped and the retention of
existing plant materials and landscape features, along with the use of plant
materials for buffers and screening;
j. Preliminary building elevations with notation of building materials of all building
types proposed within the development, excluding detached single unit dwellings;
k. A preliminary subdivision design, showing a general layout and buildable area;
l. A preliminary utility plan showing the manner in which adequate sewage disposal,
subsurface drainage, storm drainage and water will be provided to the site. Also
show where these services will be extended;
m. Other information as required by the community development director as being
necessary to determine whether the proposed development is desirable and in
accordance with the applicable standards.
2. Preliminary Review: The planning commission, subject to the requirements of this title,
may approve, deny or approve with conditions, the development plan. In reviewing the
preliminary development plan, the planning commission shall determine if the
development plan:
a. Encourages better utilization of the land, develops a sense of community and is
compatible with the neighborhood;
b. Meets the minimum requirements of this title;
c. Provides for an adequate traffic circulation system; and
d. Meets the general intent and purpose of this title and the general plan.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 132/279
3. Final Review Of Development Plan: The final development plan, based on the conceptual
sketch and preliminary plans, shall be presented to the planning commission and include
the following information:
a. All of those items required by the planning commission as part of the approval of
preliminary development plan and conditional use permit;
b. A complete and accurate legal description of all property proposed for
development;
c. A detailed site plan showing the precise location of all buildings and structures, the
location of developed common activity area and recreational uses, waterways,
detailed circulation patterns, including proposed ownership of common areas,
streets and trails, along with other relevant aspects of the site;
d. Parking layout showing the location of individual stalls and all areas of ingress and
egress;
e. Design of entryways, along with elevations of proposed signs;
f. A detailed landscape plan showing the location, types and sizes of all plant
materials, sprinkling or irrigation systems, screening and fencing;
g. Final elevations of all buildings proposed within the development with notation of
building materials, excluding detached single unit dwellings;
h. Along with all covenants, conditions and restrictions which the city deems
necessary to provide adequate guarantees for retention and maintenance of the
development as approved;
i. Detailed engineering plans including site grading, street improvements, drainage,
and public utility locations; and
j. A time schedule for the completion of landscaping and amenities (e.g., common
buildings, playground equipment, recreational facilities, trails and entry signs).
4. Final Development Plan Review Process: The planning commission, subject to the
requirements of this chapter, may approve, deny or approve with conditions the final
development plan for the proposed development. The planning commission review of the
final development plan shall include the following:
a. Whether or not the issues addressed by the planning commission during the
conceptual, preliminary processes and the conditions established by the
conditional use permit have been adequately addressed in the final development
plan;
b. Any additional changes from the preliminary development plan proposed by the
developer; and
c. Any additional information relevant to the success of the proposed development.
5. Time Limitations: A final development plan shall be submitted for approval within twelve
(12) months of the issuance of the preliminary development plan approval. Failure to
submit a final development plan within the specified time period shall result in the
preliminary development plan becoming null and void. However a one time extension of
six (6) months may be granted by the planning commission for a showing of good cause if
such request is made prior to the expiration of the preliminary development plan.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 133/279
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
11-9-5: GRADING AND DRAINAGE STANDARDS
The regulations for Grading and Drainage are found in 11-24.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
Amended by Ord. 2018-17 on 9/18/2018
11-9-6: DEVELOPMENT CONSTRAINTS
The regulations for Development Constraints are found in 11-25.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
Amended by Ord. 2009-03 on 5/26/2009
Amended by Ord. 2018-17 on 9/18/2018
11-9-7: SIGN REGULATIONS
The height, size and location of signs shall be in accordance with the regulations set forth in CCNO 11-
22.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
11-9-8: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 134/279
Zoning District HP-1 HP-2 HP-3
A. Minimum lot area (square feet or acres) 10,00
0
12,50
0
2
acres
B. Minimum lot width in feet (measured 30 feet from front lot line) 90 100 200
C. Minimum yard setback (in feet)
1. Front 30 30 50
2. Side 10 10 25
a. Minimum street side yard 20 20 50
3. Rear 20 20 150
D. Building Height (in feet)
1. Minimum building height
1
story
or 10
feet,
which
ever
is
greate
r
1
story
or 10
feet,
which
ever is
greate
r
1
story
or 10
feet,
which
ever is
greate
r
2. Maximum building height
35
feet or
2½
storie
s,
which
ever
is less
35
feet or
2½
stories
,
which
ever is
less
35
feet or
2½
stories
,
which
ever is
less
E. Accessory building regulations (in feet) (see also CCNO 11-10-31)
1. Accessory Building Smaller than 600 square feet rear and interior
sideyard setback 3 3 3
2. Large accessory building greater than 600 square feet:
a. interior lot rear and side yard setback: 15 15 15
b. Corner lot (non-street side) 15 15 15
c. Corner lot (street side) 20 20 20
F. There shall be provided a minimum of 6 feet of spacing between main and
accessory buildings.
G. In the HP-1 and HP-2 zoning districts, no accessory building shall be
greater than 1 story (15 feet) nor more than 25 percent of the footprint square
footage of the main building. In the HP-3 zoning district, no accessory building
shall be greater than 1 story (15 feet) nor have a footprint larger than the
house. No accessory buildings are permitted without a single-family residence
or main building.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 135/279
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2011-07 on 5/10/2011
Amended by Ord. 2016-25 on 8/16/2016
11-10: REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO MORE THAN ONE ZONE
11-10-1: APPLICABILITY
11-10-2: ADDITIONAL USE REGULATIONS
11-10-3: ADDITIONAL PRINCIPAL BUILDING REGULATIONS
11-10-4: ADDITIONAL YARD REGULATIONS
11-10-5: SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR SIDE YARD REDUCTION
11-10-6: ADDITIONAL HEIGHT REGULATIONS
11-10-7: ANIMALS AND FOWL
11-10-8: PRIVATE WATER SUPPLY AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
11-10-9: BUSINESSES EXCLUDING PERSONS UNDER AGE EIGHTEEN PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION
11-10-10: DAYCARE CENTER REGULATIONS
11-10-11: FENCE HEIGHT REGULATIONS
11-10-12: ATHLETIC COURT
11-10-13: EXTERIOR LIGHTING
11-10-14: PRIVATE PARK, PLAYGROUND OR RECREATION AREA
11-10-15: PUBLIC UTILITY SUBSTATION
11-10-16: FAMILY SWIMMING POOL
11-10-17: ZERO SIDE YARD PROVISIONS
11-10-18: TWIN HOME REGULATIONS FOR ZONES R-2, R-3 AND R-4
11-10-19: EXCAVATION AND GRADING
11-10-20: MODEL HOMES, MASTER PLANNED VILLAGE SALES AND INFORMATION CENTERS,
AND TEMPORARY SALES TRAILERS
11-10-21: OUTDOOR USES RESTRICTED
11-10-22: MOBILE HOMES, MOTOR HOMES, BOATS, AIRCRAFT, TRUCK CAMPERS, CAMPING
TRAILERS, TRAVEL TRAILERS AND OTHER TRAILERS
11-10-23: TEMPORARY CARNIVALS, CIRCUSES, REVIVALS, RODEOS, SWAP MEETS, AND
SIMILAR ACTIVITIES
11-10-24: PUBLIC SERVICE FACILITIES
11-10-25: TRASH ENCLOSURES
11-10-26: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
11-10-27: SITE PLAN APPROVAL REQUIRED
11-10-28: RESIDENTIAL FACILITY FOR DISABLED PERSONS
11-10-29: SHORT TERM LOAN BUSINESSES
11-10-30: FLAG LOTS
11-10-31: STANDARDS FOR ACCESSORY BUILDINGS IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES
11-10-32 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS
11-10-33: PORTABLE STORAGE CONTAINERS
11-10-34: ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS
11-10-35: PRESCHOOL USE
11-10-36: SETBACKS ON LOTS WITH AN OVERALL PERCENTAGE GREATER THAN 10 PERCENT
11-10-37: STREETSCAPE STANDARDS
11-10-1: APPLICABILITY
The regulations hereinafter set forth in this chapter qualify or supplement, as the case may be, the zone
regulations contained elsewhere in this title.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-05 on 4/9/2002
11-10-2: ADDITIONAL USE REGULATIONS
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 136/279
The requirements of this title as to minimum site development standards shall not be construed to
prevent a use as permitted in a respective zone of any parcel of land in the event such parcel was held
in separate ownership prior to December 31, 2000. Each such parcel to be developed must have not
less than twenty feet (20') of frontage on a street, and the density of development may not exceed that
permitted by area requirements in the respective zone.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-05 on 4/9/2002
11-10-3: ADDITIONAL PRINCIPAL BUILDING REGULATIONS
As defined in CCNO 11-2, every principal building shall be located and maintained on a lot and every lot
shall have required frontage on a street, except where a parcel of land was in separate ownership prior
to December 31, 2000, and except as otherwise permitted in this title.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-05 on 4/9/2002
11-10-4: ADDITIONAL YARD REGULATIONS
A. No required yard or other open space around an existing building, or which is hereafter provided
around any building for the purpose of complying with provisions of this title, shall be considered
as providing a yard or open space for any other building; nor shall any yard or other required
open space on an adjoining lot be considered as providing a yard or open space on a lot
whereon a building is to be erected or established.
B. On any lot under the same ownership as an adjoining lot and of record as of December 31, 2000,
and such lot having a smaller width than required for the zone in which it is located, and the
adjoining lot has sufficient width and size to allow both lots to meet at least the minimum zoning
requirements, the lot shall be reconfigured and recorded so both lots meet at least the minimum
standards of the zoning district wherein they are located.
C. Except for landscaping vegetation, every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky
unobstructed, except for accessory buildings in a rear yard, and except for the ordinary
projections of skylights, sills, belt courses, cornices, and other ornamental features, which do not
project more than two feet (2') into the required yard.
D. Open or lattice enclosed fire escapes, fireproof outside stairways, regular unwalled porches,
terraces, balconies, and balconies opening upon fire towers may project five feet (5') into a
required front yard, ten feet (10') into a required rear yard, and three feet (3') into a required side
yard; and the ordinary projections of chimneys and flues are permitted.
E. No accessory building nor group of accessory buildings in any residential zone shall cover more
than twenty five percent (25%) of the rear yard.
F. No space needed to meet the width, yard, area, coverage, parking, or other requirements of this
title for a lot or building may be conveyed away from such lot or building, except as permitted by
the administrative law judge, and any attempted conveyance or lease in violation hereof shall be
void.
G. No parcel of land which has less than the minimum width and area requirements for the zone in
which it is located may be divided off from a larger parcel of land for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of building or development as a lot.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2011-11 on 5/24/2011
11-10-5: SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR SIDE YARD REDUCTION
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 137/279
Residential single-family dwelling units built prior to 1980, not having adequate parking as required by
current ordinance, may request a reduced side yard of not less than six feet (6') and/or a reduced
garage width to eighteen feet (18') for the purpose of adding a garage or carport provided, that:
A. The remaining distance between dwellings is required to be at least twelve feet (12').
B. The side yard reduction must be on the garage or carport side of the dwelling and no living space
will be allowed in connection with the addition.
C. The combined total of the remaining side yards of the dwelling requesting the change is not less
than eighteen feet (18') in zones RE-20, R-1-12.5, R-1-10; and twelve feet (12') in zones R-1-8,
R-1-8(A), R-1-8(AG), R-2, R-3 and R-4.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2012-23 on 9/25/2012
11-10-6: ADDITIONAL HEIGHT REGULATIONS
A. Generally: No building shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered to exceed in height
the limit hereinafter designated for the zone in which such building is located, except as
otherwise specifically provided.
B. Exceptions: Height regulations established elsewhere in this title shall not apply:
1. In any district, to church spires, monuments and water towers; provided, that such
structure shall be so located and constructed that if it should collapse, its reclining length
would still be contained on the property on which it was constructed.
2. In any nonresidential district, to noncommercial radio or television antennas.
3. In the MP-1 zoning district, to conveyors or similar structures wherein the industrial
process involved customarily requires a height greater than otherwise permitted;
provided, that such structure shall be so located and constructed that if it should collapse,
its reclining length would still be contained on the property on which it was constructed.
4. Chimneys in residential zoning districts may be two feet (2') above the roofline of the
residential structure, even if the roofline is at the maximum building height. However,
there shall be no height exception allowed for a chimney if there is a two foot (2') or
greater vertical clearance within a ten foot (10') radius of the chimney.
5. Wireless communications towers and antennas as approved in accordance with the
requirements and provisions stated in chapter 21 of this title.
6. False mansards in any residential zone may extend five feet (5') above the maximum
zone building height.
7. Parapets in any commercial or manufacturing zone may extend six feet (6') above the
maximum zone building height.
Exception: Maximum height of twenty five feet (25') if set back twenty feet (20') from the
property line and sixty feet (60') from a neighboring dwelling.
C. Prohibited Heights: No dwelling shall be erected to a height less than ten feet (10'), except as
permitted by conditional use, and no accessory building in a residential zone shall be erected to
a height greater than twenty five feet (25').
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2011-07 on 5/10/2011
11-10-7: ANIMALS AND FOWL
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 138/279
A. Barns, Coops, Pens Or Corrals: No barn, coop, pen or corral shall be maintained closer than fifty
feet (50') from any dwelling and not closer than seventy five feet (75') from a dwelling on any
adjacent lot. Any barn, stable, coop, pen or corral for the housing or keeping of animals or fowl
shall be kept, constructed or maintained not less than one hundred feet (100') from a public
street. A fenced pasture of one acre or more will be permitted to abut adjoining property lines and
the property line adjacent to the public street, except as otherwise permitted in subsection E of
this section.
B. Kenneling Of Dogs: The kenneling of not more than four (4) dogs will be permitted only in zones
so designated as a conditional use. The pen or run in which the dog or dogs are kept shall not be
built closer than one foot (1') to the property lines, but in no case shall it encroach upon existing
utility easements. The pen or run shall be designed so as not to permit runoff onto adjoining
property.
C. Dogs And Cats; Conditional Use Permit: Except when a conditional use permit is issued for a
kennel, there shall not be more than two (2) dogs or cats, or combination thereof.
D. Limitation Of Pets: The limitation of household pets shall be as follows:
1. Fish, no limit.
2. Gerbils, hamsters, guinea pigs and/or rabbits, no more than four (4), either exclusively of
one kind or in combination.
3. Nonpoisonous snakes less than three feet (3') long, no more than two (2).
4. Turtles less than one foot (1') long, no limit.
5. Nonpoisonous lizards less than one foot (1') long, no more than two (2).
6. Parrots, no more than two (2), exclusively or in combination.
7. Budgerigars and parakeets, no limit.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 139/279
E. Keeping Of Backyard Chickens In Residential Zones:
Zone Less Than 0.49 Acre (No
Rooster)
0.5 Acre To 0.99 Acre (No
Rooster)
1 Acre To 4.99
Acres Over 5 Acres
RE-20 10 hens 15 hens 15 chickens
per acre
30 chickens
per acre
R-1-
12.5 10 hens 15 hens 15 chickens
per acre
R-1-10 10 hens 15 hens 15 chickens
per acre
R-1-8 10 hens 15 hens 15 chickens
per acre
R-1-
8(A) 10 hens 15 hens 15 chickens
per acre
R-1-
8(AG) 10 hens 15 hens 15 chickens
per acre
30 chickens
per acre
HP-1 10 hens 15 hens 15 chickens
per acre
HP-2 10 hens 15 hens 15 chickens
per acre
HP-3 10 hens 15 hens 15 chickens
per acre
RCC 10 hens 15 hens 15 chickens
per acre
1. Additional requirements:
1. Coops will be treated the same as accessory buildings however coops must be
maintained not closer than twenty-five feet (25’) from any dwelling on any adjacent
lot.
2. Feed must be stored in a rodent proof container.
3. Clean water shall be made available to the chickens at all times.
4. Chickens must be housed in a covered, ventilated, and predator resistant coop.
5. The coop must be located in the rear yard.
6. The chickens must be contained within the owner's property lines.
7. If the chickens have access to an outdoor run, the coop must have at least two (2)
square feet per chicken.
8. If chickens stay in the coop at all times, the coop must have at least six (6) square
feet per chicken.
9. The coop and enclosed area must be kept clean and sanitary to prevent any
insect breeding, vermin attraction, nuisance, or offensive odor past the property
line.
10. Dead birds and discarded or rotting eggs shall be removed as soon as possible
but no longer than twenty four (24) hours and shall be properly disposed of.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 140/279
11. A chicken permit must be obtained annually from the animal control office at the
cost of five dollars ($5.00) per year.
12. The permit for keeping chickens may be revoked upon the conviction of the permit
holder of a violation of this section.
F. Beekeeping is permitted in all Single Family Residential and R-2 Zones: An apiary, consisting of
not more than five (5) hives or an equivalent capacity, may be maintained in a rear yard (or side
yard) of any residential lot. On a residential lot which is one-half (0.5) acre or larger, the number
of hives located on the lot may be increased to ten (10) hives.
1. Additional requirements:
a. A person shall not locate or allow a hive on property owned or occupied by
another person without first obtaining written permission from the owner or
occupant.
b. Each beekeeper shall be registered with the Utah Department of Agriculture and
Food as provided in the Utah Bee Inspection Act set forth in Utah Code 4-11, as
amended.
c. Hives shall be placed at least three feet (3') from any property line and six inches
(6") above the ground, as measured from the ground to the lowest portion of the
hive.
d. Hives shall be operated and maintained as provided in the Utah Bee Inspection
Act.
e. Each hive shall be conspicuously marked with the owner's name, address,
telephone number, and state registration number.
f. A hive shall be placed on property so the general flight pattern of bees is in a
direction that will deter bee contact with humans and domesticated animals. If any
portion of a hives located between three feet (3') and fifteen feet (15') from any
property line that does not have a six foot (6') solid fence, a flyway barrier shall be
established and maintained around the hive except as needed to allow access.
g. On all lots, if the apiary is located in an area that borders a public walk, street or
public area, the area shall be separated from the public walk or street by a six foot
(6') so lid fence or wall that extends at least ten feet (10') from the hive in each
direction.
h. Each beekeeper shall ensure that a convenient source of water is available to the
colony continuously. The water shall be in a location that minimizes any nuisance
created by bees seeking water on neighboring property.
i. Each bee keeper shall comply with all State laws and regulations pertaining to bee
keeping.
j. In the event of a conflict between any regulation set forth in this chapter and bee
management regulations adopted by the State of Utah and/or Weber County
Health Department, the most restrictive regulations shall apply.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2011-06 on 4/26/2011
Amended by Ord. 2014-25 on 10/14/2014
11-10-8: PRIVATE WATER SUPPLY AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 141/279
A. Public Water And Sewer Not Available: Domestic water supply and sewage disposal shall
comply with the county health department and state health department requirements in all
applications for a building permit where an approved supply of piped water under pressure, or a
sewer, is not available.
B. Public Sewer Not Available: Where a public sewer is not available, a building permit will be
issued only upon compliance with the following requirements:
1. The lot upon which the building is to be constructed is at least one acre in size. This
requirement shall not apply to a lot of less than one acre in existence and of record prior
to May 11, 1953, so long as all other requirements of this title are complied with;
2. No other building permits have been granted for buildings to be located on the same lot;
3. The lot for which the building permit is sought is not located within an approved or
proposed subdivision;
4. The proposed sewage or waste disposal system has been approved by the county board
of health for the lot in question;
5. If the foregoing requirements have been met, then the applicant shall appear before the
city council for final approval of the building permit and construction of the sewage
disposal system;
6. Final approval may be granted when the city council finds:
a. The proposed sewage system meets the requirements heretofore set forth;
b. The construction or installation of the proposed sewage system will not constitute
a nuisance;
c. The proposed sewage system will not endanger the health, safety or general
welfare of the citizens of the city.
7. Any septic tanks or other means of private sewage disposal constructed or maintained in
violation of the provisions of this section are declared to be a public nuisance and it shall
be the duty of the city attorney to proceed forthwith with proceedings declaring the subject
matter of such violation to be a nuisance, and also to proceed forthwith the filing of a
complaint for the criminal violations of this section and to abate the nuisance.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-05 on 4/9/2002
11-10-9: BUSINESSES EXCLUDING PERSONS UNDER AGE EIGHTEEN PROHIBITED;
EXCEPTION
Except as permitted in CCNO 11-20, no shop, retail business, theater, store, bookstore, drugstore, or
other business otherwise permitted to do business in any or all zones in the city, may be located or do
business within any zone in the city if the business or establishment, or any portion thereof, caters
exclusively to adult persons to the advertised or other exclusion of persons under the age of eighteen
(18) years; provided, however, that such prohibition shall not apply to premises licensed to sell beer or to
state liquor stores doing business under the provisions of Utah Code Annotated and/or provisions of a
city ordinance.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-05 on 4/9/2002
11-10-10: DAYCARE CENTER REGULATIONS
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 142/279
A. Purpose Statement The purpose and intent of this section is to permit residents in specific
residential zones to conduct daycares in a manner that will retain the character of the home in a
residential setting while not significantly impacting the residential character of the neighborhood.
B. Daycare Use Daycares are allowed in specific residential zones as permitted uses.
C. Development Standards of all Daycares It shall be unlawful to conduct or pursue a daycare
within the corporate limits of the city, unless each of the following conditions are observed:
1. Home daycare center in the operator's residence for up to sixteen (16) people.
2. Residents Of Premises: Only persons who are bona fide residents of the premises shall
operate the daycare; if the daycare has more than 8 people or children then one
additional person not residing in the dwelling may be employed in the daycare if they
have been certified by the state and not a minor.
3. Total Floor Area: The daycare shall not occupy more than 50% of the ground floor area of
the residence.
4. Minimum Interior Floor Area: A minimum floor area of thirty-five (35) square feet per child
shall be provided.
5. Signs and Advertising: No sign or advertising shall be displayed on the premises.
6. Parking and Drop Off: Off street parking shall be provided to satisfy the requirements of
CCNO 11-17-3 and 4. The addition of off street parking facilities on the premises of the
daycare beyond that normally required for residential uses is not required. The safe drop
off of children is the responsibility of the daycare operator.
7. Play Areas; Fencing: A minimum outdoor play area of forty (40) square feet per child shall
be provided. All outdoor play areas shall be within a fenced area and shall be limited to
use by the children in the daycare in normal operating hours. Fence height shall be in
accordance with CCNO 11-10-11.
8. Conformance With Laws: There shall be complete conformity with fire, building, plumbing,
electrical and health codes; and to all state and city ordinances and other laws,
covenants, restrictions or regulations pertaining to the premises upon which the daycare
is conducted. State Law Applicable: The regulations and licensing of daycare centers
shall be in accordance with Utah Code 26-39, as amended, or as hereafter amended
9. Licensing and Regulation. Appropriate city and state licenses shall be acquired.
10. An annual inspection for continued compliance will be required for license renewal of all
daycare facilities.
11. A criminal background check is required for any adult who resides at a dwelling used for a
daycare business.
12. No person who has been convicted of a sexually oriented crime may operate, be
employed by, or reside at a dwelling that is used for a daycare business.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-05 on 4/9/2002
Amended by Ord. 2018-29 on 11/27/2018
11-10-11: FENCE HEIGHT REGULATIONS
A. Front, Side And Rear Yards: Except as otherwise stated in subsections C, D and E of this
section, no fence, hedge or other similar structure shall be erected in any required front yard of a
lot to a height in excess of three and one-half feet (3½'); nor shall any fence or other similar
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 143/279
structure be erected in any side or rear yard to a height in excess of six feet (6'), or as stated in
other provisions in this Title. Fence posts or similar structure may exceed the maximum fence
height. Hedges shall not exceed seven feet (7') in height in the side and rear yard.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 144/279
B. Corner Lots: No fence, hedge or other similar structure shall be erected to a height in excess of
six feet (6') in the rear or side yard of a corner lot.
Fences located in a side yard or portion of a rear yard of a corner lot which adjoins a street or
public right-of-way, may be solid in appearance, or may preserve a degree of visibility between
slats or similar elements, and may be located either on the property line or on a line located
twelve feet (12') behind the edge of the asphalt in the street; whichever of these locations is
farther away from the edge of the asphalt. The fence may also be located at a distance farther
behind the edge of the asphalt than the distance determined from among the two listed above to
be the farthest from the edge of the asphalt. (While not required, a three foot (3') distance behind
the sidewalk is recommended, if a sidewalk is present, in order to provide an increase in space
for snow storage, safety, practical usability of the entire width of the sidewalk by pedestrians, and
aesthetic value.) Along the rear boundary of the corner lot, the fence may be located on the rear
property line. A fence located in a side yard or portion of a rear yard of a corner lot which adjoins
a street a public right-of-way, shall have the following additional limitations and requirements:
1. Any fence erected in a side yard of a corner lot, in excess of 2 feet in height, shall not
encroach into the forty foot (40’) triangular area required for a corner lot, as specified in
subsection (C) of this section.
2. On any corner lot where a driveway on an adjoining lot is located less than ten feet (10’)
from the rear property line of the corner lot, any fence constructed in a side yard or
portion of a rear yard of that corner lot, which adjoins a street or public right of way, after
the date of adoption of this ordinance, shall preserve a clear view through a triangular
area on a portion of the rear yard of the corner lot (in addition to and separate from the
40’ triangular area specified in subsection C of this section), wherein no fence, hedge,
similar structure, or other obstruction to view shall be allowed. This triangular area shall
be determined by measuring a line ten feet (10’) in length, starting at the point where the
rear property line of the corner lot intersects the public right-of-way or the line twelve feet
(12’) behind the edge of the asphalt (whichever has been determined to be farther behind
the edge of asphalt), along the rear property line of the corner lot, and then measuring
another line ten feet (10’) in length, also starting at the same point as the first line
mentioned immediately above, along the public right-of-way, or the line twelve feet (12’)
behind the edge of the asphalt (whichever has been determined to be farther behind the
edge of asphalt), towards the front of the corner lot, and then connecting the farthest
points of the two ten foot (10’) lines with a straight line.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 145/279
3. Any lot which is adjacent to the rear yard of a corner lot and which does not have a
driveway, approach, or access way within ten feet (10’) of the rear property line of the
corner lot, shall not (upon the construction of a home, a new or expanded garage, or at
any other time) after the date of adoption of this ordinance, be allowed to have a new
driveway, approach, or access way constructed on it which is less than ten feet (10’) from
the rear property line of a corner lot which adjoins the two lots, for the first ten feet (10’)
behind the line mentioned above whereon a fence on a corner lot, in a side yard or
portion of a rear yard which adjoins a street or public right-of-way, may be located, as
described earlier in this subsection. Further, a clear view shall be maintained through this
same ten foot (10’) by ten foot (10’) area, as well as the area directly between this ten foot
(10’) by ten foot (10’) area and the edge of the asphalt, wherein no fence, hedge, similar
structure, or other obstruction to view shall be allowed.
C. Obstruction To View: In all zones, no obstruction to view in excess of two feet (2') in height as
measured from the top of the curb or edge of the hard street surface, shall be placed on any
corner lot within a triangular area formed by the street property lines and a line connecting them
at points forty feet (40') from the intersection of the street lines, or at any other location which
would obstruct the vision of street and regulatory signs or oncoming vehicles by automobile
drivers, except a reasonable number of trees pruned high enough to permit an unobstructed view
of street and regulatory signs or oncoming vehicles by automobile drivers.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 146/279
D. Fence Height and Fence Transparency On Retaining Walls:
1. All retaining walls and grading for the area surrounding the location of those retaining
walls must comply with 11-24 Grading and Drainage Standards.
2. Fence Height: a. Fences constructed on the high side of a retaining wall, within three feet
(3’) (measured horizontally) of the top back of the retaining wall, shall have a maximum
height of six feet (6’), measured from the finished grade of the ground that intersects with
the retaining wall, and a required minimum height of three and one-half feet (3.5’)
measured from the finished grade on which the fence is constructed, when the retaining
wall is two and one-half feet (2.5’) tall or taller. The fence height is measured to the top of
the picket, baluster, mesh, or top rail, or the highest typical fence element (not including
posts or post caps). Fence posts, including the post cap, may extend up to eight inches
(8”) above the maximum fence height. b. When a public right-of-way or trail is on the high
side of a retaining wall which is two and one-half feet (2.5’) or taller, and the public right of
way or trail is within five feet (5’) of that retaining wall, and a fence is installed between
the retaining wall and the public right-of-way or trail, a minimum fence height of three and
one-half feet (3.5’) is required.
3. Fence Transparency: Fences constructed on the high side of a retaining wall, within three
feet (3’) (measured horizontally) of the top back of the retaining wall, shall comply with the
following standards for fence transparency:
a. Retaining Wall Height shall be determined using the same standard used in 11-24.
b. The height of the retaining wall shall determine the minimum fence transparency,
according to the following table:
Existing or Proposed Retaining Wall
Height Minimum Fence Transparency
0' - 5' 0%
Greater than 5', up to 8' 50%
Greater than 8% 80%
c. The above listed transparency requirements shall not apply if the applicant is the
owner of the property on the low side of the retaining wall, and both the fence and
the exposed surface of the retaining wall are on the same parcel as the low side of
the retaining wall
d. The above listed transparency requirements shall not apply where a fence is built
on the high side of a retaining wall and a public right-of-way or trail is directly
adjacent to the property where the fence is built.
e. Obstruction to view and sight triangle requirements shall apply to retaining walls
and all fences built upon retaining walls.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 147/279
E. Fence Support Structure (other than retaining wall):
1. The fence support structure average height measurement shall not exceed 12 inches in
height and shall not exceed 20 inches in any single location.
2. Fence, hedge or similar structure on top of retaining walls shall meet 11-10-11.D
requirements.
F. Security Fencing: Public utility substations and institutional uses, e.g., churches, government
buildings, or schools, may be enclosed by security fencing not less than six feet (6') in height and
no more than eight feet (8') in height, which shall be constructed of cement block, masonry,
precast masonry, and / or wrought iron and may be equipped with an appropriate anti
climbing device. Chain link may only be used as approved by the planning commission.
G. The planning commission may vary the fence height for nonconforming commercial sites in
residential zones if it determines the proposed fence design, materials, and location will not
create a safety hazard due to obstructed vision of approaching vehicles or pedestrians and will:
1. Not isolate the surrounding neighborhoods;
2. Be consistent with the theme of the development; and
3. Provide an effective screen to adjacent properties.
4. Chain link, vinyl, cement block, masonry, and wrought iron are acceptable materials.
5. If the fence is a solid screen wall it shall have at least a ninety five percent (95%) screen
value.
6. The owner of the nonconforming commercial property shall construct, maintain, and keep
the fence in good repair.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-05 on 4/9/2002
Amended by Ord. 2016-40 on 12/20/2016
Amended by Ord. 2017-02 on 1/24/2017
Adopted by Ord. 2017-06 on 2/28/2017
Amended by Ord. 2019-04 on 2/26/2019
11-10-12: ATHLETIC COURT
An athletic court is a solid playing surface constructed for recreational purposes. Athletic courts shall
require a land use and building permit, and in addition to the impervious surface/landscaping
requirements found elsewhere in this code, shall be subject to the following requirements:
A. Athletic courts shall be considered an accessory structure and shall be subject to CCNO 11-10-
31 and CCNO 11-10-32.
B. Setbacks. An athletic court shall be constructed in the side or rear yard only with a 5 foot setback
if the athletic court has a fence height higher than 6 feet. The setback to be measured from the
property line to the fence fabric. Construction upon any utility easement will be done at the
property owner’s risk.
C. Fencing. Fencing around the athletic court may be up to twelve feet (12') in height. Fencing
enclosures shall not be considered as part of standard property line fencing. Fencing materials
for athletic courts shall consist of open mesh fabric or vinyl coated or color coated chain link
without slats. Fencing for athletic courts that are less than six feet (6’) in height may be placed
along a rear property line or side property line within the rear yard.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 148/279
D. Lighting. All athletic court lighting must be directed downward and shall not spill on to an adjacent
property. The applicant shall provide evidence indicating that their light product and lighting plan
will not cause light or light pollution from the athletic court light(s) to extend beyond their property
line. Lighting must meet CCNO 11-10-13. Lights and light poles including the light base and any
supporting structures shall not be in excess of twenty feet (20’) in height. Light operating hours
shall be restricted to 7am - 10pm.
E. Grading and Drainage. All athletic courts areas shall be designed and constructed so that storm
water runoff shall be contained on the owner’s property and cannot discharge onto any adjacent
property.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-05 on 4/9/2002
Amended by Ord. 2017-19 on 9/26/2017
11-10-13: EXTERIOR LIGHTING
No spotlight or floodlight shall be installed in any way which will permit the direct rays of such light to
penetrate into any residential zone or onto any property used for residential purposes.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-05 on 4/9/2002
11-10-14: PRIVATE PARK, PLAYGROUND OR RECREATION AREA
In all residential zones, a private park, playground or recreation area, with or without a swimming pool,
shall meet the following requirements:
A. Sanitary Facilities: Adequate restrooms and sanitary facilities shall be provided and kept
available for use by members, their families and guests, and shall be maintained in proper
working order and in a clean and sanitary condition and in full compliance with the reasonable
standards, rules and regulations established by the county health department.
B. Hours Of Operation: Operation or use of the recreational or other facilities provided is forbidden
between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. to six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
C. Setback: All facilities, equipment and buildings shall be set back not less than twenty feet (20')
from any property line and shall be located not less than fifty feet (50') from any main building on
an adjoining lot and from any area upon which any such main building may be constructed upon
said adjoining lot, if no such main building is in existence.
D. Lot Size: The minimum size of the lot or site used for such recreational or other purposes shall
be one acre.
E. Lighting: Any lights used to illuminate the premises shall be installed in such manner that the light
shall be suitably screened to avoid annoying illumination of lands outside said premises.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-05 on 4/9/2002
11-10-15: PUBLIC UTILITY SUBSTATION
In all residential zones, public utility substations shall meet the following requirements:
A. Lot Area: Each public utility substation in a residential zone shall be located on a lot not less than
two thousand (2,000) square feet in area.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 149/279
B. Yards: Each public utility substation in a residential zone shall be provided with a yard on each of
the four (4) sides of the building not less than five feet (5') in width, except that for such stations
located on lots fronting on a street abutted by one or more residential lots, the front yard, side
yards and rear yard shall equal those required for a single-family residence in the same zone.
C. Street Access: Each public utility substation in a residential zone shall be located on a lot which
has adequate access from a street, alley or easement.
D. Location To Be Approved: The location of a public utility substation in a residential zone shall be
subject to approval by the planning commission.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-05 on 4/9/2002
11-10-16: FAMILY SWIMMING POOL
A family swimming pool shall be permitted in the rear yard of a dwelling as an accessory use, provided
the following requirements are met:
A. Location: The location of such family swimming pool or accessory machinery shall be not less
than thirty five feet (35') from any dwelling on an adjoining lot and not less than ten feet (10') from
any interior property line. On corner lots, the distance from said pool to the property line facing on
a street shall not be less than the required side yard for an accessory building in that zone.
B. Fence; Lights: An outside family swimming pool shall be completely enclosed by a fence
structurally adequate to resist wind load conforming to the international building code (IBC), and
not less than six feet (6') in height. Any lights used to illuminate said pool or its accessories shall
be so arranged as to reflect the light away from the adjoining premises.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-05 on 4/9/2002
11-10-17: ZERO SIDE YARD PROVISIONS
At the time of subdivision approval by the planning commission and city council, one zero side yard may
be permitted per lot in the subdivision under the following conditions:
A. When the remaining one side yard is equal to the combined total of the required two (2) side
yards of the zone in which it is located.
B. No window or other similar opening shall be installed in the building or any accessory building
along the side having a zero side yard.
C. No zero side yard will be permitted on the lot side bordering a nonresidential zone, or on the lot
side bordering on a residential lot not utilizing zero side yard provisions.
D. The use of the zero side yard provision is contingent upon development of, or commitment to
development of, a zero side yard on adjacent lots.
E. The approved location of each dwelling and accessory buildings utilizing the zero side yard
concept must be designated on each lot on the approved final subdivision plat.
F. In the case of existing subdivisions, the zero side yard concept may be utilized upon compliance
with the above provisions and upon issuance of a conditional use permit approved by the
planning commission and city council.
G. All building permits will be issued in strict accordance with the building site restrictions as shown
on the approved subdivision final plat. Any changes in the location of buildings from the location
shown on the approved final plat must be approved by the city council and an amended final plat
shall be recorded with the county recorder showing the approved changes.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 150/279
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-05 on 4/9/2002
11-10-18: TWIN HOME REGULATIONS FOR ZONES R-2, R-3 AND R-4
A. Definition: "Twin home" means a dwelling structure arranged and designed to be occupied by
two (2) families, the structure having only two (2) dwelling units. Each dwelling unit to be built on
its own lot, the two (2) lots together having a common zero lot line. Two (2) covered or enclosed
parking spaces shall be required for each dwelling unit. The friendship fence shall conform to the
requirements of CCNO 11-10-11. For purposes of this section, a twin home shall be counted as
two (2) dwelling units.
B. Purpose And Intent: The purpose of this section is as follows:
1. To allow the construction of dwelling units, owned by the residents therein, to enable the
reduction of costs of homeownership and maintain the advantages of ownership as it
serves to maintain good property value and high community standards;
2. To permit the construction of twin homes as a conditional use in the residential zoned
parts of the city.
C. Modification Procedures: Procedures for modifying lot boundaries in existing subdivisions shall
be as follows:
1. Revised plats where existing lot lines are to remain shall show new twin home separation
line (common lot line);
2. Where existing lot lines are to be moved, the plat shall be vacated and a new plat shall be
submitted showing the new lot lines.
D. Minimum Standards:
Zone Interior Lot Corner Lot Side Yard
Area Width Area Width Interior Corner
R-2 10,000 95 11,000 100 16 20
R-3 10,000 95 11,000 100 16 20
R-4 10,000 95 11,000 100 16 20
E. Maximum Standards:
Zone Total Yard Coverage Rear Yard Coverage
Interior Corner Interior Corner
R-2 40% 35% 25% 20%
R-3 45% 40% 25% 20%
R-4 50% 45% 25% 20%
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 151/279
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-05 on 4/9/2002
11-10-19: EXCAVATION AND GRADING
See 11-24: GRADING AND DRAINAGE STANDARDS AND 11-25: DEVELOPMENT CONSTRAINTS.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-05 on 4/9/2002
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
Amended by Ord. 2018-17 on 9/18/2018
11-10-20: MODEL HOMES, MASTER PLANNED VILLAGE SALES AND INFORMATION CENTERS,
AND TEMPORARY SALES TRAILERS
A. Model Homes: Model homes may be permitted in a residential area by conditional use permit
only. In the review for a model home, the planning commission, and if necessary, the city council,
may consider lighting, landscaping, hours of operation, signage, parking, duration and
neighborhood impact. As a minimum, the following standards shall apply:
1. On site sales personnel must be present at least five (5) days a week during normal
business hours. In no case shall a model home be open before seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
or after nine o'clock (9:00) P.M.
2. The model home shall be for the purpose of initial marketing of houses within the
subdivision where the model home is located. A model home may not be used as an
office for the marketing of property in the subdivision that was previously sold, or the
marketing of property outside of the subdivision.
3. An off street parking stall for each person stationed on site, plus two (2) spaces shall be
provided. Parking lots for model homes may be located on an adjacent lot owned by the
owner of the model home.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 152/279
B. Master Planned Village Sales And Information Center: The developer of a master planned village
over two hundred (200) contiguous acres, may operate an information/sales facility within a
residentially zoned area if a conditional use permit is secured for this specific purpose. In the
review for a master planned village sales/information center conditional use permit, the planning
commission, and if necessary the city council, may consider lighting, landscaping, hours of
operation, signage, parking, duration and neighborhood impact. As a minimum, the following
standards shall apply:
1. On site sales personnel must be present at least five (5) days a week during normal
business hours. In no case shall the center be open before seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. or
after nine o'clock (9:00) P.M.
2. The center shall be for the purpose of marketing the specific master planned village and
the distribution of material concerning the attributes of the city and surrounding areas.
The office may not be used as an office for the sales of property outside of the master
planned village.
3. There shall be at least twelve (12) off street parking stalls provided.
4. The center must be a permanent structure that meets the adopted building codes of the
city.
5. There shall be no more than one such center in the master planned village.
6. The center shall be removed upon termination of the conditional use permit or the
completion of the master developer's marketing activities, whichever comes first.
7. Signage shall be in conformance with chapter 22 of this title.
8. There shall be a landscape buffer of at least one hundred fifty feet (150') between the
sales and information center and any occupied residential structures.
a. Landscaped areas shall include an approved mixture of drought tolerant or other
plant materials, and organic and nonorganic ground cover materials. Landscaping
shall consist of one plant for each twenty (20) square feet of landscape area. At
least twenty five percent (25%) of the plants shall be fifteen (15) gallon or greater
plants and the remaining plants must be at least five (5) gallon plants. The
approval of the above mixture of landscape materials shall be by the community
development department staff with appeal to the planning commission.
b. An automatic irrigation system shall be provided and maintained to all landscaped
areas requiring water.
c. All landscaped areas adjacent to vehicular parking and access areas shall be
protected by six inch (6") vertical concrete curbing in order to control stormwater
flows and minimize damage by vehicular traffic.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 153/279
C. Temporary Sales Offices For Subdivisions: After obtaining a conditional use permit and a
building permit for a model home, a manufactured home may be used for a temporary real estate
sales office with a conditional use permit and with the following stipulations:
1. An all weather access route approved by the North View fire department and the building
official is provided.
2. A delineated parking area is established for customer and sales personnel vehicles that is
clearly away from construction activity and traffic. There must be an off street parking stall
for each person stationed at the manufactured home, plus two (2) spaces.
3. The manufactured home must provide indoor restroom facilities to all patrons.
4. The manufactured home must be removed from the site prior to the opening of the model
home.
5. On site sales personnel must be present at least five (5) days a week during normal
business hours. In no case shall a model home be open before seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
or after nine o'clock (9:00) P.M.
6. The sales office shall only be for the purpose of marketing the tract subdivision within
which it is located with the given product line.
7. The manufactured home conditional use permit shall not be for more than one hundred
twenty (120) days.
8. The manufactured home shall be skirted with material similar to the siding of the
manufactured home.
9. There shall be a landscaped area at least equivalent to the square footage of the
manufactured home. Landscaping shall consist of at least one 5-gallon plant for each ten
(10) linear feet of the longest side of the manufactured home.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-05 on 4/9/2002
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
11-10-21: OUTDOOR USES RESTRICTED
A. Prohibited Dumping: The use of land for the dumping or disposal of scrap metal, junk, garbage,
rubbish, refuse, ashes, slag or industrial wastes or byproducts, shall be prohibited in every
district, except as otherwise provided in the MP-1 zoning district.
B. Vending Machines: In commercial and manufacturing zoning districts only, up to three (3)
vending machines placed outdoors on one property is permitted. Permission to maintain in
excess of three (3) vending machines outdoors on one property shall be by conditional use
permit.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-15 on 9/24/2002
11-10-22: MOBILE HOMES, MOTOR HOMES, BOATS, AIRCRAFT, TRUCK CAMPERS, CAMPING
TRAILERS, TRAVEL TRAILERS AND OTHER TRAILERS
A. Storage Permitted: Motor homes, travel trailers, camping trailers, other trailers, boats or utility
trailers, shall only be stored, parked or located in any residential zoning district in the following
ways:
1. Such vehicles must be noncommercial if located in any residential zoning district.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 154/279
2. Such vehicles, including trailer tongue and hitches, must be located no closer to the front
property line than ten feet (10') in front of the front wall plane of the house and entirely on
the owner's property.
3. No such vehicle may be located on a residentially zoned lot or parcel of land that does not
have a residential structure. In planned residential unit development projects, approved
screened storage yards may be allowed; however, occupancy of any vehicle in the
storage yard is prohibited.
4. Motor homes, travel trailers, camping trailers, other trailers and boats, shall not be located
in the public street or private driveway for more than two (2) consecutive days and not
more than ten (10) days in any one month. No recreational vehicle or trailer can impede
any public right of way, which includes the public sidewalks. No recreational vehicle may
be stored in the public street during and twenty four (24) hours after the end of a
snowstorm. In multi-family developments and planned residential unit development
projects, recreational vehicles shall only be parked in approved screened storage yards;
however, occupancy of any vehicle in the storage yard is prohibited.
5. All motor homes, travel trailers, camping trailers, other trailers, and boats stored in
residential zoning districts shall comply with these regulations by October 23, 2002;
provided, that motor homes, travel trailers, camping trailers, other trailers, and boats
which are stored on a concrete or asphaltic concrete pad for which a building permit was
obtained between April 10, 2002 and October 22, 2002, shall have until October 22, 2005
to comply with the regulations described in subsection A2 of this section.
B. Construction Office Or Security Personnel Housing: A mobile home, motor home, truck camper
or trailer may be allowed in any zone to conduct business or provide housing for security
personnel during the construction of a permanent building when a valid building permit is in
effect. Such a mobile home, motor home or travel trailer shall be removed immediately upon the
completion or stoppage of construction.
C. Placement Of Occupied Mobile Homes, Motor Homes, Truck Campers, Camping Trailers, Travel
Trailers And Other Trailers: Mobile homes, not placed on permanent foundations, shall be
located only in approved mobile home parks or subdivisions approved for mobile homes. Except
as otherwise provided in this section, motor homes, camping trailers, truck campers and travel
trailers that are occupied or used for living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes may be located
only in recreational vehicle parks, campgrounds or recreational vehicle subdivisions. Aircraft and
boats may not be used for living or housekeeping purposes.
D. Unoccupied Aircraft: Unoccupied aircraft may only be located in a manufacturing zone and must
be located in an area screened from public view.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-17 on 10/22/2002
Amended by Ord. 2012-12 on 5/23/2012
11-10-23: TEMPORARY CARNIVALS, CIRCUSES, REVIVALS, RODEOS, SWAP MEETS, AND
SIMILAR ACTIVITIES
A. Applicability: The provisions of this section do not apply to garage sales. All other temporary
carnivals, circuses, revivals, rodeos, swap meets, and similar activities may be permitted only in
commercial and manufacturing zoning districts, subject to the restrictions of subsection B of this
section.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 155/279
B. Conditional Use Permit: A conditional use permit shall be obtained from the planning commission
in accordance with the following:
1. The planning commission shall ensure that health and safety are considered, and shall
obtain the approval of the county health department, the North View Fire Department and
the Police Department prior to issuing the conditional use permit.
2. The planning commission shall ensure that land area and parking are adequate for the
proposed use, and shall ensure that traffic safety is considered.
3. The planning commission shall require any measures necessary to protect surrounding
property.
4. A time limit shall be established for each use conducted under the conditional use permit.
This time limit shall in no case exceed seven (7) consecutive days, nor shall more than
four (4) conditional use permits be issued for the same use during any calendar year.
5. Permanent structures shall not be permitted under a conditional use permit issued under
this section.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-05 on 4/9/2002
Repealed & Reenacted by Ord. 2014-23 on 9/16/2014
11-10-24: PUBLIC SERVICE FACILITIES
A conditional use permit shall be required by all public service companies in order to establish or
substantially expand utility buildings, structures or appurtenances thereto, in any residential zoning
district. Extension of public service lines in public or private rights of way is exempt from these
requirements.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-05 on 4/9/2002
11-10-25: TRASH ENCLOSURES
A permanent enclosure for temporary storage of garbage, refuse and other waste materials shall be
provided for every use, other than single-family dwellings and multiple-family dwellings of less than four
(4) units. The enclosure shall be entirely surrounded by screen walls or buildings. Trash enclosures shall
comply with the following regulations:
A. Construction: Trash enclosures shall be so constructed that contents are not visible from a height
of five feet (5') above grade from any abutting street or property, and shall be constructed of solid
or ornamental pierced masonry walls with solid concrete floor sloped for drainage and
maintenance of sanitary conditions. Enclosures shall be of sufficient height to conceal contents,
including containers, but in no case shall any enclosure be less than four feet (4') in height above
grade. Gates are required and shall be solid or baffled, equal in height to the enclosure and
equipped with latches to ensure closure when not in use.
B. Location: Trash enclosures shall not be located in any required front or side yard.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-05 on 4/9/2002
11-10-26: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Any permitted or conditionally permitted use must conform to the following performance standards. In
conjunction with the plan review, the developer-applicant shall provide to the zoning administrator
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 156/279
information that is sufficient to show that the proposed use and the manner of its conduct will meet the
following performance standards:
A. Glare Or Heat: Any activity producing intense glare or heat shall be performed within a
completely enclosed building in such a manner as not to create a nuisance or hazard along lot
lines.
B. Vibration: No vibration shall be permitted which is discernible beyond the lot line to the human
sense of feeling for three (3) minutes or more duration in any one hour of the day between the
hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) P.M., or of thirty (30) seconds or more
duration in any one hour during the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00)
A.M.
C. Fly Ash, Dust, Fumes, Vapors, Gases And Other Forms Of Air Pollution: No emission shall be
permitted which can cause damage to health, to animals or vegetation, or other forms of
property, or which can cause any excessive soiling.
D. Prohibited Waste: No wastes shall be discharged in the public sewerage system which would
endanger the normal operation of the public sewerage system or which would cause the system
to violate any federal, state or local law.
E. Odors: No emission of odorous gases or other odorous matter shall be permitted in such
quantities as to be offensive in such a manner as to create a nuisance or hazard beyond the
property lines.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2003-06 on 2/25/2003
11-10-27: SITE PLAN APPROVAL REQUIRED
A. A site plan shall be submitted to the planning commission which shows the location of main and
accessory buildings on the site and in relation to one another, the traffic circulation features
within the site, the height, bulk and character of building, the provision for off street parking
space, the provision of driveways for ingress and egress, the provision for other open space on
the site and the display of signs. Each of the foregoing features shall be in accordance with the
site plan (or subsequent amendment thereof) of the proposed development approved by the
planning commission prior to the issuance of a building permit.
B. A site plan shall include landscaping, fences and walls designed to further the purpose of the
regulations for commercial, manufacturing and multiple housing zones, and such features shall
be provided and maintained as a condition of the establishment and the maintenance of any use
to which they are appurtenant. The site plan shall include a comprehensive sign plan in
accordance to CCNO 11-22-5.
C. In considering any site plan, the planning commission shall endeavor to assure safety and
convenience of traffic movement, both within the area covered and in relation to access streets,
harmonious and beneficial relation among the buildings and uses in the area covered, and
satisfactory harmonious relation between such area and contiguous land and buildings and
adjacent neighborhoods, and that the requirements of this title have been met.
D. In approving site plans, the planning commission may act on a site plan submitted to it or may
act on its own initiative in proposing and approving a site plan, including any conditions or
requirements designated or specified therein or in connection therewith.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2011-08 on 5/10/2011
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 157/279
11-10-28: RESIDENTIAL FACILITY FOR DISABLED PERSONS
A. A residential facility for disabled persons when conducted consistent with existing zoning of the
desired location is a permitted use.
B. A residential facility for disabled persons shall:
1. Have twenty four (24) hour adult supervision for facilities for the housing of minors.
2. Not house persons whose asserted "disability" is based upon their status as current users
of illegal controlled substances, conviction for illegal manufacture or distribution of a
controlled substance, sex offenders, or juvenile offenders.
3. Comply with applicable fire and building codes, including requirements imposed under the
American's with disabilities act; obtain a city business license; and acquire within thirty
(30) days of receiving the city license, and maintain current, any necessary state license.
4. Not house persons who present a direct threat to the persons or property of others. When
presented with clear and convincing evidence that a person housed in a facility does pose
such a threat, that person shall be immediately removed from the facility.
C. Upon request for an accommodation from the owner or operator of a facility for disabled persons
from strict compliance with a regulation imposed by local ordinance, the director of community
and economic development is authorized to make any accommodation that in his or her opinion
will not result in an imminent health or safety threat to residents of the facility.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2012-1 on 1/10/2012
11-10-29: SHORT TERM LOAN BUSINESSES
A. Location: No short term loan business shall be located within one thousand feet (1,000') of
another short term loan business or within six hundred sixty feet (660') of a community center,
school, or other public gathering place, e.g., park, library, private or public school, licensed childcare
facility or pre-school, church, etc., or sexually oriented business.
B. Measurements: Distances shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures or zoning districts, from the property line of each business to the closest property
boundary of the short term loan business, community center, school, or other public gathering
place, or sexually oriented business.
C. Zoning: Short term loan businesses shall only be allowed in C-2 or CP-2 zones. When allowed
within a zoning district, a short term loan business may only be located on the following street:
Washington Boulevard.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 158/279
D. Disclosure Signs: Each short term loan business shall post a sign with solid black lettering on a
white background, in 50-point, non-italicized, bold Arial typeface designed to achieve a letter
height of at least one-half inch (1/2), in the English and Spanish languages, at every public
entrance to the business bearing the following disclosure:
DISCLOSURE REQUIRED BY NORTH OGDEN CITY:
THIS BUSINESS SPECIALIZES IN MAKING LOANS FOR SHORT-TERM NEEDS. THESE
LOANS SHOULD NOT BE USED AS A LONG-TERM FINANCIAL SOLUTION. THE INTEREST
RATE FOR SHORT TERM LOANS IS EQUAL TO X ANNUAL PERCENTAGE RATE (APR) TO
X ANNUAL PERCENTAGE RATE(APR).
DIVULGACIÓN REQUERIDA POR LA CIUDAD DE NORTH OGDEN ESTE NEGOCIO SE
ESPECIALIZA EN HACER PRÉSTAMOS PARA LAS NECESIDADES A CORTO PLAZO.
ESTOS PRESTAMOS NO DEBEN UTILIZARSE COMO UNA SOLUCION FINANCIERA A
LARGO PLAZO. LA TASA DE INTERÉS DE LOS PRÉSTAMOS A CORTO PLAZO ES DE UN
PORECNTAJE ANNUAL DE PR CIENTO A X POR CIENTO A X POR CIENTO.
The disclosure signs required by this section shall face the entrance to the business, and shall be
placed either on the interior surface of the door so that the top edge of the sign is between forty
eight inches (48") and seventy two inches (72") from the entrance threshold (measured vertically)
or shall be located directly behind the entry door without any intervening obstruction between
forty eight inches (48") and seventy two inches (72") from the floor (measured vertically), as near
to the entry door as is allowed by the current building code adopted by North Ogden City.
Existing short term loan businesses shall post the disclosure signs no later than October 1, 2014.
E. Additional Disclosures:
1. Post in a conspicuous location on its premises that can be viewed by a person seeking a
short term loan a complete schedule of any interest or fees charged using dollar amounts;
2. Enter into a written contract for the short term loan;
3. Provide the person seeking the short term loan a copy of the written contract described in
Subsection (2); and
4. Orally review with the person seeking the short term loan the terms of the short term loan
including;
a. the amount of any interest rate or fee;
b. the date on which the full amount of a short term loan is due;
5. Comply with the following as in effect on the date the short term loan is extended:
a. Truth in Lending Act. 15 U.S.C. Sec. 1601 et seq., and its implementing federal
regulations;
b. Equal Credit Opportunity Act, 15 U.S.C. sec. 1691 and its implementing federal
regulations;
c. Bank Secrecy Act, 12 U.S.C. Sec. 1829b, 12 U.S.C. Sec. 1951 through 1959, and
31 U.S.C. Sec. 5311 through 5332, and its implementing regulations, and
d. Title 70C, Utah Consumer Credit Code
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 159/279
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2014-19 on 8/12/2014
11-10-30: FLAG LOTS
Flag lots shall not be allowed in any residential, commercial, or manufacturing zone.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 2016-03 on 1/20/2016
11-10-31: STANDARDS FOR ACCESSORY BUILDINGS IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES
A. Design: The original design of the building must have been to function as a typical accessory
residential structure, such as a storage shed or carport, and not for some other use. Reuse of a
metal structure originally designed or used for other purposes, such as shipping or cargo
containers, is not allowed unless the exterior of the metal structure is made to be integrated into
the design of the main residential building, with a similar residential exterior wall treatment and
roofing material as the main building.
B. Location and Size:
1. No detached accessory building, other than trellises, shall be allowed between the front of
the main residential building and the street.
2. A garage or carport attached to the main residential building is allowed between the front
of the main residential building and the street if the front yard setback requirement for the
zone is maintained and the garage or carport is integrated into the design of the
residential building, with a similar residential exterior wall treatment, roof slope, and
roofing material as the main building to which it is attached.
A detached garage or carport may be located in the side yard so long as it meets the side
and front yard setbacks, is a minimum of 6 feet from the main building, is integrated into
the design of the residential building, with a similar residential exterior wall treatment and
roofing material as the main building.
3. Metal accessory buildings must be located in the rear yard and shall not exceed two
hundred (200) square feet.
4. Nonmetal accessory buildings and accessory buildings finished with architectural metal
regardless of size may be located in an interior side yard or rear yard provided they meet
the required setbacks of the zone. Nonmetal accessory buildings larger than 200 square
feet must be integrated into the design of the residential building, with a similar residential
exterior wall treatment, and roofing material as the main building.
5. On a corner lot, an attached or detached accessory building (with or without a roof) that is
open on at least three (3) sides may extend into the side yard setback facing a street up
to the minimum side yard setback for an interior lot in its respective zone. Such structures
are limited to covered or uncovered decks, patios, gazebos, pergolas, and trellises. The
finished floor elevation of these structures may not be higher than eighteen inches (18")
above finish grade.
C. Height: The building shall not exceed the maximum height allowed by other sections of the
Zoning Ordinance.
D. Prohibited Use: Accessory buildings shall not be used as living quarters.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2016-34 on 8/23/2016
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 160/279
11-10-32 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS
Accessory Buildings in CCNO 11-7F (Residential Zone R-2), CCNO 11-7G (MultiFamily Residential
Zone R-3), CCNO 11-7H (Multi-Family Residential Zone R-4) and the following PRUD Zones CCNO 11-
7C (Legacy Planned Residential Unit Zone), CCNO 11-7D (Roylance Farms Planned Residential Unit
Zone), CCNO 11-7E (Quail Ponds Planned Residential Unit Zone), and CCNO 11-7I (Cold Creek Village
Planning Residential Unit Development Zone):
Accessory Building
R-2 R-3 R-4 PRUD
A. Interior side yard setback (in feet) 3 3 3 3
B. Corner lot side yard setback (in feet) 20 20 20 20
C. Maximum height (in feet) 15 15 15 15
D. Maximum size 599 sq.
ft.
599 sq.
ft.
599 sq.
ft.
599 sq.
ft.
E. Minimum distance between buildings 6 6 6 6
F. Maximum rear yard coverage by all accessory
buildings 25% 25% 25% 25%
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2016-25 on 8/16/2016
11-10-33: PORTABLE STORAGE CONTAINERS
A. A storage container is not allowed in any residential zone, commercial or manufacturing zone for
more than 14 days except as a temporary use associated with construction, renovation, or
moving or as outlined below, In such instances, the storage container shall be located on a
concrete or asphalt surface, and shall meet all of the following criteria:
1. A storage container shall not be placed on a site more than thirty (30) days prior to the
permitted activity.
2. A storage container shall be removed within thirty (30) days after a permitted activity is
substantially completed.
3. Portable storage containers shall not be used as dwellings, or for camping, cooking or
recreation purposes, and may not be connected to plumbing or electricity.
4. Portable storage containers shall be kept in good repair.
5. Portable storage containers shall not be allowed on vacant parcels of real property.
6. It is unlawful to use a storage container as a permanent structure or as an appendage to
a permanent structure.
7. It is unlawful, in any zone, to vertically stack two (2) or more storage containers or
stack/place any other materials or items on top of or around a storage container.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 161/279
B. A storage container in a commercial or manufacturing zone shall be used in accordance with the
following criteria:
1. A storage container shall be used solely for the transportation or shipment of goods and
products, and
2. It is unlawful to use a storage container for business operations, and
3. A storage container not being actively used for transportation or shipment shall not be
stored within North Ogden City.
4. Multiple storage containers may be located on a lot or parcel in a nonresidential zone
subject to receiving site plan approval from the planning commission.
5. Temporary fireworks stands are exempted from this subsections B (1-4).
C. A storage container in a residential zone shall be used in accordance with the following criteria:
1. Portable storage containers shall not be allowed for permanent storage.
2. Only one portable storage container shall be allowed per parcel or lot and not allowed on
a vacant lot or parcel.
3. Portable storage containers used for moving in or out of a residence shall be allowed for a
maximum of fourteen (14) days, and shall only be located on a driveway or other paved
area on private property.
D. A construction storage container shall not be located on any property for more than six (6)
months in any twelve (12) month period, measured continuously from the day the container is
first placed. A construction storage container is not required to be placed on an asphalt or
concrete surface. The North Ogden City Planner may grant extensions of up to six (6) months,
but only if he/she determines that:
1. The storage container is located on a site with an active building permit.
2. The storage container is a necessary part of the construction process.
3. Not be allowed in the public right of way.
4. Construction is moving forward in a timely manner and in accordance with generally
accepted industry standards.
5. The storage container may receive electricity with an electrical permit.
6. The storage containers shall be removed prior to the granting of a certificate of
occupancy.
E. Existing prohibited storage containers will be given a 6 month amortization time period to
continue to operate from November 1, 2016.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2016-35 on 10/12/2016
11-10-34: ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS
A. Definition of Accessory Dwelling Unit: A subordinate dwelling, which has its own kitchen,
living/sleeping area, and sanitation facilities which is: 1) within or attached to a single-family
residential building, or 2) within a detached accessory structure associated with a single-family
dwelling.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 162/279
B. Purpose and Intent: The purpose and intent of this section is to recognize the residential
character of North Ogden City and to provide for supplementary living accommodations in the
community. These provisions are intended to provide for affordable housing with reasonable
limitations to minimize the impact on neighboring properties and neighborhoods, and to promote
the health, safety, and welfare of the property owners and residents of accessory dwelling units.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 163/279
C. Owner Occupied: No accessory dwelling units shall be created, established, or occupied in a
single-family dwelling unless the owner of the property occupies either a portion of the primary
dwelling or a detached accessory unit on the same single-family lot. For the purpose of this
section, the term "owner occupied" shall be defined as full time residency within the home by the
bona fide property owner(s) as shown on the Weber County tax assessment rolls.
1. Definition of Owner Occupant
Owner occupant means, except as set forth in Subsection (c) of this definition:
a. an individual who:
i. possesses, as shown by a recorded deed, fifty (50) percent or more
ownership in a dwelling unit; and
ii. occupies the dwelling unit with a bonafide intent to make it his or her
primary residence; or
b. an individual who:
i. is a trustor of a family trust which:
(1) possesses fee title ownership to a dwelling unit;
(2) was created for estate planning purposes by one (1) or more
trustors of the trust; and
ii. occupies the dwelling unit owned by the family trust with a bonafide intent
to make it his or her primary residence. Each living trustor of the trust shall
so occupy the dwelling unit except for a trustor who temporarily resides
elsewhere due to a disability or infirmity. In such event, the dwelling unit
shall nevertheless be the domicile of the trustor during the trustor's
temporary absence.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 164/279
c. A person who meets the requirements of Subsections (a) and (b) of this definition
shall not be deemed an owner occupant if the property on which the dwelling unit
is located has more than one (1) owner and all owners of the property do not
occupy the dwelling unit with a bona fide intent to make the dwelling unit their
primary residence.
i. A claim that a person is not an owner occupant may be rebutted only by
documentation, submitted to the Planning Department, showing that the
person who occupies the dwelling unit has a bona fide intent to make the
dwelling unit his or her primary residence as indicated by the following
documents which show such person:
(1) is listed as a primary borrower on documents for any loan presently
applicable to the property where the dwelling unit is located;
(2) has claimed all income, deductions, and depreciation from the
property on his or her tax returns for the previous year;
(3) is the owner listed on all rental documents and agreements with
tenants who occupy the dwelling unit, including any accessory
apartment;
(4) is the owner listed on all insurance, utility, appraisal, or other
contractual documents related to the property; and
(5) is a full-time resident of Utah for Utah State income tax purposes.
ii. Any person who claims to be an owner of the dwelling unit, but who does
not occupy it, shall provide documentation to the Planning Department
which shows such person:
(1) has not claimed any income, tax deduction, or depreciation for the
property on the person’s tax returns for the previous year;
(2) is not listed as an owner on any rental document or agreement with
any tenant who occupies the dwelling unit, including any accessory
apartment; and
(3) is not listed as an owner on any insurance, utility, appraisal, or a
agreement related to the property.
iii. Any person, or group of persons, who fails, upon request of the Planning
Department, to provide any of the documents set forth in Subsections (c)
(1) or (c)(2) of this definition or who provides a document showing that
ownership of a dwelling unit is shared among persons who do not all
occupy the dwelling unit shall mean for the purpose of this chapter that
such person or persons shall not be deemed an "owner occupant" of the
dwelling unit in question.
d. A person who because of a temporary work, military, or non-profit related
assignment which is less than 36 months is relocated outside of the City but
maintains the property associated with the ADU as their legal residence as
evidenced by providing proof annually of the temporary assignment and one of the
following: the current years income taxes (with financial information redacted),
driver’s license, vehicle registrations, or voting registration.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 165/279
D. Dwelling Unit Occupancy: The occupants of an accessory dwelling unit shall be limited by one of
the following family categories:
1. One person living alone; or
2. Two (2) or more persons all related by blood, by marriage, by adoption; by legal
guardianship or foster children; or
3. Up to four (4) related and/or unrelated persons living as a single housekeeping unit.
4. Any of the above categories plus a temporary guest. A "temporary guest" is defined as a
person who stays with a family for a period of less than thirty (30) days within any rolling
one year period and does not utilize the dwelling as a legal address for any purpose.
5. For purposes of the definition of family, the term "related" shall mean a spouse, parent,
child, stepchild, grandparent, grandchild, brother, sister, uncle, aunt, nephew, niece, first
cousins, great-grandparent, and great-grandchild. The term "related" does not include
other, more distant relationships.
E. Zones: An accessory dwelling which meets ordinance requirements may be allowed in a singlefamily
dwelling unit or in a detached accessory unit within RE-20, R-1-8, R-1-8(AG), R-1-10, R-1-
12.5 and RCC zone. No accessory dwelling unit may be allowed in any multi-family dwelling.
F. Number Of Accessory Dwelling Units: A maximum of one accessory dwelling unit shall be
allowed in each owner occupied single-family dwelling, or in a detached accessory unit
associated with a single-family dwelling.
G. Address: The principal dwelling unit and the accessory dwelling unit shall have the same address
number, but shall refer to the accessory dwelling unit as unit B. Addresses must be located in a
visible location on the street frontage side of the home.
H. Separate Living Areas: An accessory dwelling unit must provide living areas for eating, sleeping
and sanitation facilities separate from the principal dwelling unit.
I. Fire, Building, and Health Codes: An ADU shall comply with all building construction and fire
codes in effect at the time the ADU is constructed, created or subsequently remodeled, including
the obtaining of required building and other permits.
J. Utility Meters: A single-family dwelling with an accessory dwelling shall have one (1) but no more
than two (2) meters for each water, gas, and electricity utility service, and each meter shall be in
the property owner’s name. An impact fee is required when adding a detached accessory
dwelling unit.
K. Not Intended For Sale: Accessory dwelling units shall not be sold separately from the primary
dwelling unit. Neither the primary dwelling unit or ADU shall be rented on a transient basis
(periods less than 30 days).
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 166/279
L. Accessory Dwelling Unit Registration / Business License: Any person owning an existing
accessory dwelling unit that has not previously been permitted by the city, or any person
constructing or causing the construction of a residence that has an accessory dwelling unit, or
any person remodeling or causing the remodeling of a residence for an accessory dwelling unit,
shall register the accessory dwelling unit with the building department. If the accessory dwelling
unit is a rental unit a business license is required. This shall be in addition to a building permit for
the work to be performed. In order to meet the requirements of the registration, the applicant
shall:
1. Submit a fee as identified in the Consolidated Fee Schedule with a completed registration
form including a site plan that shows property lines and dimensions, the location of
existing buildings and building entrances, proposed buildings or additions, dimensions
from buildings or additions to property lines, the location of parking stalls, and utility
meters.
2. Include detailed floor plans with labels on rooms indicating uses or proposed uses.
3. Pay building permit fees, if applicable, for the construction of a new dwelling, or the
remodeling of an existing dwelling, in accordance with the established fees and charges.
4. Make all corrections identified as necessary to comply with building code requirements,
as identified by the chief building official or his designee, and provide photos of the life
safety items required by building code, including carbon monoxide detectors, smoke
detectors, and earthquake strapping on water heaters.
5. Existing non-conforming duplexes which were legally established prior to the elimination
of duplexes from the underlying zone shall continue to operate as a duplex even if an
Owner Occupant maintains one of the units as their primary residence, provided the
Owner Occupant continues to treat the property as a duplex.
a. The Owner Occupant establishes the intent to maintain the duplex use by:
i. Obtaining the necessary rental license annually; and
ii. Paying the required utility billing charges for two dwelling units; and
iii. Paying all other necessary licensing procedures which may be imposed in
the future on all landlords throughout the City.
b. b. Failure to maintain the license and pay all necessary utility and other fees for a
period of one year or more shall be interpreted as the intent to abandon the duplex
use in favor of the conforming Accessory Dwelling Unit use whether or not the unit
is occupied.
c. c. Registering the duplex as an Accessory Dwelling Unit for a period of one year
or more shall be interpreted as the intent to abandon the duplex use.
M. Failure to Complete Registration: If the property owner does not complete the registration as
outlined above, the accessory dwelling unit shall not be considered legal or approved. Failure to
complete the registration of an existing accessory dwelling unit within two (2) years of the
passing of this section may result in a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) which may result in a
lien on the property. After the fine is assessed, the building official or his designee shall
determine an appropriate deadline for compliance. An additional fine may be assessed for each
deadline that is not met.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 167/279
N. Home Occupation Businesses: Home occupation businesses which may be approved in an
accessory dwelling unit shall be restricted to a home office use which creates no customer traffic.
No home occupation business shall be established within an accessory dwelling unit without the
express written permission of the property owner.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 168/279
O. Development Standards:
1. The total area of the ADU shall be less than fifty percent (50%) of the total square footage
of the primary residence for an attached accessory dwelling unit. The total area of the
ADU shall be less than forty percent (40%) of the total square footage of the primary
residence for a detached accessory dwelling.
2. ADUs shall not be located in a front or corner lot side yard and shall meet the same
setbacks as required for the primary residence in the zone.
3. Appearance. The architectural design, color pallet, and materials for an ADU shall be
similar to the primary dwelling unit.
4. ADUs and the primary dwelling must be on the same parcel and may not be subdivided.
5. The height of an ADU shall conform to the height limit specified for the zoning district in
which it is located.
6. Location: Accessory dwelling units may be allowed as long as the zoning requirements for
properties in a single-family neighborhood are met. The ADU shall not be within the
building front, rear, or side yard setbacks for the zoning district in which the dwelling lot is
located. In addition the following standards apply:
a. All accessory dwelling units are allowed over the garage, provided the parking
within the garage is not converted, or
b. Attached accessory dwelling units are allowed:
i. Inside the primary residential dwelling through an internal conversion of the
housing unit as an addition or in the basement.
ii. By an addition to the house, containing an internal connection between
dwelling units provided that the addition will not alter the single-family
character of the building
c. Detached accessory dwelling units are allowed:
i. Over a detached garage.
ii. Only in the rear yard.
iii. On lots having a minimum area of 20,000 square feet.
iv. Shall have a minimum separation from the primary dwelling of 15 feet.
v. Subject to 11-7A-4, 11-7B-4, and 11-7J-4 Site Development Standards.
7. Building Entrances: An accessory dwelling unit shall have a separate entrance located on
any side or rear of the single family home or at the front of the home if it is below grade
and maintains the characteristics of a single family home. The purpose of this
requirement is to preserve the single-family residential appearance of the building.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 169/279
8. Parking: A single-family dwelling with an accessory dwelling unit shall provide at least
three (3) off street parking spaces for the primary dwelling unit. In no case shall the
number of off street parking spaces be less than the number of vehicles being maintained
on the premises. This shall include covered parking, garages and tandem parking in
driveways. Tandem parking within a driveway is allowed to meet the parking requirement.
No parking spaces may be located within the front or side yard setbacks adjacent to a
street, except for within an approved driveway. The minimum width of parking areas and
driveways shall be paved with concrete, asphalt, masonry, or concrete pavers. No
accessory dwelling may be allowed on any lot that cannot satisfy the parking
requirements.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2017-10 on 5/16/2017
Amended by Ord. 2019-02 on 2/12/2019
11-10-35: PRESCHOOL USE
A. Purpose Statement The purpose and intent of this section is to permit residents in specific
residential zones to conduct preschools in a manner that will retain the character of the home in
a residential setting while not significantly impacting the residential character of the
neighborhood.
B. Preschool Use Preschools are allowed in specific residential zones as permitted uses.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 170/279
C. Development Standards of all Preschools It shall be unlawful to conduct or pursue a preschool
within the corporate limits of the city, unless each of the following conditions are observed:
1. Preschools in the operator's residence that operates four (4) or less hours per session a
day and teaches more than nine (9) children, but not more than fourteen (14) children.
2. Residents Of Premises: Only persons who are bona fide residents of the premises shall
operate the preschool; if the preschool has more than 8 people or children then one
additional person not residing in the dwelling may be employed in the preschool if certified
by the state and not a minor.
3. Total Floor Area: The preschool shall not occupy more than 50% of the ground floor area
of the residence.
4. Minimum Interior Floor Area: A minimum floor area of thirty-five (35) square feet per child
shall be provided.
5. Signs And Advertising: No sign or advertising shall be displayed on the premises.
6. Parking and Drop Off: Off street parking shall be provided to satisfy the requirements of
CCNO 11-17-3 and 4. The addition of off street parking facilities on the premises of the
preschool beyond that normally required for residential uses is not required. The safe
drop off of children is the responsibility of the preschool operator.
7. Play Areas; Fencing: A minimum outdoor play area of forty (40) square feet per child shall
be provided. All outdoor play areas shall be within a fenced area and shall be limited to
use by the children in the preschool in normal operating hours. Fence height shall be in
accordance with CCNO 11-10-11. Fence height shall be in accordance with CCNO 11-10-
11.
8. Conformance With Laws: There shall be complete conformity with fire, building, plumbing,
electrical and health codes; and to all state and city ordinances and other laws,
covenants, restrictions or regulations pertaining to the premises upon which the preschool
is conducted.
9. Licensing and Regulation. Appropriate city and state licenses shall be acquired.
10. An annual inspection for continued compliance will be required for license renewal of all
preschool facilities.
11. A criminal background check is required for any adult who resides at a dwelling used for a
preschool business.
12. No person who has been convicted of a sexually oriented crime may operate, be
employed by, or reside at a dwelling that is used for a preschool business.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2018-30 on 11/27/2018
11-10-36: SETBACKS ON LOTS WITH AN OVERALL PERCENTAGE GREATER THAN 10
PERCENT
Residential lots with an overall slope percentage greater than 10 percent may have the front setback
reduced from 30 feet to 20 feet. Slopes shall be measured from a point on the front lot line to a point on
the rear lot line.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 2018-32 on 12/18/2018
11-10-37: STREETSCAPE STANDARDS
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 171/279
Streetscape designs are required for properties going through site plan review and shall be approved by
the Planning Commission. The streetscape design shall include the space behind the projected curb and
tie into the required onsite landscape plan, e.g., shall include street trees, tree grates, pedestrian
lighting, bus shelter location, and street furniture.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2019-01 on 2/12/2019
11-11: PLANNED RESIDENTIAL UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PRUD)
11-11-1: PURPOSE
11-11-2: DEFINITIONS
11-11-3: USE REGULATIONS
11-11-4: DENSITY DETERMINATION
11-11-5: MINIMUM DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
11-11-6: SUBMISSION AND REVIEW PROCESS
11-11-7: APPLICABILITY OF SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
11-11-8: FINAL PLAT RECORDATION
11-11-9: CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT AND FINAL PLAN
11-11-10: AMENDMENTS
11-11-11: TIME LIMITATIONS
11-11-12: CONSTRUCTION PARAMETERS
11-11-13: FAILURE TO COMPLY; CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
11-11-14: ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMITS
11-11-15 REVOCATION OF CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT; APPEAL
11-11-1: PURPOSE
A. The purpose of the planned residential unit development (PRUD) is to encourage better
utilization of land, to develop a sense of community and to ensure compatibility with the
surrounding neighborhoods. This is accomplished by allowing flexibility in the placement and
design of buildings and infrastructure not ordinarily allowed in conventional zoning regulations. It
allows flexibility in development standards for creative design and yet provides specific
requirements to ensure surrounding properties and natural features are protected.
B. A planned residential unit development is a residential development planned as a whole, single
complex. It incorporates a definite development theme which includes the elements of usable
open space, diversity of lot design, residential use and amenities, a well planned circulation
system, and attractive entrances as part of the design. The incorporation of one or two (2) of
these elements into a development does not make a PRUD. The combination of all of these
elements is necessary for the development of a PRUD.
C. An increase in housing density in order to make a project more economically profitable, is not an
objective of a PRUD. The developer must calculate in his or her pro forma the viability of a
proposed PRUD project given the regulatory structure required by this chapter. Reductions in lot
sizes may be granted, as provided herein, but only when the reduction and/or more creative
configuration of the lots results in better use of the land, the creation of usable common activity
areas and improved aesthetics. These benefits should reasonably promise to enhance the
enjoyment of life within the PRUD to a degree that would not otherwise be achievable without the
lot size concessions.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2012-15 on 8/14/2012
11-11-2: DEFINITIONS
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall mean:
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 172/279
ATTACHED DWELLING UNITS: Two (2) or more dwelling units connected by at least one wall or floor
of common construction.
DEVELOPED COMMON ACTIVITY AREA: Open green space which is designed to provide activity
areas for use by all residents such as playgrounds, recreational courts, picnic pavilions and gazebos.
Title to developed common activity area shall be held in common or in private ownership, provided that
all residents of the PRUD shall be granted access to the developed common activity area.
FACADE: All exterior walls of a building or structure.
GROSS ACREAGE: The total amount of acreage in a PRUD development.
NET ACREAGE: The total amount of acreage in a PRUD development excluding rights of way or roads
and "undevelopable land" such as unmitigated natural hazard areas, wetland areas and floodplains.
OPEN GREEN SPACE: A planned open area suitable for relaxation, recreation or landscaping which
may be held in common or private ownership, provided that all residents of the development shall have a
right to enter and use the open space. It should be unoccupied and unobstructed by buildings and hard
surfaces such as asphalt or concrete, except that such open green spaces may include walkways,
patios, recreational activity areas, picnic pavilions, gazebos and water features so long as such surfaces
do not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the required open green space.
PERIPHERY: A one hundred foot (100') depth around the perimeter of the project measured inward
from the property line.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2012-15 on 8/14/2012
11-11-3: USE REGULATIONS
Uses in all PRUDs shall be limited to the permitted and conditional uses of the zoning district where the
PRUD is located with the following exceptions:
A. Attached dwelling units may be allowed in the R-1 and R-2 zones to provide a variety of housing
options provided all other requirements of this title are met.
B. Accessory uses to the PRUD which are located in a common main building may be permitted.
Accessory uses shall be limited to personal services and recreational facilities so long as
adequate parking is provided as determined by the planning commission.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2012-15 on 8/14/2012
11-11-4: DENSITY DETERMINATION
A. Developable Acreage: Density in a PRUD shall be determined by using the developable acreage
of the entire proposed development. Developable acreage is land under twenty percent (20%)
slope which is capable of being improved with landscaping, recreational facilities, buildings or
parking. Unmitigated natural hazard areas and wetland areas shall be "undevelopable" land.
Land devoted to street usage (the right of way for public streets and the area from back of curb to
back of curb for private streets) shall not be considered developable acreage and must be
subtracted out of the total acreage used to determine density.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 173/279
B. Density In A PRUD: The number of dwellings in a PRUD shall be determined by dividing the net
developable square footage of the PRUD by the square footage required for each residential lot
by the zone in which the PRUD is located. If the number of lots ends in a fractional amount,
fractional amounts are to be disregarded.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2012-15 on 8/14/2012
11-11-5: MINIMUM DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
All proposed PRUD developments shall comply with all minimum development requirements as provided
in this section.
A. General Regulations:
1. A minimum of five (5) acres of land.
2. The minimum setback for all buildings (excluding fences) and parking in the periphery of
the development shall be the front setback of the zone at those locations where the
development abuts a street and a thirty foot (30') setback at those locations where
development abuts other parcels of land. Notwithstanding the above provision, if the
development has subdivided single-family lots, which abut other parcels of land, the
specific zone regulations shall apply for rear yard setbacks and accessory uses of the
subdivided lots. The required setback area shall be landscaped. Front setbacks may be
reduced by the planning commission if the project can demonstrate an upgraded design
to include:
a. The building fronts face the street.
b. The building fronts have the main entrance features toward the street, e.g., the
front door, walk way to the sidewalk, porch, windows, shutters, etc.
c. Acceptable building materials are brick, rock, hardie board, and or stucco or other
material approved by the planning commission; notwithstanding aluminum or vinyl
siding are not allowed.
d. The park strip and front yard shall have a landscape theme.
e. The project is pedestrian friendly. In addition to the normal sidewalk design a
walking trail system is included that has public access. The trail system and
sidewalks may include pedestrian lights.
3. The minimum distance between main buildings in the development shall be fifteen feet
(15') for single-story buildings, twenty feet (20') for two-story buildings, twenty five feet
(25') for two and one-half (21/2) story buildings. If the lower building is next to a taller
building, then the larger separation distance will apply.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 174/279
4. If fencing is proposed adjacent to a public or private street, the maximum fence height
shall be forty two inches (42") for fences located in the required front yard and side yard
setback facing a street as determined in the underlying zone. The width of the setbacks
shall be according to the required setback of the zone in which the development is
proposed. Fence heights located outside of these setbacks shall be limited to a maximum
height of six feet (6'). The planning commission may vary the height or location if it
determines the proposed fence design, materials and location will not create a safety
hazard due to obstructed vision of approaching vehicles or pedestrians and will:
a. Not isolate the surrounding neighborhoods;
b. Be consistent with the theme of the development; and
c. Be compatible with the neighborhood.
5. If fencing isolates property between the fence and the public street, the development shall
provide means to ensure continued maintenance of this area.
6. All utilities shall be placed underground, except power transmission lines capable of
carrying forty six (46) kV or greater.
B. Compatibility:
1. The front of the units developed on the periphery of the project shall front onto the public
streets. When units abut two (2) parallel streets, the fronts of the units shall face the
public street bordering the PRUD. Units, which are on corners, may front either street.
The planning commission may waive this provision due to unusual topographic features
or unusual conditions; provided that such a waiver does not negatively impact the
continuity of the existing streetscape.
2. The type of exterior building material and ratio of surface coverage for the proposed
facade for other than single-family dwelling units shall be approved by the planning
commission. The surrounding existing uses will be considered by the planning
commission when approving the building materials to be used.
C. Design Theme:
1. Entrance designs to the development are required. The minimum entrance design to the
development shall consist of a monument sign naming the development surrounded by a
variety of ground cover, shrubs, and/or trees, which shall be approved by the planning
commission.
2. Attached dwelling units shall have visual relief in facade and roof line, which adds variety
and rhythm to the design and avoids monotonous straight lines.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 175/279
D. Open Space And Landscaping:
1. In the multi-family R-2, R-3, and R-4 zones a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the entire
site shall be in open green space. Each phase of development shall provide its
proportionate required open green space needed for that phase. In single-family zones
the open space plan shall be reviewed and approved by the planning commission and city
council.
2. Developments shall be designed to preserve and incorporate the natural features of the
land into the development. Natural features include drainage swales, rock outcroppings,
streams and concentrated native stands of large shrubs or trees.
3. Developed common activity area for single-family and attached dwelling units shall be
provided as follows:
a. Developments with attached dwelling units shall provide developed common
activity area at a ratio of one square foot of developed common activity area per
one square foot of floor area of living space. Each phase of development shall
provide its proportionate required open green space needed for that phase. At a
minimum, developed common activity area shall include either a playground with
play equipment or pathways with benches and tables through a natural planted
landscaped area. Common activity areas shall be configured to provide
appropriate, accessible and usable spaces. Spaces that are too small, too steep,
too narrow, etc., or otherwise configured in a way that the space provides
questionable utility for homeowners in the PRUD, shall not be credited toward the
developer's open space requirement.
b. Subdivided, single-family lots shall provide developed common activity area at a
ratio approved by the planning commission. At a minimum, developed common
activity area shall include either a playground with play equipment or pathways
with benches and tables through a natural or planted landscaped area.
c. The developer will provide to the planning commission a reasonable calculation of
the monthly assessment required to adequately fund the reasonably foreseeable
cost of operation, maintenance, and replacement of all common areas. A
description of the common activity areas required by the city along with the
estimate of the monthly assessment for all common areas shall be disclosed to all
prospective buyers of building lots within the PRUD. Reasonableness shall mean
that the calculation complies with the industry standard for determination of
assessments for homeowners' associations.
4. Street trees shall be placed along all interior roads at a maximum spacing distance of
forty feet (40') between each tree.
5. The development shall have a unified landscaping design of trees, shrubs, and theme
lighting. Natural features, ponds, streams, fountains, waterfalls, sculptures and other
design elements which create interest and visual unity and displays creativity in providing
usable open space for the residents of the development are encouraged.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 176/279
6. The following are guidelines for landscape design and standards. Individual projects may
vary but all will be reviewed and approved by the planning commission:
a. Ten (10) 1-foot high shrubs (4 of which are a flowering shrub) for each residential
building. The plant selections of shrubs and ground covers should be drought
tolerant plants. Shrub areas shall be mulched to reduce watering demands.
b. Six (6) 2-inch caliper deciduous trees and one 4-foot tall evergreen tree for each
residential building. The placement and types of deciduous trees shall take into
consideration use of the trees for summer cooling and winter solar access.
Evergreen trees should be used as windbreaks, screening and accent plants.
c. Turf area at least equal to the footprint square footage of the development.
d. The irrigation system must use secondary water and shall be designed to water
plants of similar water needs and avoid wasteful watering.
e. No more than ten percent (10%) of the entire landscaping surface area can be in
rocks or other nonliving ground cover. The ten percent (10%) limitation does not
include areas where the ground cover is rocks or other material and is planted
with plants spaced so they will completely cover the area in five (5) years.
f. The landscape design along streams, canals, or rivers should provide a trail
access along the development.
7. All dumpsters shall be stored in screened enclosures, which are architecturally
compatible in style and materials with the architecture of the development. Dumpsters
shall be located so they are not in the required setback areas, not visible from the public
street and do not restrict vehicular parking or circulation.
8. Stormwater detention facilities are to be designed and used to detain all of the storm
drainage generated by any development. All surface stormwater detention facilities are to
be designed and used for multiple functions. The design of the facility shall blend in with
the overall theme of the open space. Factors which will be used in determining
compliance may include, but not be limited to, free form design, grading and landscaping
to provide gradual transitions or artistic design elements. All drainage systems shall be
approved by the city engineer and must be capable of preventing unapproved runoff onto
other property and of preventing structural damage in the event of a 10-year storm. The
system must also drain subsurface water capable of penetrating structures in the
development.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 177/279
E. Parking Regulations:
1. Parking lots are to be screened from view by means of a three foot (3') high berm along
street frontages. The berm height shall be measured from the top of curb.
2. Parking lots shall provide landscaping at a ratio of one square foot of landscaping per
thirteen (13) square feet of hard surface. The perimeter areas must also be landscaped.
3. Each landscaped island and area shall have, at a minimum, a two inch (2") caliper tree
(measured 6 inches above the ground) located in such a manner as to shade twenty five
percent (25%) of the parking area upon maturation of the trees.
4. The circulation system of the development is designed to provide a circulation hierarchy.
The main circulation road does not have perpendicular parking which backs out into the
travel lane, but branches off into development areas which have parking areas.
5. If a group recreational vehicle (RV) parking area is provided for the development, it shall
be a minimum of one RV space per five (5), or fraction thereof, dwelling units. The RV
parking area shall not be located in the periphery of the development and shall be
completely screened.
6. Two (2) parking stalls for each unit in the development are required…
7. There shall be at least one visitor parking stall for every two (2) units or fraction thereof in
multi-family unit areas of the PRUD.
8. All required parking stalls must be non-tandem, except that visitor parking stalls may be
tandem with the following standards:
a. Both the required parking stalls and visitor tandem parking stalls must be for the
same dwelling unit.
b. Tandem visitor parking is only allowed behind a fully enclosed parking stall.
c. All tandem parking pads shall meet the following size requirement, i.e., 10 feet
wide by 20 feet in depth.
d. Tandem visiting parking may only be used to satisfy up to one half of a projects
visitor parking requirement.
9. All parking aisles greater than one hundred fifty feet (150') in length shall have a
turnaround area that meets the cul-de-sac standards contained in the North Ogden public
works standards.
10. A minimum six foot (6') landscaped area, excluding sidewalk, is to be provided between
the unit and any parking or access lanes.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 178/279
F. Street Design: PRUDs shall be designed to meet the circulation requirements of the
transportation element of the general plan, the design needs of the surrounding area, and the
project. Projects which are located on or next to a collector or arterial street shall be designed
and developed so the public street continues through the project in a logical, safe design.
Projects which are located at the end of stubbed local public streets may be required to extend
the street through the development based on the proposed circulation needs of the area as
determined by the planning commission. The planning commission, upon recommendation of the
city engineer, shall determine if the street should be extended as a through street or as a cul-desac
during the concept or preliminary approval. Local streets which are internal to the
development and do not provide access through the project may be designed as either public or
private streets provided they meet the following criteria:
1. Public Street Requirements:
a. Right Of Way Width: Public streets shall meet the appropriate right of way widths
as required in the subdivision ordinance or the general plan based on the function
of the road for either a local, collector, or arterial road.
b. Neighborhood Local Streets: Projects may develop neighborhood local streets
with a sixty foot (60') right of way (41 foot width from back of curb to back of curb)
as part of a PRUD, provided the street meets one of the following criteria:
i. The road is a cul-de-sac which does not exceed one thousand six hundred
feet (1,600') in length, or sixty (60) dwelling units, whichever is less;
ii. The roadway is internal to the development, intersects at each end with a
roadway which has a right of way of sixty feet (60') or larger, does not
provide for access through the development, and is less than seven
hundred feet (700') in length or is intersected by a standard width right of
way.
c. Unusual Cross Sections: In cases where unusual topography or other exceptional
conditions exist which would make the installation of required public street cross
sections impractical to develop, variations from the standards may be considered.
The planning commission shall consider the reasons for the request, the impact to
the existing land, the development, and the ability of the city to deliver services
with the unusual cross section before any variation from the standard is approved.
d. Public Sidewalk: The sidewalks generally required to be installed in the public right
of way may be varied in location, but at all times there shall be at least a four and
one-half foot (41/2') wide landscape strip of land between the curb and sidewalk.
The applicant may request that a public sidewalk be located independent of the
public street right of way due to topography or other design considerations,
provided the design has reasonable access from one end of the development to
the other, allowing the public to pass through the neighborhood in a logical
manner, and is within the common area of the development. A public easement
for such a walkway shall be required. Because such sidewalk is established
independent of the street right of way, the sidewalk shall be maintained by a
homeowners' association.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 179/279
2. Private Street Requirements:
a. Private streets must meet all public street standards.
b. All private roads shall be placed in a separate tract of land from the other common
areas of the PRUD.
c. All private roadway tracts shall be the same width as the public rights of way.
d. Private streets will be approved only in PRUDs which:
i. Establish a homeowners' or property owners' association;
ii. Explicitly provide that the owners' association will assume responsibility for
the maintenance of all private streets; and
iii. Obtain approval from the planning commission of an assessment fee
analysis demonstrating a reasonable financial plan to provide for future
street maintenance or replacement.
G. Public Trails: Development of public trails as an alternative form of travel serves important
community interests of improving air quality, increasing opportunity for recreation and improved
health, reducing motor vehicle congestion and preserving scarce energy resources.
Development within any new subdivision of a segment of a trail system designated in the city's
general plan or trails master plan shall be a required feature of new subdivision infrastructure.
1. Trails shall be developed according to standards established by the city and shall be of
sufficient width and design to safely accommodate two-way bicycle and pedestrian traffic
into, out of and within the development.
2. Voluntary dedication of area within a development, in excess of the minimum required to
meet the alternative travel needs of the development itself, may be accepted by the city
for use as part of a public trail system. Any additional area so dedicated shall be counted
as part of the open space requirement of the PRUD. Furthermore, the planning
commission, in its discretion may allow a reduction in the overall open space requirement
of the PRUD in exchange for voluntary dedication of excess trail right of way by a
developer where it is in the best interest of the city.
3. The planning commission shall also have discretion to include excess area dedicated to
public trail right of way as part of the calculation of any setback requirement.
4. After final acceptance of public trail infrastructure by the city, the city shall become
responsible for trail maintenance.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 180/279
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2012-15 on 8/14/2012
Amended by Ord. 2015-04 on 3/31/2015
Amended by Ord. 2015-10 on 6/16/2015
11-11-6: SUBMISSION AND REVIEW PROCESS
The PRUD approval process consists of three (3) basic review steps. The first step is submission and
review of a conceptual sketch plan. The purpose of this step is to evaluate the appropriateness of the
development as a PRUD based on the consideration of the existing features of the proposed site and
the relationship to adjacent properties. The second step is submission and review of a preliminary
development plan and conditional use permit based on the conceptual sketch plan. The purpose of this
step is to determine if the preliminary plan/conditional use permit shall be granted. The third step is
submission and review of a final development plan. The purpose of this step is to review compliance
with the conditional use permit. For purposes of recordation, the PRUD shall be recorded as a
subdivision. Upon compliance with final approval, a final plat shall be recorded.
A. Conceptual Sketch Plan Review Process: Prior to the submission of a PRUD proposal, the
applicant shall meet with the community development director to discuss the proposal and its
appropriateness for development as a PRUD. Upon completion of the preapplication meeting
with the community development director, the applicant may choose to present the conceptual
sketch plan to the planning commission. The purpose of this presentation is to provide the
applicant with an opportunity to present why the PRUD proposal is appropriate for the site. The
planning commission may comment as to the potential suitability of the site for a PRUD and
present any concerns or comments they may have for the applicant relative to the proposed
PRUD. If the applicant chooses to not present the conceptual sketch plan, it shall be done as
part of the preliminary plan approval. For sites located in a hillside protection zone, the standards
specified in CCNO 12-3-9 shall be followed.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 181/279
B. Preliminary Development Plan/Conditional Use Permit Submission: An application for a PRUD
preliminary plan/conditional use permit shall be presented to the planning commission and shall
include the following information:
1. Topographic maps of the entire site, including contour intervals of no greater than ten feet
(10');
2. A tabulation of the total acreage of the site and the percentages to be designated for
parking, streets and travelways, various types of residential units, other buildings and
structures, open space and waterways, along with other relevant aspects of the site;
3. The proposed circulation patterns, including private and public streets, and any other path
system;
4. The proposed location of all parking and ingress and egress;
5. The proposed location of parks, common open spaces, playgrounds, school sites,
recreation facilities, and other similar types of improvements;
6. The proposed location of all dwellings by type and number of dwelling units per building,
along with other buildings (e.g., recreational buildings or clubhouses) or structures (e.g.,
fencing, lighting, and signage);
7. The proposed location of each phase, if the project is to be done in phases;
8. A table of densities for each development phase with an overall density for the
development;
9. A general landscape plan showing the areas to be landscaped and the retention of
existing plant materials and landscape features, along with the use of plant materials for
buffers and screening;
10. Preliminary building elevations with notation of building materials of all building types
proposed within the development, excluding detached single-unit dwellings;
11. A preliminary subdivision design, showing a general layout and buildable area;
12. A preliminary utility plan showing the manner in which adequate sewage disposal,
subsurface drainage, storm drainage, and water will be provided to the site. Also show
where these services will be extended;
13. If located in a hillside protection zone, all necessary reports or information required for
compliance with CCNO 12-3-9; and
14. Other information as may be necessary to determine whether the proposed PRUD is
desirable and in accordance with the applicable standards.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 182/279
C. Preliminary Development Plan Review Process: The planning commission, subject to the
requirements of this chapter, may approve, deny, or approve with conditions, the preliminary
development plan for the proposed PRUD. Approval of a preliminary development plan shall
result in the issuance of a conditional use permit. During the preliminary review process, notice
shall be given to the public of the PRUD proposal in accordance with state law for conditional use
permits. In reviewing the conditional use permit for the proposed PRUD, the planning
commission shall determine if the PRUD:
1. Encourages better utilization of the land, develops a sense of community and is
compatible with the neighborhood;
2. Meets the minimum requirements of this title;
3. Provides an adequate traffic circulation system and whether streets should be designed
as public or private; and
4. Meets the general intent and purpose of this title and the general plan.
D. City Council Review And Comment: The preliminary development plan approved by the planning
commission shall be sent to the city council for review and comment. The planning commission
shall consider any city council comments prior to granting final development plan approval.
E. Final Development Submission: The final development plan, based on the conceptual sketch and
preliminary plans, shall be presented to the planning commission and include the following
information:
1. All of those items required by the planning commission as part of the approval of
preliminary development plan and conditional use permit;
2. A complete and accurate legal description of all property proposed for development;
3. A detailed site plan showing the precise location of all buildings and structures, the
location of developed common activity area and recreational uses, waterways, detailed
circulation patterns, including proposed ownership of common areas, streets and trails,
along with other relevant aspects of the site;
4. Parking layout showing the location of individual stalls and all areas of ingress and
egress;
5. Design of entryways, along with elevations of proposed signs;
6. A detailed landscape plan showing the location, types and sizes of all plant materials,
sprinkling or irrigation systems, screening, and fencing;
7. Final elevations of all buildings proposed within the development with notation of building
materials, excluding detached single-unit dwellings;
8. A final plat of the PRUD, along with all covenants, conditions and restrictions which the
city deems necessary to provide adequate guarantees for retention and maintenance of
the development as approved;
9. Detailed engineering plans including site grading, street improvements, drainage, and
public utility locations; and
10. A time schedule for the completion of landscaping and amenities (e.g., common buildings,
playground equipment, recreational facilities, trails and entry signs).
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 183/279
F. Final Development Plan Review Process: The planning commission, subject to the requirements
of this chapter, may approve, deny, or approve with conditions the final development plan for the
proposed PRUD and the accompanying conditional use permit. The planning commission review
of the final development plan shall include the following:
1. Whether or not the issues addressed by the planning commission during the conceptual,
preliminary processes and the conditions established by the conditional use permit have
been adequately addressed in the final development plan;
2. Any additional changes from the preliminary development plan proposed by the
developer; and
3. Any additional information relevant to the success of the proposed development.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2012-15 on 8/14/2012
11-11-7: APPLICABILITY OF SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
A. A PRUD shall comply with the provisions of CCNO Title 12, or any successor title, except as
follows:
1. A PRUD need not comply with those requirements of the subdivision ordinance, which
are specifically waived by the city council under the provisions of this chapter;
2. The procedures for preliminary and final plan approval required under the subdivision
ordinance shall be fulfilled upon approval of the preliminary development plan and final
development plan in this chapter.
B. A PRUD for which all of the real property is intended to be maintained as one lot, held in single
ownership, shall require the filing of a plat as a single lot subdivision as part of the final
development plan approval process, in order to provide for the dedication of public property, the
recording of covenants, conditions and restrictions, notice to third parties of the requirements
imposed under this chapter, and the elimination of existing lot lines.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2012-15 on 8/14/2012
11-11-8: FINAL PLAT RECORDATION
A. Requirements: For purposes of recordation, the final approved plat shall be recorded as a
subdivision and be included in the subdivision plat records of the Weber County recorder's office.
Recordation by the city shall only take place after all of the necessary signatures are obtained, all
approvals given, and all bonds and fees are posted with the city public works department.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 184/279
B. Covenants, Conditions And Restrictions:
1. The city shall require the applicant to submit for recording covenants, conditions and
restrictions which will provide adequate guarantees for the permanent retention and
maintenance of open space area, landscaping, natural features, private streets, other
privately owned infrastructure and architectural design standards. The covenants,
conditions and restrictions shall include, at a minimum, provisions for:
a. The establishment of a homeowners' association, unless the property will continue
to be held in single ownership by either a corporation, partnership or an individual
and restrictions are recorded requiring establishment of a homeowners'
association in the event that the unity of title is not maintained;
b. A notice to subsequent owners of the need to obtain city approval of changes to
the PRUD, which may require either an amendment to the final development plan
or to the conditional use permit;
c. A homeowners' assessment fee based upon an analysis approved by the planning
commission that demonstrates the ability to provide for future maintenance, repair
and replacement of open space area, landscaping, natural features, private
streets and other privately owned infrastructure which shall be disclosed to the
purchaser of any lot or home within the PRUD prior to closing of the purchase;
and
d. A provision granting the city the consent of the homeowners' association and each
of its members, after providing notice to each property owner and holding a public
hearing, to create a special assessment area comprised of all homes and lots
within the PRUD, to finance the cost of reasonably necessary maintenance, repair
or replacement of commonly owned essential public infrastructure such as streets,
sidewalks, street lighting, water systems, etc., in the event of dissolution or default
by the homeowners' association;
e. A provision defining "default" by the homeowners' association which shall include,
at minimum, the failure of the homeowners' association, after receiving six (6)
months notice of default from the city, to take reasonable steps to remedy its
failure to levy, collect and budget assessments sufficient to provide for reasonably
necessary maintenance, repair or replacement of commonly owned essential
public infrastructure which has become unsafe, unsound or functionally obsolete
as determined by the city engineer.
2. Each phase submitted for review shall include covenants, conditions and restrictions for
approval.
3. Two (2) copies of the declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions shall be
submitted to the city signed and prepared for recording at the Weber County recorder's
office prior to approval of a final plat. Prior to recordation, the covenants, conditions and
restrictions shall be reviewed and approved for compliance with this chapter by the
director of community and economic development and city attorney.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2012-15 on 8/14/2012
11-11-9: CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT AND FINAL PLAN
A conditional use permit that stipulates all of the required conditions of development shall be maintained
with the approved final site plan.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 185/279
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2012-15 on 8/14/2012
11-11-10: AMENDMENTS
A. Substantial Changes: Any changes in the proposed final development plan which involves a
substantial change to the conditional use permit issued in the preliminary plan review process
shall be approved by amendment to the conditional use permit after notice as required by state
law for issuance of a conditional use permit.
B. Minor Changes: All development shall conform to the final plan. Minor changes in the location,
siting or character of buildings and structures may be authorized by the city planner if required by
engineering or other circumstances not foreseen at the time the final development plan was
approved. No change authorized under this section may cause any of the following:
1. A change in the use or character of the development;
2. An increase in the overall density or intensity of use;
3. An increase in overall coverage of structures in designated common areas;
4. A reduction or change in character of approved open space;
5. A reduction of required off street parking;
6. A detrimental alteration to the pedestrian, vehicular and bicycle, circulation and utility
networks;
7. A reduction in required street pavement widths; and
8. Any substantial changes to the conditional use permit.
C. Major Changes: Any major changes in use or rearrangement of lots, blocks, building tracts or
grouping, or any changes in the provision of open space and significant changes as noted in
subsection A of this section, must be approved by the planning commission as an amendment to
the conditional use permit. In case of amendments after final approval, such amendments may
be made only if they are shown to be required by changes in conditions that have occurred since
the final development plan was approved. Any major changes must be recorded as amendments
and be reviewed and approved in accordance with procedures established for final development
plan review.
D. Economic Factors: In order to receive approval for substantial or major changes to the plat or
final development plan, the developer shall have the burden of showing that economic factors
that were not foreseeable at the time of the original approval make the PRUD economically
unviable without the requested changes.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2012-15 on 8/14/2012
11-11-11: TIME LIMITATIONS
A. Final Development Plan: A final development plan shall be submitted for approval within twelve
(12) months of the issuance of the conditional use permit for the PRUD and approval of the
preliminary development plan as part of the permit. Failure to submit a final development plan
within the specified time period shall result in the automatic revocation of the conditional use
permit, and the preliminary development plan shall be null and void. However, a one time
extension of six (6) months may be granted by the planning commission for a showing of good
cause, if such request is made prior to the expiration of the final development plan.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 186/279
B. Recording Subdivision Plat: If the PRUD is a multi-lot subdivision, a final subdivision plat shall be
recorded prior to the time any construction permits are issued. A final plat must be recorded
within six (6) months after approval of the final development plan. Failure to record the
subdivision plat within the specified time period shall result in the final development plan
becoming null and void, and the conditional use permit shall be revoked. If phased development
for the PRUD was approved by the city council, the above time limitation shall apply only to the
recording of a final subdivision plat for the first phase.
C. Conditional Use Revocation: Any property for which a conditional use permit has been revoked
or a plan determined to be null and void for failure to comply with the above time limitations shall
thereafter be subject to the zoning and subdivision ordinances otherwise applicable to said
property.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2012-15 on 8/14/2012
11-11-12: CONSTRUCTION PARAMETERS
A. Financial Sureties: Prior to the recording of a PRUD subdivision plat and prior to the issuance of
any building permit on property covered by a PRUD final development plan, an escrow account
acceptable to the city, sufficient in amount to cover the cost of all infrastructure, amenities and
required landscaping in common ownership or the public right of way, and the stipulations and
requirements of the planning commission shall be required. The escrow account shall be a
guarantee that the proper installation of all required improvements, including amenities, shall be
completed within two (2) years of recordation of the approved final plat. This escrow account
shall also assure that the improvements shall remain free from defects for twelve (12) months
following completion of all improvements, and shall not be released until the improvements are
accepted by the city. Said escrow shall be in the form prescribed by the subdivision ordinance of
the city, and in an amount of one hundred ten percent (110%) of the estimated cost of such
improvements as approved by the city engineer. The account shall be established in a bank that
has a branch located in Weber County, Utah.
B. Infrastructure: All street improvements, sidewalks, curbs and gutters, water lines, sewer lines,
and all other such surface and underground improvements shall be completed prior to
occupancy.
C. Amenities And Landscaping: Notwithstanding the provision above, all amenities shall be
completed prior to occupancy unless inclement weather prevents their completion, in which case
one extension of six (6) months for amenities and landscaping may be granted. If not completed
at the end of the six (6) month period, the city will review the progress and may proceed to use
the bond funds to make the improvements in accordance with the approved plan.
D. Property Ownership: Plans submitted for preliminary and final development review may be filed
jointly by multiple owners provided all owners have signed the proposed plans. The applicant
shall submit a title report demonstrating compliance with this section. The area proposed for a
PRUD shall be in single ownership or corporate ownership prior to recording of the final plat or in
order to provide for full supervision and control of said development, and to ensure conformance
with the provisions of this chapter.
E. Phasing: If the sequence of construction of various portions of the final development plan is to
occur in stages, then the open space or recreational facilities shall be developed in proportion to
the number of dwelling units intended to be developed during any given stage of construction. A
phasing plan, including size and order of phases, shall be approved by the planning commission.
Such phasing plans shall have the written approval of all property owners. In addition, the
approved phasing shall be submitted to the city recorder for recordation with the county
recorder's office as a covenant to run with the land.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 187/279
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2012-15 on 8/14/2012
11-11-13: FAILURE TO COMPLY; CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
In case of the failure or neglect to comply with any and all of the provisions of this chapter, and the
conditions and stipulations herein established, and as specifically made applicable to a PRUD, the
building inspector shall not authorize occupancy of any structure. Such failure or neglect shall be cause
for termination of the approval of the project. Such failure or neglect to comply with the requirements and
to maintain the buildings and premises in accordance with the conditions of approval thereafter shall
also be deemed to be a violation of this chapter.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2012-15 on 8/14/2012
11-11-14: ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMITS
The building inspector shall not issue a permit for any proposed building, structure, or use within the
project unless such building, structure or use is in accordance with the approved plan and any conditions
imposed in conjunction with its approval.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2012-15 on 8/14/2012
11-11-15 REVOCATION OF CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT; APPEAL
A conditional use permit may be revoked if any of the conditions or terms are violated; however, the
holder of the permit shall first be afforded an opportunity to be heard before the planning commission
and show cause why the permit should not be revoked. A violation of a condition or term of a permit
shall constitute a violation of this chapter, and the revocation of a permit shall not prohibit prosecution or
any other legal action taken on account of the violation. The decision of the planning commission to
revoke a conditional use permit may be appealed to the city council, in writing, within fourteen (14) days
of the commission's decision.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2012-15 on 8/14/2012
11-12: GROUP DWELLINGS
11-12-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT
11-12-2: TYPES OF GROUP DWELLINGS
11-12-3: AREA REQUIREMENTS
11-12-4: MINIMUM STANDARDS
11-12-5: SUBMISSION AND APPROVAL PROCESS
11-12-6: TIME LIMITATIONS
11-12-7: FINANCIAL GUARANTEE; INSTALLATION OF IMPROVEMENTS
11-12-8: FAILURE TO COMPLY; CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY DENIED
11-12-9: REVOCATION OF CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT; APPEAL
11-12-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT
A. The purpose of a group dwelling is to encourage better utilization of parcels of land up to five (5)
acres in size, to ensure neighborhood compatibility, and to provide land development patterns
which meet the needs of those living in the developments and the surrounding community. This
is accomplished by allowing more than one building on a lot, flexible placement of buildings, and
allowing private infrastructure systems not ordinarily allowed.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 188/279
B. A group dwelling is a residential development which has more than one residential building on a
lot and which is planned as a single complex. The ownership may be in either single ownership
or units sold according to the condominium requirements. It incorporates a definite development
theme which includes usable open space, a well defined circulation system, and is designed to
be compatible with the land and the surrounding neighborhood.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-07 on 5/28/2002
11-12-2: TYPES OF GROUP DWELLINGS
There are two (2) types of group dwellings, small lot and neighborhood. Because of the different
character and impact of these two (2) types of developments, some development standards may be
different. The types of group dwellings are distinguished by their size.
A. Small Lot Group Dwelling: Small lot group dwelling is development on a small parcel of land
which is less than one acre in total area.
B. Neighborhood Group Dwelling: Neighborhood group dwelling is a development on property which
is between one and five (5) acres in total area.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-07 on 5/28/2002
11-12-3: AREA REQUIREMENTS
A. Lot Area Requirements: A group dwelling may be developed on a parcel of property which is
between the minimum lot size of the respective zoning district for a three-dwelling unit building
and five (5) acres. If contiguous parcels are combined for the development, the entire acreage of
the combined properties shall be considered for the total lot area of the group dwelling. A group
dwelling must be developed as a PRUD if the area of the complex is more than five (5) acres.
B. Minimum Lot Area: The minimum lot area required per unit shall be based on the following
square footage requirements. In addition to these minimum lot area requirements, the
development shall also meet the minimum design standards and the approval process of this
chapter.
Group Dwelling
Zone Minimum Square Footage Per Unit Type
R-2 8,000 square feet per single-family dwelling. 12,000 square feet per duplex.
R-3 8,000 square feet per single-family dwelling. 12,000 square feet for the first 2 units,
plus 3,000 square feet for each dwelling unit over 2 in each building.
R-4 8,000 square feet per single-family dwelling. 12,000 square feet for the first 2 units,
plus 3,000 square feet for each additional dwelling unit over 2.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-07 on 5/28/2002
11-12-4: MINIMUM STANDARDS
A. Building Setbacks:
1. Any building which is adjacent to a public street shall meet the minimum front yard
setback required for the respective zone. If the lot is on a corner, then the shortest side of
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 189/279
the lot facing a street is the front side of the lot and the longer side facing a street is the
street side of the lot. The minimum front yard and street side setback is thirty feet (30').
The minimum interior side yard setback is twenty five feet (25') and the minimum rear
yard setback is thirty feet (30').
2. The minimum interior side yard setback shall be at least the height of the building.
B. Distance Between Buildings: The minimum distance between buildings shall be fifteen feet (15')
for single-story buildings, twenty feet (20') for two-story buildings, and twenty five feet (25') for
two and one-half (21/2) story buildings. If a lower building is next to a taller building, then the
larger separation distance will apply.
C. Building Orientation: Those buildings which are adjacent to a public street shall have the front
elevation of the building face the public street in order to retain the front yard appearance of the
community. If the building is on a corner which abuts two (2) streets, only one front elevation is
required for the building. The planning commission may consider other orientations of the
building if there is not an existing neighborhood which fronts the street or if other conditions exist
which restrict such development and the planning commission determines that the surrounding
neighborhood identity, front yard appearances and streetscape continuity will not be impacted by
such a design. If it is determined that the front elevation should not face the street, an additional
ten foot (10') setback shall be added to the front yard setback. This ten foot (10') area shall be
landscaped with trees and plants in order to provide a transition from the public street to the
private development. Any fencing which is installed shall not be placed in this ten foot (10') area.
D. Building Height: The height of the main buildings shall be limited to the maximum height allowed
in the respective zoning district of the project. Accessory buildings shall be one story with a
maximum height of fifteen feet (15').
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 190/279
E. Open Space And Landscaping:
1. A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the entire site shall be in open green space. Each
phase of development shall provide its proportionate required open green space needed
for that phase.
2. Developments shall be designed to preserve and incorporate the natural features of the
land into the development. Natural features include drainage swales, rock outcroppings,
streams and concentrated native stands of large shrubs or trees.
3. Developed common activity area for single-family and attached dwelling units shall be
provided as follows:
a. Developments with attached dwelling units shall provide developed common
activity area at a ratio of one square foot of developed common activity area per
one square foot of floor area of living space. Each phase of development shall
provide its proportionate required open green space needed for that phase. At a
minimum, developed common activity area shall include either a playground with
play equipment or pathways with benches and tables through a natural planted
landscaped area.
b. Subdivided, single-family lots shall provide developed common activity area at a
ratio of one thousand (1,000) square feet per lot. Each phase of development shall
provide its proportionate required open green space needed for that phase. At a
minimum, developed common activity area shall include either a playground with
play equipment or pathways with benches and tables through a natural or planted
landscaped area.
4. Developments shall be designed to incorporate existing large trees, clusters of trees or
clusters of large shrubs. The planning commission shall review the appropriateness of
removal of portions of these types of vegetation if proposed in the development plan. The
planning commission may approve removal of some or all vegetation based on a
determination of the benefits of the existing plant material and the efforts made to save
and incorporate the existing plant material into the design of the project versus the
problems the plant materials may create for the project in terms of general construction
techniques, the impact removal will have to the character of the area, the topography of
the site, and harmful conditions the vegetation may create. Since one of the purposes of a
group dwelling is to protect natural features, the planning commission may deny approval
of a group dwelling if it is determined there has been removal of trees or shrubs prior to
submittal.
5. The majority of new plant material used for landscaping is to be drought tolerant plants.
The landscaping design shall locate plant materials in similar water usage demand zones
to ensure proper irrigation coverage and reduce wasteful watering.
6. Drip irrigation systems are designed and installed to irrigate all shrub and tree areas as
needed.
7. Areas which are to be screened are to be screened with an opaque wood, vinyl or
masonry fence. Landscaping should be designed to soften the appearance of the fence.
Landscaping may be vines, shrubs or trees.
8. Street trees shall be placed along all interior roads at a maximum spacing distance of
forty feet (40') between each tree.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 191/279
9. The development shall have a unified landscaping design of trees, shrubs and theme
lighting. Natural features, ponds, streams, fountains, waterfalls, sculptures and other
design elements which create interest and visual unity and displays creativity in providing
useable open space for the residents of the development are encouraged.
10. The landscaping shall have the following:
a. Ten (10) 1-foot high shrubs (4 of which is are flowering shrubs) for each
residential building. The plant selections of shrubs and ground covers should be
drought tolerant plants. Shrub areas shall be mulched to reduce watering
demands.
b. Six (6) 1-inch caliper deciduous trees and one 4-foot tall evergreen tree for each
residential building. The placement and types of deciduous trees shall take into
consideration use of the trees for summer cooling and winter solar access.
Evergreen trees should be used as wind breaks, screening and accent plants.
c. Turf area at least equal to the footprint square footage of the development.
d. The irrigation system must use secondary water and shall be designed to water
plants of similar water needs and avoid wasteful watering.
e. No more than ten percent (10%) of the entire landscaping surface area can be in
rocks or other nonliving ground cover. The ten percent (10%) limitation does not
include areas where the ground cover is rocks or other material and is planted
with plants spaced so they will completely cover the area in five (5) years.
f. The landscape design along streams, canals or rivers should provide a trail
access along the development.
g. All dumpsters shall be stored in screened enclosures which are architecturally
compatible in style and materials with the architecture of the development.
Dumpsters shall be located so they are not in the required setback areas, not
visible from the public street and do not restrict vehicular parking or circulation.
h. Storm water detention facilities are to be designed and used to detain all of the
storm drainage generated by any development. All surface storm water detention
facilities are to be designed and used for multiple functions. The design of the
facility shall blend in with the overall theme of the open space. Factors which will
be used in determining compliance may include, but not be limited to, free form
design, grading and landscaping to provide gradual transitions, or artistic design
elements.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 192/279
F. Parking Regulations:
1. Parking lots are to be screened from view by means of a three foot (3') high berm along
street frontages. The berm height shall be measured from the top of the curb.
2. Parking lots of ten (10) or more stalls or a continuous row of parking over ninety feet (90')
in length, whichever comes first, must have a landscaped island of a minimum size of
nine feet by nineteen feet (9' x 19') at the end of the ninety feet (90') or tenth parking stall.
The amount of the landscaping, excluding the perimeter setback areas, shall be at a ratio
of one square foot of landscaping per thirteen (13) square feet of hard surface. The
perimeter areas must also be landscaped.
3. Each landscaped island and area shall have, at a minimum, a two inch (2") caliper tree
(measured 3 feet above the ground) located in such a manner as to shade twenty five
percent (25%) of the parking area upon maturation of the trees.
4. The circulation system of the development is designed to provide a circulation hierarchy.
The main circulation road does not have perpendicular parking which backs out into the
travel lane, but branches off into development areas which have parking areas.
5. If a group recreational vehicle (RV) parking area is provided for the development, it shall
be a minimum of one RV space per five (5), or fraction thereof, dwelling units. The RV
parking area shall not be located in the periphery of the development and shall be
completely screened.
6. Two (2) parking stalls for each unit in the development are required…
7. There shall be at least one visitor parking stall for every two (2) units or fraction thereof.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 193/279
8. All required parking stalls must be non-tandem. except that visitor parking stalls may be
tandem with the following standards:
a. Both the required parking stalls and visitor tandem parking stalls must be for the
same dwelling unit.
b. Tandem visitor parking is only allowed behind a fully enclosed parking stall.
c. All tandem parking pads shall meet the following size requirement, i.e., 10 feet
wide by 20 feet in depth.
d. Tandem visiting parking may only be used to satisfy up to one half of a projects
visitor parking requirement.
9. All parking aisles greater than one hundred fifty feet (150') in length shall have a
turnaround area that meets the cul-de-sac standards contained in the city public works
standards.
10. A minimum six foot (6') landscaped area, excluding sidewalk, is provided between the unit
and any parking or access lanes.
G. Street Design: Group dwellings shall be designed to meet area transportation plans.
Developments which are located on or next to a collector or arterial public street shall be
designed and developed so the public street continues through the project in a logical, safe
design. Projects which are located at the end of stubbed local streets or in areas where local
streets may be of benefit to the development of the general area may be required to design and
install a local public street through the development. The planning commission shall review the
future and existing circulation needs of the area, existing road patterns and emergency access
needs in determining if a local public street should be required or extended. All private streets
shall meet all minimum public street standards.
H. Fencing:
1. The perimeter of the development shall be fenced with a maximum seven foot (7') high
fence with the exception of property lines which front a public street. A maximum forty two
inch (42") high fence is allowed in the setback areas which front a public street. The
planning commission may vary the height of the fence fronting a street if the buildings do
not front the street and it is determined that the proposed fence design, materials and
location will not create a safety hazard due to obstructed vision of approaching vehicles or
pedestrians, and will:
a. Not isolate the surrounding neighborhoods;
b. Be consistent with the theme of the development; and
c. Be compatible with the neighborhood.
2. If fencing isolates property between the fence and the public street, the development shall
provide a means to ensure continued maintenance of this area. Such maintenance shall
be assured to the city by the establishment of special improvement districts, or a
development agreement with the city.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-07 on 5/28/2002
Amended by Ord. 2015-10 on 6/16/2015
11-12-5: SUBMISSION AND APPROVAL PROCESS
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 194/279
A. Requirements: The group dwelling process consists of a two (2) step review process. The first
step is submission and review of a preliminary plan/conditional use permit. The purpose of this
review is to determine general compliance with the regulations of this title and the
appropriateness of the development through a conditional use permit review. The second step is
submission and review of a final plan. The purpose of the final review is to ensure all conditions
and details needed to build the project are met. If the development is to be developed as a
condominium, the condominium approval process can occur either with the general approval
process or as a condominium conversion after development approvals have been given.
B. Preliminary Plan/Conditional Use Permit Submission: A complete application for a conditional
use permit for a group dwelling shall be submitted to the planning office for review and comment.
Once the plan has been reviewed and found meeting the minimum site plan requirements for
submittal, it shall be scheduled for the next appropriate planning commission meeting for review
of the project to consider whether or not the request should be approved. The minimum site plan
requirements for the submittal shall include the following accurate information:
1. The property boundary location, direction and length;
2. Contour lines at no greater than five foot (5') intervals if there is more than a ten foot (10')
grade difference on any portion of the site;
3. Existing vegetation, buildings, canals, ditches, streams, easements, utility poles or other
existing features, whether manmade or natural;
4. Any adjacent buildings, parking lots, streets, sidewalks and curbs within thirty feet (30') of
the property boundary;
5. The proposed location of buildings, parking, carports, driveways, sidewalks and fences.
These shall be dimensioned. The distance of these items from property lines and from
each other shall also be dimensioned.
6. A general landscaping plan which shows areas to be landscaped, general types of
landscaping to be used (i.e., trees, shrubs and grass), areas to be preserved in their
existing conditions and any open space amenities;
7. A table which indicates total acreage of the development, total hard surface, building
coverage and landscape area square footage;
8. Preliminary building elevations of all four (4) sides and the types of materials proposed to
be used on the building; and
9. Preliminary utility plan showing the manner in which culinary and secondary water
services, sewer and storm sewer services will be provided.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 195/279
C. Preliminary Plan Conditional Use Permit Review And Consideration: The planning commission,
subject to the requirements of this chapter, may approve, approve with conditions or deny the
preliminary plan/conditional use permit for a group dwelling. In reviewing a preliminary
plan/conditional use permit, the planning commission shall consider if the group dwellings:
1. Meet the minimum lot area and design standard requirements of this chapter;
2. Provide an adequate interior traffic circulation system which does not adversely impact
neighboring properties. In considering impacts to the neighbors, such things as car lights,
visibility of parking areas, screening, access location and distance of parking areas from
neighboring buildings shall be considered;
3. Interrupt or restrict future local or community traffic patterns;
4. Site design is compatible with the topography and other existing features of the site;
5. Architecture is compatible with the character of the neighborhood. In determining
compatibility the planning commission shall consider types of building materials, color,
architectural relief to the face of the building, roof style and height of the building;
6. Site design and building design does not adversely impact neighboring properties. Such
things as building location and orientation, landscaping, screening, privacy and other
specific site issues shall be considered in determining if the neighborhood is adversely
impacted beyond permitted development possibilities;
7. Open space development meets the needs of the residents of the development by
providing private outdoor areas, common play areas and areas of interest;
8. Meet the design requirements of this chapter for increased density.
D. Final Development Plan Submission: Once preliminary plan/conditional use permit approval has
been given, a final development plan shall be submitted for review and approval. The final plan
shall meet all the conditions established when the preliminary plan/conditional use permit was
approved. A small lot group dwelling may submit for a conditional use permit/final approval
without going through the preliminary plan/conditional use review, provided the submitted plan
has all information needed as required for submittal for both approval processes. Only upon
approval of the final development plan shall the conditional use become effective. The final
development plan shall include the following accurate information:
1. The property boundary with bearings and length of each property line;
2. A final site grading plan at no more than two foot (2') contour intervals showing all walls,
cuts and fills proposed;
3. A detailed site plan showing the precise location and size of all buildings and structures,
parking areas, access lanes, canals, ditches, streams, easements, utility poles,
sidewalks, and public street, curb, gutter and sidewalk.
4. A final landscape plan showing the location, types and sizes of all plant material.
5. A final building elevation of all four (4) sides and the types of materials proposed to be
used on the building.
6. Detailed engineering plan including site drainage, street improvements and utility plans
(showing location, sizes and slopes of lines); and
7. All conditions required through the preliminary plan and conditional use permit approval.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 196/279
E. Final Development Plan/Conditional Use Permit Approval: The planning commission may
approve, deny or approve with conditions the final development plan/conditional use permit for
the group dwelling. The planning commission review of the final development plan/conditional
use permit approval shall consider the following:
1. Whether or not the issues addressed as conditions for preliminary plan/conditional use
permit have been adequately addressed.
2. Any changes from the preliminary plan/conditional use permit which are now being
proposed by the developer.
3. Compliance with all applicable requirements of this title and the subdivision ordinance.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-07 on 5/28/2002
11-12-6: TIME LIMITATIONS
A. A final development plan/conditional use permit shall be submitted for approval within twelve (12)
months of the preliminary plan/conditional use permit approval. Failure to submit a final
development plan/conditional use permit within the year time period shall result in a revocation of
the preliminary approval/conditional use permit and the permit and approval shall be null and
void.
B. Once a final development plan/conditional use permit has been approved, the applicant has six
(6) months to obtain a building permit and begin construction. Failure to obtain a building permit
within the six (6) month time period shall result in a revocation of the approval of the project and
all approvals shall be null and void.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-07 on 5/28/2002
11-12-7: FINANCIAL GUARANTEE; INSTALLATION OF IMPROVEMENTS
A. Financial Guarantee Required: Prior to issuance of any building permit on the property approved
for a group dwelling, a financial guarantee in accordance with CCNO 12-4-1 shall be required.
The guarantee shall be sufficient to cover the cost of all the infrastructure, right of way
improvements and landscaping shown on the final approved plan.
B. Improvements: All landscaping and site improvements shall be installed prior to occupancy
unless inclement winter weather prevents their completion. In no case shall the time for
completion be extended beyond June 1 immediately following the completion date.
C. Phase Development: If the development is to occur in phases, then the landscaping and other
improvements which make the phase functional shall be installed prior to occupancy.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-07 on 5/28/2002
11-12-8: FAILURE TO COMPLY; CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY DENIED
In case of failure or neglect to comply with any and all of the provisions of this chapter and the conditions
and stipulations herein established and as specifically made applicable to a group dwelling, the building
inspector shall not authorize occupancy of any structure. Such failure or neglect shall be cause for
termination of the approval of the project. Such failure or neglect to comply with the requirements and to
maintain the buildings and premises in accordance with the conditions or approval thereafter shall also
be deemed to be a violation of this chapter.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 197/279
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-07 on 5/28/2002
11-12-9: REVOCATION OF CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT; APPEAL
A conditional use permit may be revoked if any of the conditions or terms are violated; however, the
holder of the permit shall first be afforded an opportunity to be heard before the planning commission
and show cause why the permit should not be revoked. A violation of a condition or term of a permit
shall constitute a violation of this title, and the revocation of a permit shall not prohibit prosecution or any
other legal action taken on account of the violation. The decision of the planning commission to revoke a
conditional use permit may be appealed to the mayor, in writing, within fourteen (14) days of the
planning commission's decision.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-07 on 5/28/2002
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
11-13: MANUFACTURED HOUSING
11-13-1: MOBILE HOMES
11-13-2: MODULAR HOMES
11-13-3: TRAVEL TRAILERS
11-13-1: MOBILE HOMES
"Mobile homes", as defined in CCNO 11-2-1, are prohibited in the city outside of mobile home parks or
approved mobile home subdivisions.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
11-13-2: MODULAR HOMES
Modular homes are a permitted use in all zones and areas of the city in which single-family residences
are a permitted use; provided, that the modular home shall comply with all local zoning and subdivision
regulations, including any restrictive covenants, which would apply to a single-family residence in the
area.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-07 on 5/28/2002
11-13-3: TRAVEL TRAILERS
A. Where Permitted: Travel trailers are permitted only as temporary residences in recreational
vehicle parks, campgrounds or recreational vehicle subdivisions.
B. Storage: Travel trailers may be stored in residential areas only as provided in this title.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-07 on 5/28/2002
11-14: CONDITIONAL USES
11-14-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT
11-14-2: CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT
11-14-3: REVIEW PROCEDURE
11-14-4: DETERMINATION
11-14-5: BASIS FOR ISSUANCE OF CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT
11-14-6: CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT; NONCONFORMING BUILDING
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 198/279
11-14-7: BUILDING PERMIT
11-14-8: EXPIRATION OF PERMIT
11-14-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT
The purpose and intent of conditional uses permits is to allow in certain areas compatible integration of
uses which are related to the permitted uses of the zone, but which may be suitable and desirable only
in certain locations in that zone due to conditions and circumstances peculiar to that location and/or
upon certain conditions which make the uses suitable and/or only if such uses are designed, laid out and
constructed on the proposed site in a particular manner.
A conditional use shall be approved if reasonable conditions are proposed, or can be proposed, to
mitigate the reasonably anticipated detrimental effects of the proposed use in accordance with
applicable standards.
If the reasonable anticipated effects of a proposed conditional use cannot be mitigated by the proposal
of the imposition of reasonable conditions to achieve compliance with applicable standards, the
conditional use may be denied.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-07 on 5/28/2002
Amended by Ord. 2006-08 on 9/5/2006
11-14-2: CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT
A. When Required: A conditional use permit shall be required:
1. For all uses listed as conditional uses in any zone;
2. For the extension, alteration and expansion of a nonconforming building.
B. Revocation Of Permit: A conditional use permit may be revoked by the city council after review
and recommendation by the planning commission upon the permittee failure to comply with
the conditions imposed with the original approval of the permit.
C. Immediate Revocation: If, in the opinion of the building inspector, there is a threat to the public
health and safety by the continued use or operation of an establishment that is permitted by a
conditional use permit, the building inspector may immediately revoke the conditional use permit
as described in subsection B of this section.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-07 on 5/28/2002
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
11-14-3: REVIEW PROCEDURE
A. Application: Application for a conditional use permit shall be made to the planning commission.
B. Plans Provided: Detailed location, site and building plan shall accompany the complete
application forms provided by the city.
C. Consideration By Planning Commission: The application, together with all pertinent information,
shall be considered by the planning commission at its next regularly scheduled meeting, held a
minimum of fourteen (14) days after receipt of the completed conditional use permit application,
along with the application fee, is received.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 199/279
D. Public Hearing Not Necessary: If a public hearing is not deemed necessary, the planning
commission shall review the application, input from the applicant, staff, the public and other
planning commissioners. The planning commission is empowered to grant and to deny
applications for conditional use permits and to impose reasonable conditions upon them. If a
conditional use permit application is tabled, the tabling action shall be for no longer than the next
regularly scheduled planning commission meeting or for a public hearing to be advertised and
held. If the applicant consents, the planning commission may table action for a specific meeting
to be held later than the next regularly scheduled planning commission meeting.
E. Public Hearing; Notice: If the planning commission tables action on the conditional use permit
application and requests a public hearing to be held, it shall direct staff to advertise for a public
hearing by placing a public notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least
fourteen (14) days before the public hearing. The planning commission shall take action on the
application no later than the next regularly scheduled meeting of the planning commission after
the public hearing is held, unless the applicant consents to a specific extension.
F. Appeal To City Council: If an appeal by the applicant or any person aggrieved by the planning
commission's decision, is made to the city council within fourteen (14) calendar days of the
planning commission's decision, a record of all planning commission meetings and public
hearings, together with the conditional use permit application, all staff reports, and any other
written materials used as a basis for the planning commission's decision, shall be forwarded to
the city council.
G. Documents And Approved Minutes Required: When an appeal of the planning commission's
decision on a conditional use permit is made to the city council, the city council shall not consider
the appeal until it has received the approved minutes of all of the planning commission meetings
and hearings held on the matter, copies of all of the staff reports, the conditional use permit
application and other written material submitted to the planning commission. At the next regularly
scheduled meeting after the planning commission deliberated and/or took action on any
conditional use permit, the planning commission shall review the minutes of the previous meeting
and make any corrections necessary. If a quorum is not present at the next regularly scheduled
planning commission meeting, a special meeting shall be called by the chairperson of the
planning commission or presiding officer of the members present for such minutes to be
reviewed, corrected if necessary, and approved. If a quorum is not able to meet prior to the next
regularly scheduled meeting, the minutes shall be reviewed, corrected if necessary, and
approved at the next regularly scheduled meeting.
H. City Council Review And Decision: The city council may hold a public hearing or make a decision
without a public hearing. If a public hearing is held, it must be advertised at least fourteen (14)
days before the public hearing date. The city council shall render its decision no later than the
next regularly scheduled city council meeting held after the public hearing, unless consent for a
delay in the decision is granted by the applicant. If a public hearing is not held, the city council
shall render its decision no later than the next regularly scheduled city council meeting after the
city council initially considered the appeal, unless the applicant consents to a delay in the
decision.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-07 on 5/28/2002
11-14-4: DETERMINATION
The planning commission may deny or permit a conditional use to be located within any zone in which
the particular conditional use is permitted. In authorizing any conditional use, the planning commission
shall impose such requirements and conditions necessary for the protection of adjacent properties and
the public welfare.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 200/279
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-07 on 5/28/2002
11-14-5: BASIS FOR ISSUANCE OF CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT
The planning commission shall not authorize a conditional use permit unless evidence is presented to
establish:
A. The proposed use of the particular location is necessary or desirable to provide a service or
facility which will contribute to the general well being of the community.
B. Such use will not, under the circumstances of the particular case and the condition imposed, be
detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare of persons nor injurious to property and
improvements in the community, but will be compatible with and complementary to the existing
surrounding uses, buildings and structures.
C. The proposed use will comply with the regulations and conditions specified in this title for such
use.
D. The proposed use conforms to the goals, policies and governing principles of the master plan for
the city.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-07 on 5/28/2002
11-14-6: CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT; NONCONFORMING BUILDING
The planning commission may approve the issuance of a conditional use permit in order to authorize the
extension, alteration or expansion of a nonconforming building, subject to all other requirements
necessary for the issuance of a conditional use permit, if such extension, alteration or expansion
promotes the general health, safety or aesthetics of the city and such extension, alteration or expansion
is made to conform to all of the regulations of the zone in which the building is located.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-07 on 5/28/2002
11-14-7: BUILDING PERMIT
Upon receipt of a conditional use permit, the developer shall take such permit to the building inspector,
who will review the permit and conditions attached. Based on this review and compliance with any other
items that might develop in the pursuance of his duties, the building inspector shall approve an
application for a building permit if the application complies with the conditional use permit and all
applicable building codes and other ordinances. The building inspector shall ensure that development is
undertaken and completed in compliance with said permit and conditions pertaining thereto.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-07 on 5/28/2002
11-14-8: EXPIRATION OF PERMIT
If completed plans are not submitted and the appropriate fees are not paid for the use authorized by a
conditional use permit within a period of one year of conditional use permit's issuance, the conditional
use permit shall expire. The planning commission may grant a maximum extension of six (6) months
under exceptional circumstances if application for the extension is made prior to the expiration of the
permit.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-07 on 5/28/2002
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 201/279
11-15: NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES
11-15-1: PURPOSE
11-15-2: DEFINITIONS
11-15-3: CONTINUATION PERMITTED
11-15-4: NORMAL MAINTENANCE OF NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS
11-15-5: RESTORATION OF DAMAGED BUILDINGS
11-15-6: EXTENSIONS, ALTERATIONS AND EXPANSIONS
11-15-7: MOVING NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS
11-15-8: CHANGE OR SUBSTITUTION OF USE
11-15-9: TERMINATION OF NONCONFORMING USES
11-15-10: PARKING
11-15-11: REZONING AND ANNEXATION
11-15-1: PURPOSE
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the use, maintenance, alteration, repair, extension and
restoration of buildings and land which lawfully existed at the time of adoption of this title, but which do
not conform to the regulations for the district in which they are located.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-07 on 5/28/2002
11-15-2: DEFINITIONS
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following meaning unless a different
meaning clearly appears from the context:
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE: A structure which was lawfully erected prior to the adoption of the
zoning ordinance, or an amendment to the zoning ordinance, causing the structure to not conform with
the standards of coverage, yard spaces, height of structures or distance between structures prescribed
in the regulations for the district in which the structure is located.
NONCONFORMING USE: A use of a structure or land which was lawfully established and maintained
prior to the adoption of the zoning ordinance, or any amendment to the zoning ordinance, causing such
use to be unlawful, but under this ordinance, or subsequent amendments, does not conform to the use
regulations for the district in which it is located.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-07 on 5/28/2002
11-15-3: CONTINUATION PERMITTED
Except as otherwise herein provided, a nonconforming use or building may be continued under the
following conditions:
A. The lawful use of land, building or structure existing at the time of the passage of this title,
although such use does not conform to the provisions hereof for said land, may be continued.
However, except for buildings to house animals and fowl, if such nonconforming building or use
is discontinued for a period of twelve (12) months, it shall be considered abandoned, and future
use of said land or structure shall be in conformity with the provisions of this title.
B. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the reconstruction, repairing or rebuilding of a
nonconforming structure, or part thereof, rendered necessary by deterioration or depreciation
that does not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the value of said structure, as determined by an
appraiser mutually agreed upon by the city and the owner of the building or structure.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 202/279
C. Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted as authorization to continue the use of a building or
premises in violation of regulations in effect prior to the enactment of any amendment to this title.
D. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent requiring the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of
any portion of a structure declared unsafe by a proper authority.
E. Nothing in this chapter shall require any change in plans, construction or designated use of a
building for which a building permit has been issued prior to the enactment of this title, provided
the construction shall be diligently pursued within sixty (60) days of the effective date hereof, and
the building is completed and used according to such plans as filed within one year from the
effective date hereof.
F. A nonconforming building, or portion thereof, which was specifically designed or, beyond a
reasonable doubt, intended by the nature of its arrangement and construction, to be used in any
way which would be nonconforming under this title, but was not so used at the time this title
became effective, may, if not altered or repaired as prohibited elsewhere in this title, be occupied
or used for the purpose for which it was designed, arranged or intended, provided such building
is so used within twelve (12) months after the effective date hereof. Otherwise, the use of such
building shall conform to the provisions of this title.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-07 on 5/28/2002
11-15-4: NORMAL MAINTENANCE OF NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS
A nonconforming use may be repaired and maintained; provided, that there is no extension, alteration,
expansion or substitution of the nonconforming building or nonconforming uses associated therewith.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-07 on 5/28/2002
11-15-5: RESTORATION OF DAMAGED BUILDINGS
A nonconforming building which is damaged or partially destroyed by fire, flood, wind, earthquake or
other calamity or act of God or the public enemy, may be restored and the occupancy or use of such
building, structure or part thereof which existed at the time of such destruction may be continued or
resumed; provided, that such restoration is started within a period of one year of destruction and is
diligently prosecuted to completion.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-07 on 5/28/2002
11-15-6: EXTENSIONS, ALTERATIONS AND EXPANSIONS
A. Conditions: A nonconforming building shall not be extended, substituted, altered, expanded or
enlarged in any manner, unless:
1. Such building, including such extensions and alterations, is made to conform to all of the
regulations of the zone in which it is located; and
2. A conditional use permit is approved by the planning commission pursuant to CCNO 11-
14-6.
3. All changes to distinguishing traits or primary features of the use of a building or land as
evidenced by increased parking requirements, change of occupancy, change of outside
storage or other features, occurring to existing properties after the effective date hereof,
shall be subject to all of the provisions of this title.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 203/279
4. The extension of a lawful use to any portion of an existing nonconforming building shall
not be deemed the extension of a nonconforming use.
B. Expansion Of Nonconforming Use; Limitations: Any expansion of a nonconforming use shall be
by conditional use permit subject to the following limitations:
1. No nonconforming use shall be extended to displace a conforming use.
2. A nonconforming use of a building or lot shall not be changed to another nonconforming
use whatsoever. Changes in use shall be made only to a conforming use.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-07 on 5/28/2002
11-15-7: MOVING NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS
No nonconforming building shall be moved in whole or in part to any other location on the lot or
elsewhere, unless every portion of such building or structure is made to conform to all regulations of the
zone in which it is relocated.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-07 on 5/28/2002
11-15-8: CHANGE OR SUBSTITUTION OF USE
A nonconforming use may not be changed to or substituted by another use unless such other use is a
conforming use, and the use shall not thereafter be changed back to a nonconforming use.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-07 on 5/28/2002
11-15-9: TERMINATION OF NONCONFORMING USES
The city council may provide for the termination of all nonconforming uses by providing a formula
establishing a reasonable time period during which the owner can recover or amortize the amount of his
investment in the nonconforming use, if any.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-07 on 5/28/2002
11-15-10: PARKING
A. If a nonconforming building or business is damaged (less than 50 percent), and if it is allowed to
be reconstructed subject to the provision of CCNO 11-15-6, the owner shall be required to
provide only the number of parking spaces which existed prior to the destruction.
B. If a nonconforming business expands, under a conditional use permit as allowed in CCNO 11-15-
6, it shall, in addition to the parking spaces in existence prior to such expansion, be required to
provide only the number of additional parking spaces necessitated by the expansion.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-07 on 5/28/2002
11-15-11: REZONING AND ANNEXATION
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 204/279
Whenever the boundaries of a zone shall be changed so as to transfer an area from one zone to
another zone of a different classification, or for areas annexed into the city, the provisions of this chapter
shall also apply to any nonconforming uses created by the boundary change or annexation.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-07 on 5/28/2002
11-16: HOME OCCUPATIONS
11-16-1: PURPOSE STATEMENT
11-16-2: PERMITTED HOME OCCUPATIONS
11-16-3: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS OF ALL HOME OCCUPATIONS
11-16-4: LICENSING AND REGULATION
11-16-5: PUBLIC NUISANCE
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 2015-02 on 3/31/2015
11-16-1: PURPOSE STATEMENT
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to permit persons residing in dwellings in residential zones to
provide a service, operate certain kinds of small business, or maintain a professional or business office
provided that the home occupation does not change the character of the neighborhood.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 2015-02 on 3/31/2015
11-16-2: PERMITTED HOME OCCUPATIONS
A. Home Occupations Permitted
1. Beauty and Hair Salon: Provided that no more than one hair stylist or beautician works at
any given time.
2. Computer Repairs.
3. Dance and Musical Instruction.
4. Dental Laboratory
5. Esthetician Provided that no more than one esthetician works at any given time.
6. Internet Sales phone order or mail order services.
7. Fine Repairs of Musical Instruments.
8. Firearm Sales provided that the applicant can demonstrate they have a federal firearms
license and have secure gun storage.
9. Gun repair provided no gun manufacturing is part of this activity.
10. Home Office.
11. Massage Therapy Salons.
12. Medical Billing.
13. Upholstering provided that no vehicles being reupholstered are left overnight at the home
occupation.
14. Any home occupation which is considered by the City Planner to fall under one of the
permitted uses shall be authorized under that use.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 205/279
15. Any uses to be proposed to be added to this section which do not fall under one of the
above categories must be authorized by an amendment to this code.
B. Home Occupations Prohibited: The following businesses, regardless of their conformance with
the standards in CCNO 11-16, are prohibited as home occupations:
1. Auto repairs.
2. Bottling plant.
3. Commercial bakery.
4. Deliveries.
5. Furniture manufacturing.
6. Industrial assembly.
7. Kennels.
8. Laboratory, medical, optical.
9. Laboratory testing.
10. Large appliance / electronics or equipment repair or service (washers, dryers,
refrigerators and other appliances or equipment that are too large to be carried in 1
individual’s arms.
11. Power sports equipment repairs, including but not limited to motorcycles, water craft,
ATV’s, scooters, and other engine propelled transport systems.
12. Repair or modification of construction equipment, excavation equipment, earth moving
equipment, heavy equipment, fork lifts, scissor lifts, or machinery used for commercial
purposes.
13. Retail sales locations, except as provided in section N of this ordinance.
14. Truck hauling.
15. Tanning salons.
16. Tattoo parlors.
17. Welding shops or machine shops.
18. Any occupation which is offensive or noxious by reason of the emission of odor, smoke,
gas, dust, vibration, magnetic, or electrical interference, noise, or other similar impacts
extending beyond the property line of the lot where the occupation is located is prohibited,
and
19. Any occupation which is not specifically permitted is considered prohibited unless
properly categorized by the City Planner under a permitted use.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 2015-02 on 3/31/2015
Amended by Ord. 2015-30 on 12/22/2015
Amended by Ord. 2016-16 on 6/21/2016
11-16-3: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS OF ALL HOME OCCUPATIONS
It shall be unlawful to conduct or pursue a home occupation within the corporate limits of the city, unless
each of the following conditions are observed:
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 206/279
A. Residents Of Premises: Only persons who are bona fide residents of the premises shall be
engaged in the occupation.
B. Residential Character Retained: The home occupation will not physically change the dwelling to
the extent that it would alter the residential character of the dwelling or the residential
atmosphere of the neighborhood in which it is located. Furthermore, it shall not disturb the peace
and quiet, including radio and television reception, of the neighborhood by reason of color,
design, materials, construction, lighting, sounds, noises or vibrations.
C. Maximum Area Of Use: If a home occupation is conducted within the living quarters of a dwelling
unit, the home occupation shall not occupy more than the equivalent of twenty five percent (25%)
of the main floor area, up to a maximum of three hundred (300) square feet. If a home
occupation is conducted within the garage of a dwelling unit, the home occupation shall not
occupy more than thirty-three percent (33%) of the garage area.
D. Conducted Within Living Quarters; Exception: Home occupations may be permitted in the garage
as long as the provisions of chapter 16 of this title are complied with. Any home occupation
approved for a garage shall have minimal environmental impact on the character of the
neighborhood as described in CCNO 11-16-5 related to public nuisances, and other relevant
provisions of the municipal code. Existing prohibited home occupations with garages will be
given a 6 month amortization time period to continue to operate from February 28, 2015.
E. Display Or Sales Of Goods: Retail sales on the premises are not permitted except as allowed in
subsection N of this section. Catalog sales, internet sales, and similar types of sales are
permitted if the product is drop shipped from the order warehouse to the buyer's home.
F. Signs And Advertising: No sign or advertising shall be displayed on the premises. This
requirement shall not apply to temporary advertising of produce in season nor to income
producing activities engaged in by minors only.
G. Traffic: The home occupation shall not generate more than five (5) vehicular roundtrips a day.
H. Parking: The addition of off street parking facilities on the premises of the home occupation
beyond that normally required for residential uses is prohibited. Parking of automobiles
generated by the home occupation will be confined to existing residential parking. There shall be
no storage or parking on the premises or on the adjacent streets in the vicinity of the premises of
tractor trailers, semi-trucks, or other heavy equipment used in an off-premise business for which
the dwelling is being used as a home occupation office, except that not more than one truck of
one-ton capacity or less may be parked on premise during off work hours at night. A work trailer
up to 22 feet in length may be parked at night as part of the home occupation business. All trucks
and trailers used as part of the home occupation business shall be licensed and registered, and
parked in accordance with CCNO 11-17-3 (Design and Location of Parking Spaces). Home
occupations within garages shall maintain the required two car parking spaces in accordance
with CCNO 11-17-3 (Design and Location of Parking Spaces).
I. Conformance With Laws: There shall be complete conformity with fire, building, plumbing,
electrical and health codes; and to all state and city ordinances and other laws, covenants,
restrictions or regulations pertaining to the premises upon which the home occupation is
conducted.
J. Emissions: The home occupation shall not be associated with noise, dust, odors, noxious fumes,
glare, or other hazards to safety and health which are emitted and may be discernible beyond the
premises.
K. Dangerous Materials Or Harmful Animals: The home occupation shall not create a hazard by
using flammable, explosive or other dangerous materials, or by keeping or raising animals which
are capable of inflicting harm or discomfort or endangering the health and safety of any person or
property.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 207/279
L. Excessive Demand For Services: The home occupation shall not create a demand for municipal
or utility services or community facilities in excess of those usually and customarily provided for
residential uses.
M. Use Outside Main Building: The home occupation shall not use any accessory buildings, yard or
space outside of the main dwelling not normally associated with the residential uses permitted
within the zone wherein the dwelling is located.
N. Product Sales: Sales of specialty products such as kitchenware, candles, cosmetics,
merchandise made by the seller, or similarly branded item intended primarily for home sales are
permitted if sales are made at the buyer's home, or ordered by catalog, or internet, or at sales
parties. As with all businesses, sales exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) annually requires
a business license. (Ord. 2011-09, 5-10-2011)
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2011-09 on 5/10/2011
Amended by Ord. 2015-02 on 3/31/2015
11-16-4: LICENSING AND REGULATION
A. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the city from licensing, taxing or regulating a home occupation.
B. Any residential property occupants with commercial vehicles or earth moving equipment greater than
15,000 GVWR being parked or stored on residential property for more than seventy two 72 continuous
hours are required to get a home occupation license irrespective of the principal place of business or
ownership of the vehicle, and comply with all parking standards including those specifically related to
Home Occupations found in CCNO 11-16-3(H) Parking. Equipment may be parked outside of a structure
if there is a current building permit issued for that property and is being used as part of the work being
performed.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
Amended by Ord. 2015-02 on 3/31/2015
Amended by Ord. 2016-22 on 7/26/2016
11-16-5: PUBLIC NUISANCE
Any income producing activity conducted in a residential zone not meeting the conditions of this chapter
shall be unlawful. Upon discovering any violation of the requirements, conditions or limitations of this
chapter, the building inspector shall notify the owner or occupant of the premises in writing of the
violations and demand abatement of said violation. If after seven (7) days of receipt of written notice
thereof, the violation persists, the violation shall be considered a public nuisance and shall be abated
pursuant to the procedures described in the ordinances relating to the abatement of nuisances on the
property.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
Amended by Ord. 2015-02 on 3/31/2015
11-17: PARKING AND LOADING; TRAFFIC AND ACCESS
11-17-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT
11-17-2: GENERAL REGULATIONS
11-17-3: DESIGN AND LOCATION OF PARKING SPACES
11-17-4: SCHEDULE OF REQUIRED OFF STREET SPACES
11-17-5: BUSINESS REQUIRING AUTOMOBILE ACCESS
11-17-6: VEHICULAR TRAFFIC TO COMMERCIAL OR MANUFACTURING ZONES
11-17-7: OFF STREET LOADING SPACES
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 208/279
11-17-8: SCHEDULE OF LOADING SPACE REQUIREMENTS
11-17-9: ALLEY ABUTMENT
11-17-10: PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING
11-17-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate parking and loading spaces, vehicle traffic and access in order
to provide orderly and adequate development of these needed amenities and, in so doing, promote the
safety and well-being of the citizens of the city. Consequently, there shall be provided at the time of the
erection of any main building or at the time any main building is enlarged or increased, minimum off
street parking space with adequate provisions for ingress and egress by standard sized automobiles.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
11-17-2: GENERAL REGULATIONS
A. Parking Space Size:
1. Regular Parking Space: A regular parking space shall mean an area of not less than one
hundred seventy one (171) square feet, with a minimum width of nine feet (9'), and
minimum depth of nineteen feet (19'), which is specifically designated for, and used for,
the parking of an automobile or light truck, exclusive of all driveways and accessways.
2. Parking Space For Vehicles Carrying People With Disabilities: A parking space for
vehicles carrying persons with disabilities shall mean an area of not less than two
hundred nine (209) square feet, with a minimum width of eleven feet (11'), and minimum
depth of nineteen feet (19'). In addition to the parking stall, there shall be a five foot (5')
wide access aisle adjacent to and on the right side of each parking space. The space
shall be specifically designated and used for the parking of an automobile, passenger van
or light truck, exclusive of all driveways and accessways, that is designated as a vehicle
permitted to park in such a parking space.
B. Permits: An applicant for site plan review or a building permit must submit plans showing the off
street parking required by this chapter. These plans must show locations, arrangement and
dimensions of the off street parking, turning spaces, drives, aisles and ingress and egress, and
must be approved by the building inspector. Whenever a permit has been issued in compliance
with the requirements of this chapter, subsequent use of the structure, or use of the land is
conditioned upon the unqualified availability of off street parking as shown in the approved plans.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 209/279
C. Alterations, Additions And Expansion Of A Business:
1. A new use, addition or alteration of a building shall not be approved if it would create or
increase a deficit in the amount or type of off street parking.
2. It is unlawful to reduce the amount of existing parking below the minimum amount or type
of parking spaces required by this section without first supplying other spaces as are
required.
3. If a building or business is destroyed, and if it is allowed to be reconstructed subject to the
provisions of CCNO 11-15, it shall be required to provide only the number of parking
spaces which existed prior to the destruction.
4. If a business expands, it shall, in addition to the parking spaces in existence prior to such
expansion, be required to provide only the number and type of additional parking spaces
necessitated by the expansion.
D. Parking Garage: All garage or other space allocated for the parking of vehicles within buildings,
basements or on roofs of buildings, shall be considered part of the off street parking facilities and
may be included as such in computing the parking area requirements.
E. Access: All off street parking shall have access from a public street or alley.
F. Ingress, Egress, Internal Traffic Circulation: Off street parking and loading facilities and
pedestrianways shall be designed so as to promote safety and convenience and so that traffic
visibility is not obstructed.
G. Berms: Except for the access points, all parking lots shall have berms running along all street
frontage. The berms shall be located in the landscaped area between the sidewalk and parking
lot pavement. The berms shall not be steeper than one foot (1') vertical for each three (3)
horizontal feet of landscaped area and shall not be higher than three feet (3'). The height shall be
measured from the top of the street curb. Off street parking areas serving single-family dwellings,
two-family dwellings and churches are excluded from this regulation.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
11-17-3: DESIGN AND LOCATION OF PARKING SPACES
A. Single-Family Residences, Mobile Homes And Multiple-Family Residences Of Four Or Less Dwelling
Units per building:
1. Location: Required off street parking shall be located on the same lot or parcel as the use it is
intended to serve.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 210/279
2. Surfacing:
a. The first thirty (30) feet from the public right-of-way of all primary driveways used to
access the required parking stalls under 11-17-4 for any residential unit shall be surfaced
with asphaltic concrete, pavement bricks, cement concrete, permeable pavers, or other
material approved by the City Engineer which complies with air quality and SWPPP
standards.
b. Secondary accessways may be constructed using rocks, road base, or other natural or
manmade materials provided the area is kept weed free and complies with air quality and
SWPPP standards.
c. Off-street parking stalls located in the side yard or rear yard setbacks of a structure may
be constructed using rocks, road base, or other natural or manmade materials provided
the area is kept weed free and complies with air quality and SWPPP standards.
d. Multi-family units and Accessory Dwelling units are required to utilize asphaltic concrete,
pavement bricks, or cement concrete, or other materials approved by the City Engineer
for all parking stalls.
3. Driveways: Primary driveways and accessways shall be not less than ten feet (10') wide for oneway
traffic, and not less than twenty feet (20') wide for two-way traffic.
4. If additional parking of vehicles and trailers takes place, including recreational vehicle parking
pads, such parking places shall meet the following standards:
a. The dwelling unit has the minimum number of required off street parking spaces as
stipulated by CCNO 11-17-4.
b. The parking area is at least eight feet (8') wide, and in the case of corner lots, a maximum
of twelve feet (12') wide in the side yard area, and is of sufficient length to accommodate
the vehicle with no portion of the vehicle extending more than ten feet (10') forward of the
front face of the dwelling. In the case of a corner lot, no vehicle shall be parked in the forty
foot (40') sight triangle.
c. The appurtenant driveway to the slab must be tapered to use the existing driveway
approach or a new approach must be installed for the new driveway access.
d. Any slab constructed must remain open and unobstructed to the sky, or appropriate
building permit be obtained to comply with all setbacks and other requirements of this
code.
e. All storm water runoff from hard surfaces must be directed so as to prevent drainage onto
adjacent properties.
B. Garages: When residential garages are used to meet the minimum off street parking requirements, an
unobstructed parking stall from the floor to the height of the garage door with the following dimensions
must be met:
1. Single Car Garage: Twelve foot (12') width by a twenty foot (20') depth.
2. Double Car Garage: Twenty two foot (22') width with a twenty foot (20') depth.
3. Garages larger than a double car garage must provide at least the parking space dimensions of a
double car garage for each dwelling unit the garage is serving.
C. All Uses Except As Provided Above:
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 211/279
1. Location: Required off street parking shall be located within three hundred feet (300') of the
building or use it is intended to serve, the distance being measured along the street line from the
nearest point of the building or use to the nearest point of the parking lot. Whenever the use of a
separate lot or parcel is proposed for fulfillment of minimum parking requirements, the owner shall
submit as a part of his application satisfactory assurance that the separate lot or parcel is
permanently committed to parking use by enforceable legal measure.
2. Off Street Parking: Off street parking spaces shall be situated in a manner which will not result in
automobiles backing onto a public street.
3. Surfacing: All off street parking areas, access ways and driveways shall be improved with
concrete, pavement bricks or asphaltic concrete. The surfacing of the parking area shall be
designed and graded so that there will be total retention or drainage into a drainage system
approved by the city engineer. Catch basins and drains shall be provided to collect surface drainage
of all paved areas at a minimum rate of one inch (1") an hour rainfall. Surface drainage is not
allowable across pedestrian walkways or sidewalks.
4. Curbing: A six inch (6") wide by six inch (6") high curb or bumper guard shall be installed along all
property lines bordering the parking and maneuvering area, excluding necessary points of ingress
and egress, and shall be so located that no part of a vehicle shall extend over or beyond any
property line or sidewalk. The building inspector may determine the location of additional bumper
guards or curbs to protect adjacent property owners or persons using a sidewalk.
5. Landscaping: In addition to the perimeter landscaping, a minimum of five percent (5%) of the
interior parking lot must be landscaped in accordance with a landscape plan submitted to and
approved by the community development department. Such landscaping must be maintained for the
duration of the use of the parking lot.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 212/279
6. Design: As indicated in the diagram below, all areas of the parking lot, with the exception of
necessary points of ingress and egress, shall be no closer than twenty feet (20') from the front
property line. That unoccupied area shall be landscaped and maintained with trees, shrubs, ground
cover, undisturbed natural growth, pedestrian walkways and plazas in a manner acceptable to the
planning commission. Access to off street parking areas from a public street shall be from a two-way
driveway with a minimum width of twenty feet (20') and a maximum width of twenty five feet (25'), or
two (2) one-way driveways each with a minimum width of twelve feet (12') and a maximum width of
fifteen feet (15'). No access driveway shall be located closer than twenty feet (20') from a street
intersection or other access driveway, nor any closer than ten feet (10') from any property line.
7. Maximum Yard Area To Be Used For Parking And Vehicle Access Lanes: For all uses permitted
in the RE-20 and single-family residential zoning districts, none of the front yard area and side yard
required by the respective zones shall be used to meet the minimum off street parking requirements,
but overflow parking is permitted in the front and side yard areas if the standards of subsection A4 of
this section are met. In the case of multiple-family dwellings and nonresidential uses in a residential
zone, not more than fifty percent (50%) of the required side and twenty five percent (25%) of the
required rear yards shall be used for parking or vehicular access lanes. In such cases where it is
deemed necessary to utilize more than permitted of the required side and rear yards, any said yard
area used in excess of said limits shall be provided in an equivalent amount of land area elsewhere
on the same lot as the building for open green space, patios, play areas or courts.
8. Parking Spaces For Persons With Disabilities: Parking spaces for persons with disabilities shall
include a five foot (5') wide access aisle adjacent to the right side of each parking space. The
parking space and access aisle shall not have a slope greater than two percent (2%) in any
direction. The access aisle shall be connected to an accessible route to the appropriate accessible
entrance of a building or facility. The parking access aisle shall either blend with the accessible
route or have a curb ramp complying with Americans with disabilities act (ADA) regulations. Such a
curb ramp opening must be located within the access aisle boundaries, not within the parking space
boundaries. The required dimensions of the access aisle cannot be restricted by planters, curbs or
wheel stops. Signs designating parking spaces for disabled persons shall be located in front of each
parking space, and shall be mounted four feet (4') above the ground, in addition to blue wheelchair
logo being painted on the parking space itself.
9. Screening: Whenever a parking lot or a driveway to a parking lot is established so as to adjoin the
side or abut the rear line of a lot in a residential zoning district, a solid masonry or solid material
fence eight feet (8') in height or of other material or height as allowed or required by the planning
commission (subject also to the fence height regulations established in CCNO 11-8A-8 and CCNO
11-10-11) shall be constructed and maintained along said side or rear lot line.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 213/279
10. Lighting: Parking lot lights used during hours of darkness shall not exceed five (5) foot-candles.
Lighting shall be indirect, hooded and arranged so that the source of light is not directly visible from
any street or adjoining property. Light standards shall be a maximum of twenty feet (20') in height
above grade.
11. Dimensions: Arrangements of parking spaces within the parking lot and driveway widths shall
conform with the following requirements: Parking layout dimension (in feet) for nine foot by nineteen
foot (9' x 19') stalls at various angles.
12.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 214/279
Dimension (in feet) On Diagram Angle
45 60 75 90
Stall width, parallel to aisle A 12.7 10.4 9.3 9.0
Stall length of line B 28.5 24.3 21.5 19.0
Stall depth to wall C 20.0 21.0 20.5 19.0
Aisle width between stall lines D 12.0 16.0 23.0 26.0
Stall depth, interlock E 17.0 19.0 19.5 19.0
Module, wall to interlock F 49.0 56.0 63.0 64.0
Module, interlocking G 46.0 54.0 62.0 64.0
Module, interlock to curb face H 47.0 53.7 60.5 61.5
Bumper overhang, (typical) I 2.0 2.3 2.5 2.5
Offset J 6.4 2.6 0.6 0.0
Setback K 13.8 10.4 4.9 0.0
Cross aisle, one-way L 14.0 14.0 14.0 14.0
Cross aisle, two-way M 24.0 24.0 24.0 24.0
Access aisle N 5.0 5.0 5.0 5.0
13. Persons With Disabilities: One parking space for persons with disabilities shall be required for
any development having twenty five (25) or more parking spaces. Thereafter, not less than two
percent (2%) of the parking spaces within a development shall be built and maintained as parking
spaces for persons with disabilities.
14. Turnaround Bay: There shall be a turnaround bay, at least nine and one-half feet (9½') deep and
thirteen feet (13') wide, with eighteen foot (18') radii located at the end of each dead end row of
parking stalls.
D. Agricultural Uses: For properties which are zoned RE-20 or R-1-8 AG the primary and secondary
access ways to agricultural uses may remain unpaved, but property owners are responsible for all road
cleaning required because of debris tracked onto the roadway from vehicular access.
E. Undeveloped Lots and Parcels: No parking shall occur on undeveloped lots or parcels.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
Amended by Ord. 2018-27 on 11/13/2018
11-17-4: SCHEDULE OF REQUIRED OFF STREET SPACES
A. Off Street Parking Spaces: Off street parking spaces shall be provided for each specified use in
accordance with the schedule below.
B. Definitions: In calculating the total number of required parking spaces, "usable area", as used
herein, shall mean the area capable of being devoted to the specified use (does not include such
spaces as kitchens, restrooms, hallways, etc.), and the term "seat" shall also include each thirty
inches (30") of bench seating when individual seats are not provided.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 215/279
C. Mixed Use Developments: In the event of mixed use developments, the total requirement for off
street parking spaces is the sum of the requirements of the various uses computed separately.
D. Fractional Amount: In calculating the total number of required off street parking spaces, fractional
amounts are to be disregarded.
E. Unlisted Uses: Minimum parking requirements for a specific use not listed in this section shall be
determined by the community development director with appeal to the planning commission.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 216/279
F. Schedule:
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 217/279
1. Residential Use:
a. One- or two-family residence 2 per dwelling unit
b. Multiple dwellings with more than
2 units
2 per dwelling unit, plus 1 visitor parking space for
every 2 dwelling units, or fraction thereof
c. Rooming houses, fraternities,
sororities, resident clubs, lodges
1 per sleeping room or 1 per bed, whichever is
greater
2. Commercial Sales And Service:
a. Restaurants, bars, cocktail
lounges 1 per 40 square feet of usable floor area
b. Drive-in food or drink places with
on site consumption 1 per 40 square feet of usable floor area
c. Mortuaries, funeral homes 1 space for each 75 square feet of gross floor area
of public assembly area
d. Self-service laundries and dry
cleaners 1 per 2 machines
e. Open air businesses 1 per 500 square feet of sales area for first 2,000
square feet, plus 1 per additional 2,000 square feet
f. Auto sales lots
1 per each 300 square feet of office area and
covered parking area, plus 2 for the first 10,000
square feet or portion thereof of land area and 1 for
each additional 10,000 feet, or portion thereof of
land area, plus 2 per service bay
g. Gas service stations 1 per each 375 square feet of building
h. Car wash 1 per employee, plus reserve spaces equal to 4
times the wash capacity
i. Motor vehicle and machinery
sales, auto repair shops 1 per 200 square feet of floor area
j. Planned shopping centers under
unified control
Requirements for all uses elsewhere specified
herein. All unspecified uses shall have at least 1
parking stall for every 200 square feet of gross
building area for the first 25,000 square feet of
gross building area in the center; then 1 parking
stall for every 250 square feet of gross building
area for gross building area over 25,000 square
feet in the center
k. Barbershops, beauty shops 2 per service chair
l. Furniture and appliance stores,
household equipment 1 per 800 square feet floor area
m. Supermarkets, drugstores 1 per 250 square feet of gross leasable space
n. Hotels, motels 1½ per guest room or suite
o. Bus depots 1 per 150 square feet of waiting room space
p. Skating rinks, dance halls, dance
studios
1 per 3 persons of maximum capacity permitted by
fire regulations
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 218/279
q. Bowling alleys 6 per bowling lane
r. Billiard parlors 1 per billiard table
s. Gymnasiums, health studios 1 per 350 square feet of usable floor area
t. Private golf clubs, athletic,
swimming and tennis clubs 1 per every 5 memberships
u. Auditoriums, gymnasiums and
similar places of public assembly 1 per every 4 person occupancy capacity
v. Theaters 1 per every 6 person occupancy capacity
3. Offices And Clinic Uses:
a. Offices, banks, savings and loan
agencies 1 per 250 square feet of gross floor area
b. Medical and dental offices 3 per examination room or dental chair
c. Nursing homes, convalescent
homes, and homes for the aged 1 per 4 beds
4. Schools And Institutions:
a. Elementary and intermediate
schools 2 per classroom
b. High schools 6 per classroom and other teaching stations
c. Junior colleges, colleges,
universities 3 per classroom and other teaching stations
d. Trade schools, business college 1 per 150 square feet of gross floor area
e. Hospitals 1 per bed
f.
Churches, community centers,
libraries, assembly halls, public
meetings
1 space per each 75 square feet of meeting area
5. Manufacturing And Industrial Uses:
a. Manufacturing 2 per every 3 employees
b. Telemarketing, data processing
centers 1 per 50 square feet of building area
c. Other industrial uses 1 per 300 square feet
d. Warehousing or wholesaling 1 per 800 square feet
e. Ministorage 1 per 35 spaces, plus 1 for the manager
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
Amended by Ord. 2003-17 on 8/2/2003
Amended by Ord. 2009-05 on 7/28/2009
11-17-5: BUSINESS REQUIRING AUTOMOBILE ACCESS
Service stations, roadside stands, public parking lots, storage sheds and all other businesses requiring
motor vehicle access shall meet the following requirements:
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 219/279
A. Access: Access to the station or other structure or parking lot shall be not less than two (2)
roadways for each one hundred feet (100') or fraction of frontage on any street, no two (2) of said
roadways shall be more than thirty four feet (34') in width and shall not be closer than twenty feet
(20') to the point of intersection of two (2) property lines or at any street corner; and a curb,
hedge or fence of not more than two feet (2') in height shall be provided by the owner to limit
access to the permitted roadway.
B. Gasoline Pumps: Gasoline pumps shall be set back at least twenty feet (20') from any property
line bordering a street; provided, that a pump island parallel to an adjoining street may be located
not less than fifteen feet (15') from the property line bordering said street.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
11-17-6: VEHICULAR TRAFFIC TO COMMERCIAL OR MANUFACTURING ZONES
Land, other than public streets, located within a residential zone shall not be used as a regular means of
vehicular passage to and from property in commercial or manufacturing zones.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
11-17-7: OFF STREET LOADING SPACES
A. Location: Off street loading spaces shall not be permitted in any required front yard, nor in any
required side yard, except in a nonresidential district where a side yard abuts an alley. An off
street loading space may occupy all or any part of a required rear yard, and may be partially or
entirely enclosed within a building. All loading areas abutting residential zoning districts shall be
screened from the residential zoning districts.
B. Size: Every required off street loading space shall have a minimum width of twelve feet (12'), a
minimum length of forty five feet (45') and a minimum height of fourteen feet (14'), exclusive of
access aisles and maneuvering space.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
11-17-8: SCHEDULE OF LOADING SPACE REQUIREMENTS
Total Floor Area Of Building Number Of Loading
Spaces Required
1,000 to 10,000 square feet 1
10,000 to 30,000 square feet 2
30,000 to 50,000 square feet 3
For each additional 100,000 square feet 1
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
11-17-9: ALLEY ABUTMENT
Where a building or use in a nonresidential district abuts an alley, such alley may be used as
maneuvering space for loading and unloading spaces. No alley abutting any residential district may be
so used.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 220/279
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
11-17-10: PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING
A. Amount Required: In parking lots, at least five percent (5%) of the interior parking area shall be
landscaped with plantings, and one tree for each ten (10) spaces shall be installed. Parking lot
street frontage and perimeter landscape areas shall be a minimum of twenty feet (20') wide.
Planting required within the parking lot is exclusive of other planting requirements, such as for
shade trees planted along the street.
B. Location: The landscaping should be located in protected areas, such as along walkways, in
center islands, at the ends of bays or between parking stalls. All landscaping in parking areas
and on the street frontage shall be placed so that it will not obstruct sight distance.
C. Plant Type: A mixture of hardy flowering and deciduous trees shall be planted. Plants that
provide maximum screening at ground level up to three and one-half feet (31/2') should be used
along the perimeter of the lot for screening, and the deciduous trees for shade within the lot. The
area between trees shall be mulched, planted with shrubs or ground cover, or covered with
paving material. Any area that will be under the overhang of vehicles shall be mulched or
covered with paving materials.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
11-18: TELEVISION SATELLITE OR DISH ANTENNAS
11-18-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT
11-18-2: BUILDING PERMIT
11-18-3: LOCATION
11-18-4: NUMBER PERMITTED
11-18-5: ANTENNA SIZE
11-18-6: ANTENNA HEIGHT
11-18-7: CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
11-18-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT
The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum setback requirements, height standards, width and
diameter regulations and to otherwise control and restrict the size, use and placement of television
satellite antennas so as to be compatible with the zones in which they are located.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 17.112.010 on 1/1/1987
11-18-2: BUILDING PERMIT
Building permits are required for television satellite antennas or dish antennas and shall comply with the
regulations set forth in this chapter.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 17.112.020 on 1/1/1987
11-18-3: LOCATION
Any television satellite antenna shall be located as follows:
A. Setbacks: All television satellite antennas shall have setbacks of at least five feet (5'), if
freestanding. The setbacks shall be measured from the property lines to the nearest point of the
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 221/279
antenna. The distance for rotating dish antennas shall be measured from the nearest point of the
antenna in its closest rotational configuration.
B. Commercial, Manufacturing Zones: In any commercial or manufacturing zone, such antenna may
be located on the roof or in the rear or side yard; but shall only be permitted in the front yard or
on a side yard facing the street on a corner lot by approval of the administrative law judge when
a usable satellite signal cannot be obtained in an otherwise approved location.
C. Residential Zones: In any residential zone, television satellite antennas shall only be located in
the rear yard of any lot. If a usable satellite signal cannot be obtained from such rear yard, the
antenna may be located on the roof or side yard (except side yards facing the street on a corner
lot) by approval of the administrative law judge.
D. Visual Impacts Reduced: The television satellite antenna or dish shall be so located and/or
screened so as to reduce visual impacts from public right of way.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2011-11 on 5/24/2011
11-18-4: NUMBER PERMITTED
Not more than one television satellite antenna or dish is allowed per residential lot.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 17.112.040 on 1/1/1987
11-18-5: ANTENNA SIZE
No television satellite antenna or dish shall exceed twelve feet (12') in diameter in a residential zone.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 17.112.050 on 1/1/1987
11-18-6: ANTENNA HEIGHT
No antenna shall exceed the height limitation in its respective zone.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 17.112.060 on 1/1/1987
11-18-7: CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
A. Anchoring: The receiving dish shall be securely mounted and anchored to the ground in
accordance with the requirements of the manufacturer and the international building code.
B. Grounding: Every antenna must be adequately grounded for protection against a direct strike of
lightning.
C. Underground Wiring: All electrical and antenna wiring shall be placed underground or otherwise
obscured from view.
D. Glare Minimized: The surface of the dish shall be painted or treated so as not to reflect glare
from the sunlight.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 17.112.070 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
11-19: RESTRICTED LOT (R LOT) DEVELOPMENT
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 222/279
11-19-1: DEFINED
11-19-2: PURPOSE OF R LOT
11-19-3: PERMITTED USES
11-19-4: SITE DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS
11-19-1: DEFINED
An "R lot" is a lot having an average slope of twenty percent (20%) or more, which contains a building
area of at least two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet having a slope of less than twenty percent
(20%) and which contains or is susceptible to special events or conditions, including, but not limited to,
flooding, natural drainage channels, wetlands, improper drainage, steep slopes, rock formations,
adverse earth formations or topography, fault lines, water table, and snow, mud and debris slides. All R
lots shall be clearly identified on the recorded plat and on a recordable instrument in form acceptable to
the city. The instrument shall be recorded in the county recorder's office at the time the final plat is
recorded in order to provide notice to potential lot purchasers of the existence of limitations imposed
upon R lot development.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 17.116.010 on 1/1/1987
11-19-2: PURPOSE OF R LOT
The purpose of designating or identifying an R lot is to minimize hazards relating to flooding, erosion,
improper drainage, steep slopes, rock formations, adverse earth formations or topography, fault lines,
water table, snow, mud and debris slides, and other environmental hazards; to protect percolation and
natural drainage channels and recharge areas and the natural scenic character of hillside and other
areas located within the city; to promote the safety, health and well-being of present and future residents
of the city; and to ensure the efficient expenditure of public funds.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 17.116.020 on 1/1/1987
11-19-3: PERMITTED USES
With respect to an R lot, no property shall be used and no building shall be erected or altered thereon so
as to be arranged, intended or designated to be used for other than one or more of the following uses:
A. A public recreational facility which will not significantly alter the natural form of the landscape;
B. Emergency equipment routes to provide essential emergency services such as fire control;
C. Single-family dwellings in approved subdivisions; provided, that the applicant can demonstrate
conclusively to the planning commission, through the submission of a site design, that any
hazards and limitations of the site can be overcome in such a manner as to prevent hazard to,
among others, life or limb, hazard to property, adverse effects on the safety, use or stability of a
public way or drainage channel, and undue adverse impact on the natural environment as
described in CCNO 11-19-2.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 17.116.030 on 1/1/1987
11-19-4: SITE DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS
All site design elements are subject to the approval of the planning commission. The following guidelines
shall be used to promulgate development which will be compatible with the natural character of the area
upon which the R lot lies:
A. The design of structures and site modifications shall demonstrate an effort to conform with the
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 223/279
topography of the site rather than extensively alter the site to accommodate development.
B. All developments shall comply fully with the provisions of site development standards ordained
by the city.
C. The design of structures and site modification shall protect the public from and not enhance the
potential risk of natural hazards of storm water runoff and erosion by requiring, where necessary,
manmade drainage facilities, minimal impact to natural drainage channels, and the minimal
removal of natural vegetation.
D. The threat and consequential damage of fire in hillside areas shall be minimized by establishing
fire protection measures.
E. Natural features, wildlife habitat and open space shall be preserved.
F. Public access to mountain areas and natural drainage channels shall be preserved.
G. Natural topographical features such as drainage channels, streams, ridge lines, rock
outcroppings, vista trees, and other natural plant formations, shall be retained.
H. Visual and environmental quality by use of natural vegetation and the prohibition of excessive
excavation and terracing shall be preserved and enhanced.
I. Cuts, fills and other visible scars will be considered and minimized to promote safety and
aesthetics.
J. A variety of development designs and concepts that are compatible with the natural terrain of the
sensitive area will be encouraged and open space and natural landscape will be preserved.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 17.116.040 on 1/1/1987
11-20: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
11-20-1: PURPOSE
11-20-2: DEFINITIONS
11-20-3: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS
11-20-4: EFFECT ON NONCONFORMING BUSINESSES
11-20-5: SIGNS
11-20-1: PURPOSE
The purpose and objective of this chapter is to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent
the concentration of sexually oriented businesses or their location in areas deleterious to the city,
regulate the signage of such businesses, control the adverse effect of such signage, and prevent
inappropriate exposure of the activities of such businesses to the community. This chapter is to be
construed as a regulation of time, place and manner of the operation of these businesses, consistent
with the United States and Utah constitutions.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
11-20-2: DEFINITIONS
A sexually oriented businesses is a business that includes the following:
ADULT BOOKSTORE: An establishment:
A. Having as a substantial portion of its stock in trade, videos, film, books, magazines and other
periodicals or publications depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or which
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 224/279
are characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified
anatomical areas"; or
B. Having as a substantial portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines and other periodicals, and
which excludes all minors from the premises, or a section thereof.
ADULT LIVE ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT: An establishment which features topless female or
bottomless dancers of both sexes, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers or similar entertainers.
ADULT THEATER: An enclosed building or open air drive-in theater:
A. Regularly used for presenting any film or plate negative, film or plate positive, film or tape
designed to be projected on a screen for exhibition or films, glass slides or transparencies, either
in negative or positive form, designed for exhibition by projection on a screen depicting,
describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or characterized by an emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to "specified anatomical areas"; or
B. Used for presenting any film or plate negative, film or plate positive, film or tape designed to be
projected on a screen for exhibition, or films, glass slides or transparencies, either in negative or
positive form, designed for exhibition by projection on a screen and which regularly excludes
minors.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS:
A. Less than completely and opaquely covered: 1) human genitals, pubic region; 2) buttock; and 3)
breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and
B. Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES:
A. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
B. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy.
C. Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or breasts.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
11-20-3: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS
A. Outcall services shall be permitted in areas MP-1 (industrial zone).
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 225/279
B. Sexually oriented businesses, except outcall services, shall only be permitted in areas zoned
MP-1 under this chapter, subject to the following additional restrictions:
1. No sexually oriented business shall be located:
a. Within one thousand feet (1,000') of any school, public park, library or church;
b. Within two hundred feet (200') of any residential use or any agricultural or
residential zoning boundary;
c. Within five hundred feet (500') of any other sexually oriented business, except
outcall services.
2. Distance requirements between structures and uses specified in this section shall be
measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or zoning districts,
from the property boundaries of the school, public park, religious or cultural activity,
residential use or other sexually oriented business, or from the right of way line of a
gateway to the structure of the sexually oriented business.
3. Distance requirements from zoning districts for this section shall be measured in a
straight line, without regard to intervening structures or zoning districts, from the closest
zoning boundary of a residential or agricultural district to the sexually oriented business
structure.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
11-20-4: EFFECT ON NONCONFORMING BUSINESSES
All existing legal, nonconforming sexually oriented businesses, as of the effective date hereof, or any
amendment hereto, shall comply with the provisions of this chapter within nine (9) months from the
effective date hereof.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
11-20-5: SIGNS
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in CCNO 11-22, the following more restrictive
requirements for signs pertaining to sexually oriented businesses shall prevail:
A. No more than one exterior sign shall be allowed;
B. No sign shall be allowed to exceed eighteen (18) square feet;
C. No animation shall be permitted on or around any sign or on the exterior walls or roofs of such
premises;
D. No descriptive art or designs depicting any activity related to or inferring the nature of the
business shall be allowed on any sign. Said signs shall contain alphanumeric copy only;
E. Only flat wall signs and/or awning signs shall be permitted;
F. Painted wall advertising shall not be allowed; and
G. Other than the signs specifically allowed by this chapter, the sexually oriented business shall not
attach, construct or allow to be attached or constructed, any temporary sign, banner, light or
other device designed to draw attention to the business location.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 226/279
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
11-21: WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND ANTENNAS
11-21-1: PURPOSE
11-21-2: DEFINITIONS
11-21-3: APPLICABILITY
11-21-4: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
11-21-5: PERMITTED USES
11-21-6: CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
11-21-7: MINIMUM SETBACKS AND SEPARATION
11-21-8: BUILDINGS OR OTHER EQUIPMENT STORAGE
11-21-9: COLLOCATION
11-21-10: REMOVAL OF ABANDONED ANTENNAS AND TOWERS
11-21-11: NONCONFORMING USES
11-21-1: PURPOSE
The purpose of this chapter is to establish general guidelines for the siting of wireless communications
towers and antennas. The goals of this chapter are to: a) protect residential areas and land uses from
potential adverse impacts of towers and antennas; b) encourage the location of towers in nonresidential
areas; c) minimize the total number of towers throughout the community; d) strongly encourage the joint
use of new and existing tower sites as a primary option rather than construction of additional single use
towers; e) encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the extent possible, in areas
where the adverse impact on the community is minimal; f) encourage users of towers and antennas to
configure them in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and antennas through
careful design, siting, landscape screening and innovative camouflaging techniques; g) enhance the
ability of the providers of telecommunications services to provide such services to the community
quickly, effectively and efficiently; h) consider the public health and safety of communication towers; and
i) avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through engineering and careful siting
of tower structures. In furtherance of these goals, the city shall give due consideration to the general
plan, this title, existing land uses and environmentally sensitive areas in approving sites for the location
of towers and antennas.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
11-21-2: DEFINITIONS
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth below:
ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE: Clock towers, bell steeples, light poles and similar alterative
design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers.
ANTENNA: Any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on a tower, building or structure and
used in communications that radiates or captures electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals,
radio frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals or other communication
signals.
BACKHAUL NETWORK: The lines that connect a provider's towers/cell sites to one or more cellular
telephone switching offices, and/or long distance providers, or the public switched telephone network.
EXISTING STRUCTURE: Light poles, power poles, chimneys, billboards and other similar structures
which are placed within the city at the time of adoption of this chapter, except existing buildings.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 227/279
FAA: The federal aviation administration.
FCC: The federal communications commission.
HEIGHT: When referring to a tower or other structure, the vertical distance measured from the natural
grade level to the highest point of the structure directly above the natural grade when such structure is
not located in a platted subdivision. If the structure is located in a platted subdivision, the height shall be
the vertical distance measured from the finished grade as shown on the subdivision grading plans or
finished grade as shown on the individual lot's grading plans (whichever is lower), to the highest point of
the structure directly above the finished grade. In the event that terrain problems prevent an accurate
determination of height, the zoning administrator shall rule as to height, and appeal from that decision
shall be to the administrative law judge.
PREEXISTING TOWERS AND PREEXISTING ANTENNAS: Any tower or antenna for which a building
permit has been properly issued prior to the effective date hereof, including permitted towers or
antennas that have not yet been constructed, so long as such approval is current and not expired.
TOWER: Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or
more antennas for telephone, radio and similar communication purposes, including self-supporting
lattice towers, guyed towers or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission
towers, microwave towers, common carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower
structures and the like. The term also includes the structure and any support thereto.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2011-11 on 5/24/2011
11-21-3: APPLICABILITY
A. New Towers And Antennas: All new towers or antennas in the city shall be subject to these
regulations.
B. Exceptions:
1. Amateur Radio Station Operators/Receive Only Antennas: This chapter shall not govern
any tower, or the installation of any antenna, that is located on the lot so the reclining
length is entirely on the operator's property and which is owned and operated by a
federally licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for receive only
operations.
2. Preexisting Towers Or Antennas: Legally established preexisting towers and preexisting
antennas shall not be required to meet the requirements of this chapter, other than the
requirements of CCNO 11-21-4F and G.
3. AM Array: For purposes of implementing this chapter, an AM array, consisting of one or
more tower units and supporting ground system which functions as one AM broadcasting
antenna, shall be considered one tower. Measurements for setbacks and separation
distances shall be measured from the outer perimeter of the towers included in the AM
array. Additional tower units may be added within the perimeter of the AM array by right.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
11-21-4: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
A. Principal Or Accessory Use: Antennas and towers may be considered either principal or
accessory uses. A different existing use of an existing structure on the same lot shall not
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 228/279
preclude the installation of an antenna or tower on such lot.
B. Lot Size: For purposes of determining whether the installation of a tower or antenna complies
with district development regulations, including, but not limited to, setback requirements, lot
coverage requirements and other such requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot shall
control, even though the antennas or towers may be located on leased parcels within such lot.
C. Inventory Of Existing Sites: Each applicant for an antenna and/or tower shall provide to the
community development director an inventory of existing towers, antennas or sites approved for
towers or antennas, that are either within the jurisdiction of the city or within one mile of the
border thereof, including specific information about the location, height and design of each tower.
Each applicant shall also provide a one year build-out plan of its facilities for all other wireless
communications facilities within the city. The community development director may share such
information with other applicants applying for administrative approval or conditional use permits
under this chapter or with other organizations seeking to locate antennas within the jurisdiction of
the city; provided, however, that the community development director is not, by sharing such
information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable.
D. Aesthetics: Towers and antennas shall meet the following requirements:
1. Towers, two hundred feet (200') or greater in height, shall be subject to any applicable
standards of the FAA. Such regulations include, but not limited to, those specified in FAA
advisory circulars AC 70/7460-1-H "Obstruction Marketing & Lighting" and AC 150/5345-
43-D "Specifications for Obstruction Lighting Equipment". Towers, less than two hundred
feet (200') in height, shall be painted a neutral color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness.
2. At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the extent
possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping that will blend them
into the natural setting and surrounding buildings.
3. If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting
electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or
closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna
and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible.
E. Lighting: Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable
authority. If lighting is required, the lighting alternatives and design chosen must cause the least
disturbance to the surrounding views.
F. State Or Federal Requirements: All towers must meet or exceed current standards and
regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the state or federal government with
the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed,
then the owners of the towers and antennas governed by this chapter shall bring such towers
and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six (6) months
of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a different compliance schedule is
mandated by the controlling state or federal agency. Failure to bring towers and antennas into
compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal
of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 229/279
G. Building Codes; Safety Standards: To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner of a
tower shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable
state or local building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are published by the
Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time to time. If, upon inspection, the city
concludes that a tower fails to comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to
persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall
have thirty (30) days to bring such tower into compliance with such standards, unless a longer
time is reasonably necessary. Failure to bring such tower into compliance within said thirty (30)
days shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense.
H. Measurement: For purposes of measurement, tower setbacks and separation distances shall be
calculated and applied to facilities located in the city irrespective of municipal and county
jurisdictional boundaries.
I. Not Essential Services: Towers and antennas shall be regulated and permitted pursuant to this
chapter and shall not be regulated or permitted as essential services, public utilities or private
utilities.
J. Franchises: Owners and/or operators of towers or antennas shall certify that all franchises
required by law for the construction and/or operation of a wireless communication system in the
city have been obtained and shall file a copy of all required franchises with the community
development director.
K. Public Hearing: The planning commission may call a specific public hearing on any application
after adequate notice, if it is deemed in the public interest. The planning commission shall take
action on the application by the second meeting of the planning commission after the application
filing date. A record of the hearing, together with a recommendation for the denial or issuance of
the conditional use permit with conditions of approval or reasons for denial, shall be forwarded to
the city council within thirty (30) days of the public hearing.
L. Signs: No signs shall be allowed on an antenna or tower.
M. Buildings And Support Equipment: Buildings and support equipment associated with antennas or
towers shall comply with the requirements of CCNO 11-21-8.
N. Collocation And Multiple Antenna/Tower Plan: The city encourages tower and antenna users to
submit a single application for approval of multiple towers and/or antenna sites and to submit
applications which utilize collocation with an existing wireless telecommunications provider.
Applications for approval of multiple sites or for collocation with an existing provider shall be
given priority in the review process.
O. Security Fencing: Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not less than six feet (6') in height
and no more than eight feet (8') in height, which shall be constructed of cement block or
masonry, and shall be equipped with an appropriate anticlimbing device.
P. Landscaping: The following requirements shall govern the landscaping surrounding towers:
1. Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant materials that effectively
screens the view of the tower compound from residential property. The standard buffer
shall consist of a landscaped strip at least four feet (4') wide outside the perimeter of the
compound.
2. In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal, the landscaping
requirement may be reduced or waived.
3. Existing mature plant growth and natural land forms on the site shall be preserved to the
maximum extent possible.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 230/279
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
11-21-5: PERMITTED USES
A. General: The uses listed in this section are deemed to be permitted uses and shall not require
administrative approval or a conditional use permit.
B. Permitted Uses: The following uses are specifically permitted:
Antennas or towers located on property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the city,
provided a license or lease authorizing such antenna or tower has been approved by the city. No
such license or lease shall be issued for an antenna or tower that is to be located within three
hundred feet (300') of any residentially zoned property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by
the city, until a public hearing has been held at a regular or special planning commission
meeting.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
11-21-6: CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
A. If the tower or antenna is not a permitted use under CCNO 11-21-5, then a conditional use permit
shall be required for the construction of a tower or the placement of an antenna in all zoning
districts.
B. General: The following provisions shall govern the issuance of conditional use permits for towers
or antennas by the planning commission:
1. Applications for conditional use permits under this section shall be subject to the
procedures and requirements of CCNO 11-14, except as modified in this section.
2. In granting a conditional use permit, the planning commission may impose conditions to
the extent such conditions are necessary to minimize any adverse effect of the proposed
tower on adjoining properties.
3. Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant submits, whether civil,
mechanical or electrical, shall be certified by a Utah licensed professional engineer.
4. An applicant for a conditional use permit shall submit the information described in this
section and a nonrefundable fee established pursuant to CCNO 11-14.
5. A conditional use permit issued under this chapter shall be conditioned upon verification
by the city engineer or designee that such tower structure is structurally sound. Such
verification shall be received by the applicant prior to submission.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 231/279
C. Towers:
1. Information Required: In addition to any information required for applications for
conditional use permits pursuant to CCNO 11-14, applicants for a conditional use permit
for a tower shall submit the following information:
a. A plan of development as required in CCNO 11-14-3, plus zoning, general plan
classification of the site and all properties within the applicable separation
distances set forth in CCNO 11-21-7B, adjacent roadways, proposed means of
access, elevation drawings of the proposed tower and any other structures, and
other information deemed by the community development director to be necessary
to assess compliance with this chapter.
b. The setback distance between the proposed tower and the nearest residential unit
and residentially zoned properties.
c. The separation distance from other towers described in the inventory of existing
sites submitted pursuant to CCNO 11-21-4C, shall be shown on an updated site
plan or map. The applicant shall also identify the type of construction of the
existing tower and the owner/operator of the existing tower, if known.
d. Method of fencing, and finished color and, if applicable, the method of camouflage
and illumination.
e. A description of compliance with CCNO 11-21-4C through G, J, L through P, and
CCNO 11-21-7A and B, and all applicable federal, state or local laws.
f. A notarized statement by the applicant as to whether construction of the tower will
accommodate collocation of additional antennas for future users.
g. Identification of the entities providing the backhaul network for the tower described
in the application and other cellular sites owned or operated by the applicant in the
municipality.
h. A description of the suitability of the use of existing towers, other structures or
alternative technology not requiring the use of towers or structures to provide the
services to be provided through the use of the proposed new tower.
i. A description of the feasible alternative locations of future towers or antennas
within the city based upon existing physical, engineering, technological or
geographical limitations in the event the proposed tower is erected.
j. A statement of compliance with federal communications commission (FCC) radio
frequency (RF) exposure standards.
D. Noise: No permit shall be issued for any facility which generates a noise level greater than fifty
(50) decibels as measured at the edge of the property upon which such facility is sited.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 232/279
E. Factors Considered In Granting Conditional Use Permits For Towers: In addition to any
standards for consideration of conditional use permit applications pursuant to CCNO 11-14, the
planning commission shall consider the following factors in determining whether to issue a
conditional use permit:
1. Height of the proposed tower;
2. Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residentially zoned district boundaries;
3. Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties;
4. Surrounding topography;
5. Surrounding tree coverage and foliage;
6. Design of the tower, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect
of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness;
7. Proposed ingress and egress; and
8. Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures or alternative technologies not
requiring the use of towers or structures, as discussed in subsection B4 of this section.
F. Availability Of Suitable Existing Towers, Other Structures Or Alternative Technology: No new
tower shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the
planning commission that no existing tower, structure or alternative technology that does not
require the use of towers or structures can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. An
applicant shall submit information requested by the planning commission related to the
availability of suitable existing towers, other structures or alternative technology. Evidence
submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower, structure or alternative technology can
accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna may consist of any of the following:
1. No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area which meet
applicant's engineering requirements.
2. Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet applicant's engineering
requirements.
3. Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support
applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment.
4. The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the
antenna on the existing towers or structures, or the antenna on the existing towers or
structures would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna.
5. The fees, costs or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share an
existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing are
unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development are presumed to be
unreasonable.
6. The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing
towers and structures unsuitable.
7. The applicant demonstrates that an alternative technology that does not require the use
of towers or structures, such as a cable microcell network using multiple low powered
transmitters/receivers attached to a wireline system, is unsuitable. Costs of alternative
technology that exceed new tower or antenna development shall not be presumed to
render the technology unsuitable.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 233/279
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
11-21-7: MINIMUM SETBACKS AND SEPARATION
A. Setbacks: The following setback requirements shall apply to all towers:
1. Towers must be set back a distance equal to at least one hundred percent (100%) of the
height of the tower from any adjoining lot line; provided, however, that separation
distances from residential uses shall be in accordance with table 1, subsection B1b of this
section.
2. Accessory buildings must satisfy the minimum zoning district setback requirements.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 234/279
B. Separation: The following separation requirements shall apply to all towers and antennas:
1. Separation From Off Site Uses/Designated Areas:
a. Tower separation shall be measured from the base of the tower to the lot line of
the off site uses and/or designated areas as specified in table 1, except as
otherwise provided in table 1.
b. Separation requirements for towers shall comply with the minimum standards
established in table 1.
Table 1
Separation Requirements From Off Site Uses/Areas
Off Site Use/Designated Area Separation Distance
Single-family or duplex residential units, including
modular homes and mobile homes used for living
purposes.
200 feet or 300% of tower
height, whichever is greater.
Vacant single-family or duplex residentially zoned land
which is either platted or has preliminary plat approval
which is not expired.
200 feet or 300% of tower
height, whichever is greater.
The separation is measured
from base of tower to closest
building setback line.
Vacant unplatted residentially zoned lands, including
any unplatted residential use properties without a valid
preliminary subdivision plan or valid development plan
and any multi-family residentially zoned land greater
than a duplex.
100 feet or 100% of tower
height, whichever is greater.
Existing multi-family residential units greater than
duplex units.
100 feet or 100% of tower
height, whichever is greater.
Nonresidential zoned lands or nonresidential uses. None, only setbacks apply.
2. Separation Distances Between Towers: Separation distances between towers shall be
applicable for and measured between the proposed tower and preexisting towers. The
separation distances shall be measured by drawing or following a straight line between
the base of the existing tower and the proposed base, pursuant to a site plan, of the
proposed tower. The separation distances (listed in linear feet) shall be as shown in table
2.
Table 2
Separation Distances Between Towers
Towers 65 feet in height or greater 2,000
feet
1,500
feet
1,000
feet
Towers less than 65 feet in height, but greater than 40
feet in height
1,500
feet
1,500
feet
1,000
feet
Towers less than 40 feet in height 1,000
feet
1,000
feet 750 fee
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 235/279
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
11-21-8: BUILDINGS OR OTHER EQUIPMENT STORAGE
A. Antennas Mounted On Structures Or Rooftops: The equipment cabinet or structure used in
association with antennas mounted on structures or rooftops shall comply with the following:
1. The cabinet or structure shall not contain more than one hundred twenty (120) square
feet of gross floor area or be more than eight feet (8') in height and shall be located on the
ground.
2. Equipment storage buildings or cabinets shall comply with all applicable building codes.
B. Antennas Mounted On Utility Poles, Light Poles Or Towers: The equipment cabinet or structure
used in association with antennas mounted on utility poles, light poles or towers shall be located
in accordance with the following:
1. In residential districts, the equipment cabinet or structure may be located:
a. In a required front yard or required street side yard, provided the cabinet structure
is no greater than three and one-half feet (3½') in height or twenty (20) square feet
of gross floor area and the cabinet/structure is located a minimum of three feet (3')
from all lot lines. The cabinet/structure shall be screened by sight obscuring
landscaping which obscures at least ninety five percent (95%) of the structure at
planting and throughout the duration of the cabinet or structure's existence with an
ultimate height not to exceed forty two inches (42").
b. In a required rear yard, provided the cabinet or structure is no greater than five
feet (5') in height or one hundred twenty (120) square feet in gross floor area. The
cabinet/structure shall be screened by sight obscuring landscaping which
obscures at least ninety five percent (95%) of the structure at planting and
throughout the duration of the cabinet or structure's existence with an ultimate
height of six feet (6').
c. The entry or access side of a cabinet or structure shall be gated by a solid, sight
obscuring gate that is separate from the cabinet or structure.
2. In commercial or industrial districts, the equipment cabinet or structure shall be no greater
than fourteen feet (14') in height or three hundred (300) square feet in gross floor area.
The structure or cabinet shall be screened by sight obscuring landscaping with an
ultimate height of sixteen feet (16') and a planted height of at least six feet (6'). The entry
or access side of a cabinet or structure shall be gated by a solid, sight obscuring gate that
is separate from the cabinet or structure. Such accessway shall not face residentially
zoned property.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
11-21-9: COLLOCATION
A. Good Faith: Applicants and permittees shall cooperate and exercise good faith in collocating
wireless telecommunications facilities on the same support structures or site, if the city so
requests. Good faith shall include sharing technical information to evaluate the feasibility of
collocation, and may include negotiations for erection of a replacement support structure to
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 236/279
accommodate collocation. A competitive conflict to collocation or financial burden caused by
sharing such information normally will not be considered as an excuse to the duty of good faith.
B. Third Party Technical Review: In the event a dispute arises as to whether a permittee has
exercised good faith in accommodating other users, the city may require the applicant to obtain a
third party technical study at the applicant's expense. The city may review any information
submitted by the applicant and permittee in determining whether good faith has been exercised.
C. Exceptions: No collocation may be required where the shared use would or does result in
significant interference in the broadcast or reception capabilities of the existing wireless
telecommunications facilities or failure of the existing wireless telecommunications facilities to
meet federal standards for emissions.
D. Failure To Comply: Failure to comply with collocation requirements when feasible may result in
denial of a permit request or revocation of an existing permit.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
11-21-10: REMOVAL OF ABANDONED ANTENNAS AND TOWERS
Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of ninety (90) days shall be considered
abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or tower shall remove the same within ninety (90) days of
receipt of notice from the city notifying the owner of such abandonment. Failure to remove an
abandoned antenna or tower within said ninety (90) day period shall be grounds to remove the tower or
antenna at the owner's expense. If there are two (2) or more users of a single tower, then this provision
shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower for the prescribed period.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
11-21-11: NONCONFORMING USES
A. Not Expansion Of Nonconforming Use: Towers that are constructed, and antennas that are
installed, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to constitute the
expansion of a nonconforming use or structure.
B. Preexisting Towers: Preexisting towers shall be allowed to continue their usage as they presently
exist. Routine maintenance (including replacement with a new tower of like construction and
height) shall be permitted on such preexisting towers. Construction of additional antennas or
other equipment on a preexisting tower shall comply with the requirements of this chapter.
C. Rebuilding Damaged Or Destroyed Nonconforming Towers Or Antennas: Notwithstanding other
provisions of this chapter, bona fide nonconforming towers or antennas that are damaged or
destroyed may be rebuilt without having to first obtain a conditional use permit and without
having to meet the separation requirements specified in CCNO 11-21-7A and B. The type, height
and location of the tower on site shall be of the same type and intensity as the original facility
approval; provided, however, that any destroyed lattice or guyed tower shall be replaced with a
monopole structure only. Building permits to rebuild the facility shall comply with the then
applicable building codes and shall be obtained within ninety (90) days from the date the facility
is damaged or destroyed. If no permit is obtained or if said permit expires, the tower or antenna
shall be deemed abandoned as specified in CCNO 11-21-10.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-16 on 10/8/2002
11-22: SIGN REGULATIONS FOR ALL ZONES
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 237/279
11-22-1: PURPOSE
11-22-2: DEFINITIONS
11-22-3: SIGN AREA AND HEIGHT
11-22-4: GENERAL PROVISIONS
11-22-5: COMPREHENSIVE SIGN PLAN
11-22-6: SIGNS FOR RESIDENTIAL USES
11-22-7: SIGNS PERMITTED FOR NONRESIDENTIAL USES IN SPECIFIC DISTRICTS
11-22-8: TEMPORARY SIGNS
11-22-9: FLAGS AND FLAGPOLES
11-22-10: ON SITE SUBDIVISION ADVERTISING SIGNS
11-22-11: MODEL HOME ADVERTISING SIGNS
11-22-12: DELETED
11-22-13: SIGN PERMITS; FEES
11-22-14: PENALTY
11-22-1: PURPOSE
These sign regulations are intended to encourage attractive, effective and adequate signs for
businesses and services, while promoting the general welfare of the community by creating safer street
frontages through the use of controlled signs.
It is the city's policy to regulate signs in a manner that is consistent with the free speech protections and
provisions of the United States Constitution and of the Constitution of the State of Utah by enacting
regulations which do not restrict speech on the basis of its content, viewpoint or message; and do not
favor one form of speech over another.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-05 on 4/9/2002
Amended by Ord. 2015-08 on 5/12/2015
11-22-2: DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this chapter, the conditions given in CCNO 11-2-1 regarding definitions shall apply to
the definitions in this section:
CAMPAIGN SIGN: The term “campaign sign” means a temporary sign soliciting support for a person
running for public office or a sign supporting, defending or objecting to an issue or proposal being placed
before the public.
COMMUNITY SIGN: A temporary sign erected within the city owned or controlled right of way solely for
the purpose of advertising or announcing a special community wide event or activity conducted or
cosponsored by the city. A special community wide event or activity is one which occurs not more than
twice in a twelve (12) month period and seeks to attract donations or participants throughout the city.
CONSTRUCTION SITE: A site on which a construction permit or building permit has been issued by
North Ogden City.
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE DISPLAY SIGN: A sign, which uses changing patterns of lights to display
public information and/or commercial messages. These signs include displays using incandescent
lamps, LEDs, or LCDs.
A. All permitted electronic message display signs shall be equipped with a sensor which uses
photocell technology to automatically determine the amount of ambient light and to adjust the
brightness of the electronic message display sign according to the amount of ambient light. This
sensor must be functional and in operation at all times that the electronic message display sign is
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 238/279
operating. If incandescent lighting is used, lamp size may not exceed fifty four (54) watts of
incandescent lighting for daytime usage and nighttime wattage shall be reduced to thirty (30)
watts maximum, automatically, by means of the required sensor.
B. An electronic message display sign may not flash or otherwise scintillate, except to transition
from the displayed message to a different message using the permitted effects listed in
subsection (1).
1. The following effects for electronic message display signs are permitted when
transitioning from the displayed message to a different message: dissolve with 0 – 1
second between messages; fade with 0 – 1 second between messages; instantaneous
transitions between messages; animation; scrolling (vertical movement of message); and
travel (horizontal movement of message).
2. The following frame effects are prohibited when transitioning from the displayed message
to a different message: flashing or blinking transitions; blank white transitions; and any
frame effect not listed in subsection (1).
C. Any message on the electronic message display sign must remain lighted and stationary for at
least two (2) seconds.
D. Electronic message display signs which are located in a commercial or manufacturing zone, and
are within two hundred feet (200') of a residential zone, excluding the R-4 zone, may not operate
between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
E. Electronic message display signs located in a residential zone, excluding the R-4 zone, may not
operate between the hours of nine o' clock (9:00) P.M. and six o' clock (6:00) A.M.
F. Electronic message display signs are not allowed off premises.
G. Electronic message display signs may not be leased in whole or part for any use which is not the
primary use on the property where the sign is located.
H. The sign shall not cause glare or be intensely lighted at dark so that it creates a nuisance or
hazard to vehicle traffic, pedestrians, or neighboring residential properties.
FASCIA SIGN: A sign which is permanently affixed to the horizontal member or surface at the edge of a
projecting roof.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 239/279
FREESTANDING SIGN: A sign which has its own supporting structure independent of any building or
structure.
ILLUMINATED SIGN: A sign which is lighted, either externally or internally.
MANSARD AND PARAPET SIGNS: A sign permanently affixed to a wall or surface not more than
twenty degrees (20°) from vertical at the upper edge of a building and running parallel with the mansard
roofline or parapet upon which the sign is attached.
NONCOMMERCIAL SIGN: A sign which expresses, conveys or advocates a noncommercial message.
POLITICAL SIGN: The term “political sign” means a temporary sign making a statement either
supporting, defending or objecting to an issue or proposal that is not being placed before the public.
PORTABLE COMMERCIAL SIGN: A commercial sign which is not permanently affixed to a structure or
permanently ground mounted.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN: A restaurant that serves food that is prepared on site and is delivered by
carhop service for consumption in its parking lot, at outdoor tables on its property or off the restaurant's
premises. The restaurant may also have drive through food service to serve food that is prepared on
site.
ROOF SIGN: A sign affixed on, above or over the roof of a building so that it projects above the roofline.
The top of a parapet wall shall be considered the roofline. The highest point of a mansard roof shall be
considered the roofline. Where a parapet wall is combined with a mansard roof, the roofline shall be the
top of the parapet.SIGN: Any device providing identification, advertising or directional information for a
business, service, product, person, organization, place or building. Included in this definition of signs are
graphic devices such as logos and attention attracting items such as banners or logo sculptures, and
trademarked color band fascia.
TEMPORARY SIGN: Any exterior sign, banner, pennant, valance or advertising display constructed of
paper, cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wallboard or other light materials including metal real estate
signs, with or without light frames, intended to be displayed for a short period of time. Examples of
temporary signs include: a grand opening banner, public event banner, political sign, real estate sign,
and special event sign.
WALL MOUNTED SIGN: A sign which is fastened to any vertical portion of a building.
WINDOW SIGN: Any poster, cut out letters, painted text or graphics, or other text or visual presentation
affixed to, or placed within twelve inches (12") behind a window pane, which can be read from the
exterior of a building.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 240/279
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-05 on 4/9/2002
Amended by Ord. 2005-10 on 10/4/2005
Amended by Ord. 2010-07 on 5/25/2010
Amended by Ord. 2015-08 on 5/12/2015
11-22-3: SIGN AREA AND HEIGHT
A. Sign Area: Sign area shall be measured as follows:
1. Sign copy mounted or painted on a background panel or area distinctively painted,
textured or constructed. Sign area is the area within the outside dimensions of the
background panel or surface.
2. Sign copy consisting of individual letters and/or graphics affixed to a wall or portion of a
building which has not been painted, textured or otherwise altered to provide a distinctive
background for the sign copy.
Sign area is the area within the smallest rectangle that will enclose the sign copy.
3. Sign copy mounted or painted on an internally illuminated sign or internally illuminated
element of a building. The entire internally illuminated surface or architectural element,
which contains sign copy, will be counted as sign area.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 241/279
4. Number Of Sign Faces:
a. One: Area of the single face only.
b. Two: If the interior angle between the two (2) sign faces is forty five degrees (45°)
or less, the sign area is the area of the larger of the two (2) sign faces. If the angle
exceeds forty five degrees (45°), the sign area is the sum of the areas of the two
(2) faces.
c. Three Or More: The sign area is the sum of areas of the three (3) or more faces.
d. Three Dimensional, Sculptural Or Other Nonplanar Signs: Sign area will be the
sum of the areas of the vertical faces of the smallest polyhedron that will
encompass the sign structure.
5. The sum of the areas of the signs on a single lot or parcel shall not exceed the sign area
allowed for the use in the zone in which it is located.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 242/279
6. The sign area is the area of the smallest rectangle which can enclose the sign. Any
monuments or other supporting structures are not calculated in the sign area calculation.
Any post or monument must be a neutral color in order to not be a part of the rectangular
calculation.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 243/279
B. Sign Height: Sign height is defined as follows:
1. Freestanding Sign: Sign height is the distance from highest historic elevation of the
ground surface directly below the sign to the tallest point of the sign measured vertically
from the top of the sign, including all elements of the sign. In the commercial zones where
a three foot (3') high berm is required when site parking is adjacent to the public street,
the height shall be measured from the height of the three foot (3') berm beneath the sign
location. When the ground elevation of the sign is below public street level, the crown of
the nearest public street shall become the lowest point to measure the height of the sign.
LEVEL GRADE APPLICATION
DOWNHILL GRADE APPLICATION
3'-0" BERM GRADE APPLICATION
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 244/279
UPHILL GRADE APPLICATION
2. Wall Or Fascia Mounted Signs: Sign height is the distance from the top of the sign
structure to the top of the curb nearest the sign or to the crown of the adjacent roadway if
no curb exists, or grade of the building where significant grade separations from the road
exists.
3. Projection Of Parapet Sign: No parapet sign may project more than five feet (5') above
the roofline, but must remain below the top line of the parapet.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-05 on 4/9/2002
Amended by Ord. 2012-19 on 11/13/2012
11-22-4: GENERAL PROVISIONS
A. Prohibited Signs: Signs not specifically authorized herein are prohibited, including, but not limited
to the following:
1. Off premises commercial signs, except as permitted in CCNO 11-22-8D.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 245/279
2. Commercial signs mounted, attached or painted on trailers, boats or motor vehicles
parked continuously for more than twenty four (24) hours, on the premises of a business
which sign advertises a product or service available on the premises.
3. Roof signs, or signs that project above the highest point of the roofline, parapet or fascia
of the building.
4. Any sign emitting sound, except for menu boards.
5. Any sign with intermittent or flashing illumination.
6. Any sign with animation or motion, including electronic reader boards.
B. Legal Nonconforming Signs: Signs which have been legally erected in the city prior to the
adoption of this chapter and which do not comply with the terms of this chapter may be repaired
and maintained; provided, that there may be no extension or expansion of the sign. Whenever
any person or entity operating a business with a legal nonconforming sign or signs sells the
business, changes the business or changes the name of the business, the nonconforming sign or
signs may be replaced or altered to reflect the new business; provided, that there may be no
expansion or extension of the signs. If a nonconforming sign is abandoned for a period of twelve
(12) months or more, use of the sign shall be deemed to be abandoned and the sign, together
with any supporting structures, poles and other related equipment, shall be removed. In the event
of any conflict between this section and any provision of CCNO 11-14e, this section shall control.
A commercial sign attached to, or associated with, a business operated in a particular building
shall be deemed to be abandoned if the business ceases its operation in the building.
C. Location Restrictions: With the exception of directional signs owned by the city or another
governmental agency, no sign shall be erected or placed within any center median or any public
sidewalk or bicycle path. The city employees may remove any sign located in these areas.
D. Window Signs: "Window signs", as defined in CCNO 11-22-2, shall not exceed twenty five
percent (25%) of the total area of the windows through which they are visible.
E. Enforcement: The building inspection department shall be responsible for the enforcement and
the administration of this chapter. The building inspection department shall inspect each sign for
which a permit has been issued and shall require the proper maintenance of all signs subject to
the provisions of this chapter.
F. State License Required: It is unlawful for any person, partnership or corporation to erect or
maintain, or to engage in the business of erecting or maintaining any "sign", as herein defined,
except those signs authorized by subsection A of this section, CCNO 11-22-6A1, and CCNO 11-
22-8 and CCNO 11-22-12, until such person, partnership or corporation shall have obtained a
license from the state authorizing the person, partnership or corporation to be a sign installation
contractor. Application for permits to erect signs will be accepted and permits granted only to
such persons, partnerships or corporations as are licensed by the state to perform such sign
contracting.
G. Bond Required: No contractor shall be issued a permit for the erection of a sign in the city until
such person shall have filed with the city recorder a bond in the amount set by the city council.
The city council will set bond amounts from time to time by resolution.
H. Bond To Be Executed By Qualified Surety: All bonds required to be filed under subsection G of
this section shall be executed by a qualified surety licensed to do business in the state and shall
be conditioned on the faithful observance of the ordinances of the city now or hereafter enacted
relating to the erection and maintenance of signs to save and keep harmless the city, its officials
and employees from all damages, liabilities, losses or judgments that may be recovered against
the city, it officials and employees, by reason of negligent erection of any of the aforesaid signs,
or negligent maintenance of any sign owned by or maintained by such sign contractor.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 246/279
I. Vertical Clearance: There shall be a minimum vertical clearance of ten feet (10') between the
ground or sidewalk and any part of a projecting sign, projecting more than eight inches (8") from
a wall.
J. Lighting Of Signs: Signs may be illuminated by indirect lighting, floodlights or luminous tubes
only. No lighting shall be installed in any way which will permit direct rays of such light to
penetrate onto any adjoining property used for residential purposes, or in any manner
constituting a nuisance.
K. Location Of Signs: No light or sign, or other advertising structure as regulated by this title shall be
erected at the intersection of any street in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision, or
at any location where, by reason of the position, shape or color, it may interfere with, obstruct the
view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device, or one which makes use
of any other word, phrase, symbol or character in such manner as to interfere with, mislead or
confuse traffic. No part of any sign shall be permitted to extend across any property line.
L. Sign Not To Constitute A Traffic Hazard: No sign or other structure in excess of two feet (2') in
height, as measured from the top of the curb or edge of the hard road surface, shall be placed on
any corner lot within a triangular area formed by the street property lines and a line connecting
them at points forty feet (40') from the intersection of the street lines, in such a manner as to
obstruct free and clear vision to automobile drivers.
M. Maintenance Of Signs: Signs regulated by this chapter shall be maintained in good visual
appearance and structural condition at all times.
1. If a sign does not conform with the requirements of this chapter or if the construction,
design, manner of use, or method of anchoring or supporting any sign makes such sign
unsafe, the building inspector shall proceed in any manner he deems necessary to cause
the removal of the sign or the rebuilding of the sign to conform with the requirements of
this chapter, or to remedy the defects herein. All signs must meet the requirements of the
international building code and safety regulations of the city.
2. The city, its building inspector and its other agents shall not be liable for negligence or
failure of the owner, or the person responsible for maintaining any sign, to keep such sign
in good condition or be responsible for any damage caused by defective conditions.
3. Any person occupying a building or portion of a building, who owns or maintains a sign in
connection therewith shall, upon discontinuing the business advertised, cause the sign to
be removed. Any person who owns and maintains a sign which is maintained for the
benefit of another person who occupies a building or part of a building whereon the sign is
located shall cause the sign to be removed if the person for whom the sign is maintained
vacates the premises.
4. Failure of the owner of the sign or of the person responsible for maintaining same to
remove the sign within thirty (30) days after notice from the building inspector shall be
considered as a violation of this chapter and shall subject the owner of the sign and the
owner of the property to the penalties herein.
N. Obscene Messages: No sign shall be erected or maintained, or be permitted to remain publicly
displayed, which contains obscene material.
O. Pasting, Gluing And Materials: Signs shall be permanently attached onto any wall, parapet,
fascia, vehicle, pole, plant or structure.
P. Materials: Permanent signs may only be constructed of one or more of the following materials:
stucco, metal, at least one-fourth inch (¼") thick plastic; rock/stone, or wood that is at least threeeighths
of an inch (?") thick. No paper or cloth sign shall be allowed.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 247/279
Q. Refusal Of Owner To Remove Dangerous Signs; Removal By Building Inspector: Where
immediate action is deemed necessary to protect limb, life or property and where the owner of a
sign or the owner of the property on which the sign is erected fails to remove such sign pursuant
to notice from the building inspector within a specified time fixed in such notice, the building
inspector may proceed in any manner deemed necessary to cause the immediate removal of
such sign. The building inspector shall certify a statement of the expenses incurred in such
removal to the city treasurer, who in turn shall assess and charge the same against the real
estate upon which the sign was erected. If the assessment is not paid within ninety (90) days, the
city may then file suit to recover the cost, including attorney fees.
R. Sign Not To Cover Windows, Doors Or Similar Openings: No sign shall cover more than twenty
five percent (25%) of a window, doorway or other opening providing light, ventilation or exit
facilities.
S. Interior Signs Exempt: Interior signs which are not visible from outside the building in which they
are installed are exempt from the provisions of this chapter. Interior signs shall meet all the
provisions of the international building code and shall be safely installed. Interior signs shall be
placed in accordance with any instructions of the fire marshal or fire chief. No sign shall be
installed on any exit door.
T. Signs On Private Property: It shall be unlawful for any person to fasten, attach, paint or place any
"sign", as defined in this chapter, upon any private wall, window, door, gate or fence, or upon
other personal property, without the consent of the owner, lessee or someone authorized to act
on behalf of such owner or lessee.
U. Sign On Public Property: Except as authorized in CCNO 11-22-8D, it shall be unlawful for any
person to fasten, attach, paint or place any sign, handbill, poster, advertisement or notice of any
kind or sort, whether commercial or noncommercial, or to cause the same to be done in or upon
any public curb, lamp post, telephone pole, electric light, power pole, hydrant, bridge, tree,
easement, right of way, sidewalk, street, building or other property of the city. No sign shall be
erected or project over such public properties.
V. Sign Over Street Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to erect and/or maintain any sign over any street
or alley, except as herein expressly provided.
W. Signs, Zones Permitted, And Controls: It is unlawful for any person to erect or otherwise install a
sign having an area or height greater than allowed in this chapter. It is unlawful for any person to
erect or otherwise install a sign located on a site or in a zone in violation of the regulations
specified in the chapter.
X. Compliance With State Highway Sign Regulations: Before any sign permit is issued for signs on
a highway controlled or funded by the state or federal government, the applicant shall show proof
that the sign has been approved by the controlling agency. This proof must be submitted to the
city with the application for a sign permit. The city will not consider sign permit applications until
the proof of approval is submitted.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-05 on 4/9/2002
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
Amended by Ord. 2014-21 on 8/26/2014
11-22-5: COMPREHENSIVE SIGN PLAN
A. Purpose: A comprehensive sign plan for a proposed or existing development for multi-tenant
shopping centers may be approved by the planning director or his or her designee. The purpose
of a comprehensive sign plan is to provide for the establishment of criteria for signs that are
tailored to a specific development or location, and which may vary from specific provisions of this
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 248/279
chapter. The intent of this section is to provide for flexible sign criteria that promote superior
design through architectural integration of the site, buildings and signs. Examples of signs
permitted under this section are street name signs and directional signs.
B. Content Of Plan: A comprehensive sign plan shall include the location, size, height, type of
illumination, landscaping, time of placement and/or illumination, and orientation, of all proposed
signs for the development, either permanent or temporary.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 249/279
C. Parameters For Flexibility: Flexibility in sign regulations shall be in accordance with the following
parameters:
1. Subdivisions In Residential Zoning Districts:
a. Permanent subdivision signs may be permitted up to a maximum area of thirty
(30) square feet and a maximum height up to six feet (6').
b. At a minimum, such signs shall be located in a landscaped area of at least four (4)
square feet per each one square foot of sign area.
c. The number of signs permitted shall be at the discretion of the planning
commission, but in no case more than one sign per entrance of the subdivision.
d. The type of illumination shall be at the discretion of the planning commission, but
in no event shall the provisions of the comprehensive sign plan violate the terms
of CCNO 11-22-4L.
e. There shall be no flexibility in traffic control signage. All traffic control signs shall
be in compliance with the standards established in the manual of uniform traffic
control devices. This restriction shall apply to private streets as well as public
streets.
f. No flashing, moving or sound emitting signs shall be permitted.
2. Shopping Centers, Building Complexes, Subdivisions In Nonresidential Zoning Districts:
a. A permanent freestanding sign for a shopping center, building complex or
subdivision signs may be permitted up to a maximum area of sixty (60) square
feet and a maximum height up to twenty feet (20').
b. At a minimum, such signs shall be located in a landscaped area of at least four (4)
square feet per each one square foot of sign area.
c. The number of signs permitted shall be at the discretion of the planning
commission, but in no case more than two (2) signs per acre of the subdivision.
d. The type of illumination shall be at the discretion of the planning commission, but
in no event shall the provisions of the comprehensive sign plan violate the terms
of CCNO 11-22-4L.
e. There shall be no flexibility in traffic control signage. All traffic control signs shall
be in compliance with the standards established in the manual of uniform traffic
control devices. This restriction shall apply to private streets as well as public
streets.
f. In addition to the permitted business signs, one electronic message sign, whether
as a reader board, changeable copy area or electronic message center, in
conjunction with a regular shopping center sign, is permitted. No such device shall
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total sign copy area of the sign.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 250/279
3. Plan Exceeding Regulations: A comprehensive sign plan containing elements which
exceed the permitted height, area and number of signs specified in this ordinance, may
be approved by the planning commission only upon finding that:
a. The development site contains either: 1) unique or distinctive characteristics, in
terms of physical scale, topography, land use, architectural design or historical
significance; or 2) the development contains distinguishing features that represent
a clear variation from conventional development, such as a shopping center,
building complex, a planned residential unit development or a condominium.
b. The proposed signs incorporate special design features such as logos, emblems,
murals or statuaries that are integrated with the site and building architecture.
c. The proposed overall development must be at least forty (40) acres if it is a
residential development and at least ten (10) acres if it is a nonresidential
development. If the overall development is a mixture of residential and
nonresidential development, the overall development must be at least forty (40)
acres.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-05 on 4/9/2002
Amended by Ord. 2005-10 on 10/4/2005
Amended by Ord. 2017-29 on 12/19/2017
11-22-6: SIGNS FOR RESIDENTIAL USES
A. One- And Two-Family Dwellings:
1. Permanent Noncommercial Signs: One noncommercial sign, not exceeding one square
foot in area, except for political and ideological signs, which shall be governed by CCNO
11-22-12.
2. Temporary Signs: Temporary signs in accordance with CCNO 11-22-8.
3. Permanent Commercial Signs: Residential uses shall not be permitted to have permanent
commercial signs.
B. Multi-Family Dwellings:
1. Temporary Signs: Temporary signs in accordance with CCNO 11-22-8.
2. Apartments And Condominium Complexes: Signs for apartments and condominium
complexes and similar uses in the multi-family districts as follows:
a. A freestanding sign, not exceeding fifteen (15) square feet in area. Such sign shall
not exceed five feet (5') in width or three feet (3') in height. Such sign must be
located at least five feet (5') from any property line; or
b. A wall mounted sign, not exceeding twelve (12) square feet in area. Height of such
sign shall not exceed ten feet (10').
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 251/279
C. Subdivision Signs: Permanent subdivision signs for recorded subdivisions, ten (10) or more
acres in size, in accordance with the following parameters:
1. Maximum area of each such sign shall be twenty four (24) square feet with a maximum
height of five feet (5').
2. Such signs to be monument type; i.e., individually mounted letters on a freestanding wall.
3. Such signs shall be located in a landscaped area of at least four (4) square feet per each
one square foot of sign area.
4. There may be one sign for a single development project of at least ten (10) acres, but less
than fifty (50) acres in size. For purposes of this subsection, a development or project
shall be deemed to be a single development project, even though it is developed in
multiple subdivisions or phases, if:
a. The entire project is designed for development by a single developer; and
b. The entire project is developed under the same name.
5. There may be two (2) signs for a single development project of at least fifty (50) acres in
size. For purposes of this subsection, a development or project shall be deemed to be a
single development project, even though it is developed in multiple subdivisions or
phases, if:
a. The entire project shall be designed for development by a single developer; and
b. The entire project is developed under the same name.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-05 on 4/9/2002
11-22-7: SIGNS PERMITTED FOR NONRESIDENTIAL USES IN SPECIFIC DISTRICTS
A. HP-3, HP-2, HP-1, RE-20, R-1-12.5, R-1-10, R-1-8, R-1-8(A), R-1-8(AG), R-2, R-3, R-4, and
RCC Zoning Districts:
1. All signs permitted in CCNO 11-22-6A of this chapter.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 252/279
2. Signs with a total maximum sign area not exceeding twenty four (24) square feet. Such
signs may be wall mounted with a maximum height of ten feet (10') and/or such signs
may be freestanding according to the following:
a. One freestanding sign shall be permitted with a maximum height of five feet (5').
b. A landscaped area shall be provided, on site at the street frontage at the base of
the freestanding sign, with said landscaped area to have a minimum area of four
(4) square feet for each one square foot of sign area.
c. Electronic message display signs shall be allowed only by building permit, except
as provided for in subsection (1).
a. i. For schools, K-12, a marquee sign which includes an electronic message
display sign or a message board shall be a permitted use. The sign shall
have a single pole, which shall be required to have either a painted metal
pole cover, or cladding according to the same sign design standards for
cladding as listed in CCNO 11-22-7(C)(1)(b)(9)(C). The sign shall have a
maximum height of fifteen feet (15’) and the minimum height required for
the lowest part of the sign shall be eight feet (8’) above the ground
immediately below the sign. The maximum total sign area allowed is thirtytwo
(32) square feet, and shall include the area of the electronic message
display sign or message board, and any other type of sign area which is
part of the marquee sign, not including the pole. The electronic message
display sign or message board shall not comprise more than 66% of the
total sign area of the marquee sign. The required setback for marquee
signs is ten feet (10’) and shall be measured from the edge of the sign
structure.
ii. Sign area for electronic message display signs shall be calculated by the
same standards as illuminated signs in CCNO 11-22-3(A)(3), with any
portion of the electronic message display sign which is able to emit light
considered as the illuminated surface. The number of sign faces
contributing to total sign area shall be determined by the same standard as
used in CCNO 11-22-3(A)(4) for other signs.
3. In addition to the twenty four (24) square feet of signs permitted in subsection A2 of this
section, each tenant may be allowed three (3) square feet of nonilluminated sign area,
located on the wall adjacent to the entry of the tenant's business.
4. In addition to the above, a sign with a maximum area of six (6) square feet and a
maximum height of six feet (6') may be permitted behind the required front yard setback.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 253/279
B. CP-1 And C-1 Zoning Districts:
1. Signs shall be in accordance with the following regulations:
a. Excluding the area allowed for a freestanding sign, the total aggregate area of all
commercial signs pertaining to one or more businesses in any single building or
suite shall not exceed forty percent (40%), excluding the windows and doors, of
the front wall plane of the building or suite or two hundred (200) square feet,
whichever is less, unless the portion of the building or suite adjacent to its lot's
street-property line measures more than two hundred (200) linear feet. In that
case, the aggregate area of all such signs on the premises may be increased in
area to the rate of one square foot of sign area for each linear foot of building or
suite frontage in excess of two hundred (200) linear feet. If two (2) or more
businesses occupy a single building or suite, each business shall be entitled to an
equal proportional share of the total aggregate sign area and no business shall be
entitled to use more than its proportionate share of the aggregate signs because
another business is not using all of its proportionate share. For buildings or suites
on a corner lot, only the frontage on the building which contains the main entrance
shall be measured to compute the aggregate sign area.
b. Freestanding commercial signs shall not be counted as a portion of the total
aggregate sign area of the premises and shall be restricted to the following:
i. One freestanding commercial sign for each street upon which the lot has
frontage.
ii. Such signs shall have a maximum area of sixteen (16) square feet.
iii. Such signs shall have a maximum height of five feet (5').
iv. Such signs shall not be closer than thirty feet (30') to any residential
district.
v. A landscaped area shall be provided, on site at the street frontage at the
base of the freestanding sign, with said landscaped area to have a
minimum area of four (4) square feet for each square foot of sign area.
vi. The minimum setback from the street property lines shall be ten feet (10').
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 254/279
2. Noncommercial signs shall be in accordance with the following regulations:
a. The total aggregate area of all noncommercial signs pertaining to one or more
businesses in any single building or suite shall not exceed ten (10) square feet,
unless the portion of the building or suite adjacent to its lot's street-property line
measures more than thirty six (36) linear feet. In that case, the aggregate area of
all such signs on the premises may be increased in area to the rate of one square
foot of sign area for each linear foot of building or suite frontage in excess of thirty
six (36) linear feet, provided the total aggregate area for businesses housed in a
single building or suite shall not exceed forty (40) square feet. If two (2) or more
businesses occupy a single building or suite, each business shall be entitled to an
equal proportional share of the total aggregate sign area and no business shall be
entitled to use more than its proportionate share of the aggregate signs because
another business is not using all of its proportionate share. For buildings or suites
on a corner lot, only the frontage on the building or suite which contains the main
entrance shall be measured to compute the aggregate sign area.
b. Freestanding noncommercial signs shall be counted as a portion of the total
noncommercial aggregate sign area of the premises and shall be restricted to the
following:
i. One freestanding noncommercial sign for each public street access.
ii. Such signs shall have a maximum sign copy area of four (4) square feet.
iii. Such signs shall have a maximum height of the entire sign structure of
three feet (3').
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 255/279
C. CP-2, C-2 And MP-1 Zoning Districts:
1. Commercial Signs: Commercial signs shall be in accordance with the following
regulations:
a. Total Area Of Commercial Signs: The total aggregate area of all commercial signs
pertaining to one or more businesses in any single building or suite shall not
exceed forty percent (40%) of the front wall plane of the building or suite or two
hundred (200) square feet, whichever is less, unless the portion of the building or
suite adjacent to its lot's street-property line measures more than two hundred
(200) linear feet. In that case, the aggregate area of all such signs on the
premises may be increased in area to the rate of one square foot of sign area for
each linear foot of building or suite frontage in excess of two hundred (200) linear
feet. If two (2) or up to five (5) businesses occupy a single building or suite, each
business shall be entitled to an equal proportional share of the total aggregate
sign area and no business shall be entitled to use more than its proportionate
share of the aggregate signs because another business is not using all of its
proportionate share.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 256/279
b. Freestanding Commercial Signs: Freestanding commercial signs shall not be
counted as a portion of the total aggregate sign area of the premises and shall be
restricted to the following:
i. Number Of Signs Permitted: One freestanding commercial sign for each
street upon which the lot has frontage.
ii. Maximum Unchangeable Area: Such signs shall have a maximum
unchangeable area of seventy five (75) square feet.
iii. Proximity To Residential District: Such signs shall not be closer than thirty
feet (30') to any residential district.
iv. Minimum Setback: The minimum setback shall be ten feet (10') from
behind the curb, but not in the street right of way.
v. Additional Area Allowed For Changeable Copy: In addition to the seventy
five (75) square feet permitted for business signs, thirty (30) square feet
will be allowed for a changeable copy area incorporated with the regular
sign. No such device shall exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total sign copy
area of the sign.
vi. Sign Plan Required: A comprehensive sign plan shall be submitted to the
Planning Department for approval in accordance to CCNO 11-22-5 of this
chapter.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 257/279
vii. Permitted Signs:
(1) Monument Sign:
(A) Monument sign is a freestanding sign whose sign face
extends to the ground or to a base.
(B) Monument signs shall have a maximum height of ten feet
(10').
(C) A monument base shall be no less than one-half (½) the
width of the widest portion of the sign. The monument base
shall not be greater than one and one-half (1½) times the
width of the portion of the sign containing verbiage.
(2) Low Profile Sign:
(A) Low profile sign is a sign having a maximum height of ten
feet (10'), incorporated into some form of landscape design
scheme or planter box with an open area from the ground to
the bottom edge of the sign with dual support. Pole supports
shall be cladded as described in the design standards
section.
(B) Low profile signs shall not exceed ten feet (10') in height.
(3) Monolith Sign:
(A) Monolith sign has a support or covered pole support which
is the same width as the sign cabinet extending from the
sign cabinet to the ground.
(B) The monolith sign shall have a maximum height of twenty
feet (20') and a maximum width of six feet (6').
(4) Pole Sign:
(A) Pole sign shall have a double pole support cladded in the
manner provided in the sign design standards.
(B) A pole sign shall have a maximum height of twenty feet
(20').
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 258/279
viii. Sign Design Standards: The following design standards are mandatory:
(1) Sign Cabinets: Sign cabinets shall be integrated into a uniform sign,
rather than added to a pole in an ad hoc manner. The modification
or addition of a sign cabinet to an existing pole sign with two (2) or
more independent sign cabinets shall be subject to review and
approval by the planning commission.
(2) Wood Signs: Wood signs are not permitted for permanent signs,
unless approved by the planning commission.
(3) Cladding: All poles supporting signs shall be cladded as a means to
improve the appearance of the sign by:
(A) Proportionately increasing that portion of the structure that
anchors the sign to the ground, and
(B) Providing a material on the support structure that
complements the building architecture.
Cladding shall primarily be wood, stucco, brick, or rock,
duplicating materials which are used on the main building.
Manmade products may be used if the material replicates
the appearance of a natural material.
Cladding is not required, if in the opinion of the planning
commission, the sign contains unique elements that result in
a creative flair or defines a product or service with unique
design, and the cladding would detract from the creativity of
the design.
(4) Landscaping: Landscaping shall be provided at the base of the sign
at a ratio of four (4) square feet for every one foot (1') of sign width,
with fifty percent (50%) of the landscaped area containing live
decorative plant material. Where a hardship can be demonstrated,
the planning commission may modify or waive this requirement.
(5) Theme And Plan: Where feasible, signs shall be incorporated into a
landscape theme and be part of an overall design plan for the
property. Aesthetic appeal is a high priority.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 259/279
c. Freestanding Sign For Shopping Center Or Multi-Tenant Complex On Site Of Less
Than Ten Acres:
i. Maximum Size Of Total Sign Copy Area:
(1) Twenty six (26) square feet of sign copy area for the first two (2)
potential tenants in the shopping center or multi-tenant complex.
(2) Thirteen (13) additional square feet for each additional potential
tenant over the first two (2) potential tenants in the shopping center
or multi-tenant complex, up to one hundred four (104) square feet
of total sign copy area.
ii. Maximum Copy Area Utilization:
(1) Specified: The maximum copy area that can be utilized at any time
is limited to a maximum of thirteen (13) square feet per actual
tenant operating in the shopping center or multi-tenant complex.
The allocation of copy space to tenants and the content of the
utilized copy area are at the discretion of the shopping center
management or management of the multi-tenant complex. The
unused copy areas provided for future use, as future tenants locate
in the center, shall remain without copy.
(2) Ancillary Uses Or Functions: The ancillary uses or functions in a
tenant space do not qualify the tenant for additional copy area
utilization.
(3) Reduction In Number Of Tenants: When there is a reduction in the
number of tenants, the utilized copy area must be reduced to the
maximum allowable copy utilization area as determined by the
number remaining tenants in the center. Copy area reduction shall
take place within ten (10) days of a tenant ceasing operation.
iii. Maximum Height Of Total Sign Structure: Twenty feet (20').
iv. Maximum Width Of Copy Area: Eight feet (8').
v. Vertical Clearance: There shall be at least four feet (4') of vertical clear
space (excluding the sign poles) measured from the top of the required
three foot (3') high landscaped berm and the bottom of the sign copy area.
Except for the support poles, no sign structure is permitted in the bottom
seven feet (7') of the sign area.
vi. Minimum Landscaping: Four square feet for every square foot of total sign
area shall surround the sign structure on the shopping center property.
Landscaping in the right of way cannot be attributed to the landscape area
calculations to fulfill this requirement.
vii. Location: The entire sign structure, including overhangs, shall be entirely
on the shopping center property. No portion of the sign shall be in the
public right of way. The sign shall be at least twenty feet (20') from the
interior side property line and at least fifty feet (50') from the street side
property line.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 260/279
viii. Number Below Minimum; Removal: If the number of actual tenants and
potential tenant spaces in the shopping center or multi-tenant building
complex falls below the minimum number of tenant spaces to qualify for a
shopping center or multi-tenant building, the sign authorized in this section
must be removed.
ix. In addition to the permitted business signs, one electronic message sign,
whether as a reader board, changeable copy area or electronic message
center, in conjunction with a regular sign, is permitted. No such device
shall exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total sign copy area of the sign.
d. Freestanding Signs For Shopping Center Or Multi-Tenant Complex On Site Of
More Than Nine Acres:
MAXIMUM SIZE OF TOTAL SIGN COPY AREA
Maximum copy area 200 square feet
Tenant sign area to be determined by shopping center or multi-tenant
management. However, no tenant to exceed 25 square feet of sign area on
shopping center sign.
1 reader board per sign, not to exceed 32 square feet.
Maximum height of entire 26 feet
sign structure
Maximum copy area width 12 feet
Signs per street frontage 1
Minimum landscaping 4 square feet for each square foot of sign copy area. The
landscaped area shall surround the base of the proposed sign on the shopping
center or multi-tenant property. Landscaping in the street right of way cannot be
used to calculate required landscaping area.
Minimum setbacks 26 feet from an interior side yard and 50 feet from an
intersection of 2 streets (corner). The sign shall be entirely on the commercial
site's property and not overhang onto any public right of way.
10 feet from front yard property line or side line abutting a public street for any part
of the sign structure, which touches the surface of the ground.
Clear area4 feet from top of a 3 foot high berm.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 261/279
2. Noncommercial Signs: Noncommercial signs shall be in accordance with the following
regulations:
a. The total aggregate area of all noncommercial signs pertaining to one or more
businesses in any single building shall not exceed ten (10) square feet, unless the
portion of the building or suite adjacent to its lot's street-property line measures
more than forty (40) lineal feet. In that case, the aggregate area of all such signs
on the premises may be increased in area to the rate of one square foot of sign
area for each lineal foot of building frontage in excess of forty (40) lineal feet,
provided the total aggregate area for businesses housed in single building or suite
shall not exceed (40) square feet. If two (2) or more businesses occupy a single
building, each business shall be entitled to an equal proportional share of the total
aggregate sign area and no business shall be entitled to use more than its
proportionate share of the aggregate signs because another business is not using
all of its proportionate share. For buildings on a corner lot, only the frontage on the
building which contains the main entrance shall be measured to compute the
aggregate sign area.
b. Freestanding Noncommercial Signs: Freestanding noncommercial signs shall be
counted as a portion of the total noncommercial aggregate sign area of the
premises and shall be restricted to the following:
i. One freestanding noncommercial sign for each public street access.
ii. Such signs shall have a maximum sign copy area of four (4) square feet.
iii. Such signs shall have a maximum height of the entire sign structure of
three feet (3').
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 262/279
c. Drive-Through and Drive-in Restaurant Menu Signs:
i. In addition to the signs allowed in subsections C1 and C2 of this section,
drive-through and drive-in restaurants may have two (2) freestanding menu
board signs located at least thirty feet (30') from the front and street side
property line which conform to the following standards:
(1) Number of signs:
(A) Menu Signs: Each commercial site shall be allowed a
maximum of two (2) menu signs. If two (2) ordering lanes
are used, one (1) per lane is allowed. Two (2) menu signs
may be used in the same lane, if only one (1) ordering lane
is used.
(B) Pre-sale Signs: One (1) additional sign, with a maximum
square footage of twelve (12) square feet, that is used to
illustrate, describe, and promote selected product offerings
to customers on site, known as a pre-sale sign, shall be
allowed.
(2) Height: Seven and one-half feet (7.5’) is the maximum permitted
height for menu signs. The maximum permitted height for pre-sale
signs is six feet (6’).
(3) Area: Forty five (45) square feet is the maximum permitted area per
sign.
(4) Awnings and Accessory Items: Awnings are allowed, but must be
approved as part of a building permit. The colors used for the
awning must be consistent with the color scheme used on the
building. Up to one (1) separate microphone stand is allowed per
menu board sign.
(5) Location: In addition to the above-listed thirty foot (30’) distance
requirement from a public right-of-way, menu signs, pre-sale signs,
and accessory items must be fifty feet (50’) from a residential zone.
Distance requirements shall apply to all accessory items related to
menu signs, in addition to the menu signs themselves.
(6) If located on the side of the building facing a public right-of-way,
menu signs shall not be located between the access lane used for
ordering and the public right-of-way; the sign must be between the
access lane used for ordering and the building, or elsewhere.
(7) Orientation: Signs shall be oriented a minimum of 30 degrees away
from parallel to Washington Boulevard when located between a
building and Washington Boulevard, or closer to the public right-ofway
than the building face closest to Washington Boulevard.
(8) Digital menu signs are permitted.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 263/279
ii. Each parking stall covered with a canopy may have one freestanding sign
located to the side of the parking stall if the sign conforms to the following
standards:
(1) Each sign area shall not exceed fifteen (15) square feet.
(2) Maximum height shall not exceed five feet (5') in height as
measured from the parking lot pavement surface directly below the
sign.
(3) Maximum width shall not exceed three feet (3').
(4) Such signs shall be located on the side of the parking stall, but no
closer than three feet (3') from the end of the parking stall.
(5) No restaurant shall have more than fifty (50) of the above described
freestanding signs located to the side of parking stalls on the site.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-05 on 4/9/2002
Amended by Ord. 2003-19 on 9/23/2003
Amended by Ord. 2004-08 on 8/3/2004
Amended by Ord. 2005-10 on 10/4/2005
Amended by Ord. 2011-10 on 5/10/2011
Amended by Ord. 2017-29 on 12/19/2017
Amended by Ord. 2019-05 on 3/26/2019
11-22-8: TEMPORARY SIGNS
Temporary signs. Temporary signs shall be permitted in accordance with standards set forth below,
unless specified otherwise in this ordinance:
A. Setback standards for temporary signs.
1. Temporary signs must be located completely on private property, except as otherwise
exempted in the community sign provisions.
2. Signs must be placed behind the sidewalk, including those with grass strips between the
street and the sidewalk, except as provided elsewhere in this section.
3. On streets with no sidewalks and where it is not clear where the property line is located,
signs must be placed ten feet behind the curb or pavement and not hang into the street;
and
4. At intersections, they must be placed to not obstruct free and clear vision CCNO 11-22-4
K and shall not constitute a traffic hazard within the site distance triangle and provide a
clear view of intersecting streets CCNO 11-22-4 L.
B. Temporary signs. Temporary signs in this section shall in no way regulate the content of speech,
only the place and manner in which it is permitted.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 264/279
C. Additional standards.
1. Off premise temporary signs are not allowed.
2. Temporary signs that are permitted that are placed on private property must have the
permission of the property owner CCNO 11-22-4-T.
3. Except as otherwise permitted in this title, no such sign or portion of the sign may be
located in or project into a public right of way or an adjoining property CCNO 11-22-4-V.
D. Political and Campaign Signs
E. Sale, Lease Or Rent Signs: Signs advertising the sale, leasing or renting of a building, dwelling,
suite, property or other forms of real estate shall conform to the following regulations and are
exempted from the total aggregate sign area:
1. Nonresidential zoning districts: The signs shall be nonilluminated and shall not exceed
sixteen (16) square feet in aggregate area and eight feet (8') in height.
2. Residential zoning districts: Nonilluminated and not exceeding four and one-half (41/2)
square feet in total aggregate area and five feet (5') in maximum height.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 265/279
F. Future Development Signs: Signs announcing the proposed development of property in
nonresidential zoning districts only prior to issuance of a building permit for the purpose of
displaying the name of the project, contractors, architect and any additional information
pertaining to the site on which the signs are located are allowed in accordance with the following:
1. Sign Area: The cumulative maximum sign area for the entire site or project shall not
exceed sixty four (64) square feet.
2. Illumination: Such signs shall not be illuminated.
3. Double Faced: Such signs may be double faced. If the interior angle between the two (2)
sign faces is forty five degrees (45°) or less, the sign area is the area of the larger of the
two (2) sign faces. If the angle exceeds forty five degrees (45°), the sign area is the sum
of the areas of the two (2) faces.
4. Freestanding Sign: One freestanding sign is permitted for each street on which the
development has frontage.
5. Maximum Height: Maximum height shall not exceed eight feet (8') for all such signs.
6. Term Permitted: Such signs may be installed and maintained for a period not to exceed
twelve (12) months. If a building or construction permit is not obtained at the end of the
twelve (12) months, such signs must be removed. If a building or construction permit is
issued within twelve (12) months of the placement of the signs, the sign may remain
during construction, but must be removed upon issuance of the first certificate of
occupancy.
7. Permit Required: A sign permit must be obtained before a future development sign is
located on the site.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 266/279
G. Banners, Pennants And Displays For Promotional Or Special Events:
1. Freestanding banners, vertical banners, pennants and other displays shall be allowed in
nonresidential zones for a maximum of three (3) weeks at a time or less; whatever the
time period, the banners, pennants and other displays must be removed for the same
period of time (days) that they were put out. If the display was up for two (2) weeks, it
must be removed for the same period of time. Any use of banners, pennants or other
displays may only be for a total period of twelve (12) weeks in any calendar year. Signs,
banners, pennants and displays shall be limited to:
a. One four foot by eight foot (4' x 8') banner for each street on which the business
has frontage.
b. Banners, pennants and displays for a promotional event shall be located on the
business premises only.
c. Balloons shall be tethered so as not to exceed thirty five feet (35') and shall not
occupy any required parking space.
d. Balloons and signs shall not be designed to depict any product not legally
available to all residents of the city.
e. During the promotional event, the total sign area, including permanent signs, shall
not exceed two hundred percent (200%) of the permitted sign area.
f. Maximum height for vertical banners is twenty feet (20') and no more than two (2)
vertical banners per commercial lot are permitted.
2. Freestanding banners, pennants and other displays shall be allowed in residential zones
for a maximum of one week at a time or less; whatever the time period, the banners,
pennants and other displays must be removed for the same period of time (days) that
they were put out. If the display was up for one week, it must be removed for the same
period of time. Any use of banners, pennants or other displays may only be for a total
period of two (2) weeks in any calendar year. Signs, banners, pennants and displays in
residential zones shall be limited to:
a. One two foot by six foot (2' x 6') banner and one freestanding sign not exceeding
four and one-half (41/2) square feet in total copy area nor five feet (5') in height.
b. Banners and signs advertising an event shall be located on the residential
premises only.
H. Construction Site Signs: A sign may be placed on a construction site within the following
parameters:
1. Number: There shall be only one sign per lot.
2. Size: Such a sign shall not exceed eight (8) square feet.
3. Height: A construction site sign shall not exceed five feet (5') in height.
4. Location: Such a sign must be located on the construction site.
5. Illumination: A contractor sign shall not be illuminated.
6. Time: A contractor sign may be placed only during the period of time when a building
permit is valid and must be removed no later than the final inspection.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 267/279
I. Community Signs: Community signs are permitted in all zones with a permit issued by the
community development department. A community sign plan and visual representations of all
types of signs and their proposed locations shall be submitted to the community development
department. These submittals shall be reviewed by the community development staff for
compliance with these requirements. Additional review, if necessary, may include, but not be
limited to, the city engineer, police department and public works. In some cases, the community
development staff may refer the proposal to the planning commission when issues arise with the
proposed plans of the sign design or placement.
1. No sign shall be permitted which is unsafe for vehicular or pedestrian traffic, is
inappropriate with respect to location, size, or is in a deteriorated condition. Such sign:
a. Shall be made of durable, weather resistant material.
b. Shall use logos or symbols instead of copy, especially where copy would cause
distraction to vehicular traffic.
c. Shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet.
d. Shall not exceed six feet (6') in height.
2. Any such sign may not be attached to another temporary sign or permanent traffic or
business sign.
3. Any such sign for any single purpose or event shall not be displayed for more than twenty
one (21) days prior to the event and two (2) days after the event.
4. Commercial logos, limited to sponsors of the event, may appear on signage for
community events.
J. A-Frame Signs: A portable commercial sign used on a daily basis during the time when the
business is open to advertise daily special food plates in the case of restaurants, cafes or
cafeterias as well as daily merchandise on sale at other businesses. An A-frame sign may be no
larger than twelve (12) square feet in area for each visible side and stand no taller than five feet
(5'). The sign must be movable by hand and have no electrical or battery operated lights. It may
be placed anywhere on the business site at ground level and not in the public right of way. The
placement shall not interfere with the visual needs of vehicular or pedestrian traffic. It shall be
immediately moved when requested to do so by the North Ogden City police department or code
enforcement staff. The sign must be made of durable, weather resistant materials and have an
anchor system to the ground to resist wind pressure. The sign shall be kept in good condition
and shall be removed, repaired or replaced at the request of the North Ogden code enforcement
staff.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2012-6 on 2/28/2012
Amended by Ord. 2012-18 on 8/28/2012
Amended by Ord. 2015-08 on 5/12/2015
11-22-9: FLAGS AND FLAGPOLES
A. Height: No flagpole may be higher than the maximum building height limitation permitted in the
zoning district where the flagpole is located.
B. Location: No flagpole shall be located closer to a property line than its reclining length.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 268/279
C. Exceptions: Except as otherwise provided in CCNO 11-22-11F, a maximum of one
nongovernmental flag is permitted per property under following parameters:
1. Any flag flown in conjunction with the U.S. and/or state of Utah flag must be flown
beneath them and must not exceed them in size.
2. The maximum size of any nongovernmental flag shall not exceed fifteen (15) square feet.
No one dimension to exceed six feet (6') in any direction.
3. Governmental flags and model home flags which comply with the provisions of CCNO 11-
22-11F shall not be considered signs and will not be included in the calculation of total
aggregate sign area. All other signs shall be included in the calculation of total aggregate
sign area.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-05 on 4/9/2002
11-22-10: ON SITE SUBDIVISION ADVERTISING SIGNS
A. Permit: A building permit is required to place signs advertising a subdivision in a residential zone.
B. Size: No sign shall exceed thirty two (32) square feet in size.
C. Height: No sign shall exceed five feet (5') in height.
D. Time Limit: The length of time on site subdivision advertising signs may be permitted may be determined
by the planning commission. If no time limit is established, all such signs shall be removed upon the
completion of the initial sale of a house or lot of the subject subdivision.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-05 on 4/9/2002
Amended by Ord. 2017-29 on 12/19/2017
11-22-11: MODEL HOME ADVERTISING SIGNS
Through the land use permit process required for model homes, the following parameters for signs must
be followed:
A. Number: One sign per model home.
B. Size: No sign shall exceed twenty four (24) square feet.
C. Height: No sign shall exceed five feet (5') in height.
D. Illumination: Model home signs shall not be illuminated.
E. Model Home Flags: A model home may use flags in addition to the United States Of America flag
and the state of Utah flag, in the following manner:
1. Number: No more than two (2) flags on the lot of the first model home and one flag on
each additional lot with a model home located upon it, up to a total of four (4) lots of
model homes and five (5) flags.
2. Size: Model home flags shall not exceed eight (8) square feet in size.
3. Height: Flagpoles shall not exceed twenty five feet (25') in height.
4. Illumination: Model home flags shall not be illuminated.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 269/279
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-05 on 4/9/2002
Amended by Ord. 2017-29 on 12/19/2017
11-22-12: DELETED
Deleted
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-05 on 4/9/2002
Amended by Ord. 2015-08 on 5/12/2015
11-22-13: SIGN PERMITS; FEES
A. Permit Required; Exception: Sign permits, issued by the building department, are required for
placement of all signs, except those signs authorized in CCNO 11-22-6A1 and CCNO 11-22-8,
and windows signs. The fee for sign permits shall be established by resolution of the city council.
B. Unlawful Without Permit; Appeal: It shall be unlawful to erect, install and/or modify any sign that
requires a sign permit within the city without first applying for and obtaining a sign permit.
"Modify", as it is used herein, shall mean any change in or to an existing sign, its face, electrical
components, design and/or supporting structures. Appeals of any decision by the building
department concerning sign permits shall be directed to the administrative law judge or city
council.
C. Electrical Work Not Included: A sign permit does not include electrical work; however, this
exemption shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in violation of the
provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2011-11 on 5/24/2011
Amended by Ord. 2015-08 on 5/12/2015
11-22-14: PENALTY
Any person who shall fail to comply with, or shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, shall be
deemed guilty of a class B misdemeanor. The penalty provided herein shall be an addition to any
suspension or revocation of any license or permit issued hereunder.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2002-05 on 4/9/2002
11-23: VESTED RIGHTS
11-23-1: LAND USE APPLICATION
11-23-2: LAND USE PERMIT
11-23-3: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
11-23-4: CITY COMPLIANCE
11-23-1: LAND USE APPLICATION
A. An applicant is entitled to approval of a land use application if the application conforms to the
requirements of the city's zoning map and applicable land use ordinance in effect when a
complete application is submitted and all fees have been paid, unless:
1. The governing body, on the record, finds that a compelling, countervailing public interest
would be jeopardized by approving the application, or
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 270/279
2. In the manner provided by local ordinance and before the application is submitted the
municipality has formally initiated proceedings to amend its ordinances in a manner that
would prohibit approval of the application as submitted.
B. The city shall process an application without regard to proceedings initiated to amend the
municipality's ordinances if:
1. One hundred eighty (180) days have passed since the proceedings were initiated; and
2. The proceedings have not resulted in an enactment that prohibits the approval of the
application as submitted.
C. An application for a land use approval is considered submitted and complete when the
application is provided in a form that complies with the requirements of applicable ordinances
and all applicable fees have been paid.
D. The continuing validity of an approval of a land use application is conditioned upon the applicant
proceeding after approval to implement the approval with reasonable diligence.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2006-08 on 9/5/2006
11-23-2: LAND USE PERMIT
The city shall not impose on a holder of an issued land use permit a requirement that is not expressed:
A. In the land use permit or in documents on which the land use permit is based; or
B. In the city's ordinances.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2006-08 on 9/5/2006
11-23-3: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
The city will not withhold issuance of a certificate of occupancy because of an applicant's failure to
comply with a requirement that is not expressed:
A. In the building permit or in documents on which the building permit is based; or
B. In the city's ordinances.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2006-08 on 9/5/2006
11-23-4: CITY COMPLIANCE
The city is bound by the terms and standards of applicable land use ordinances and shall comply with
mandatory provisions of those ordinances.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2006-08 on 9/5/2006
11-24: GRADING AND DRAINAGE STANDARDS
A. PURPOSE AND INTENT
The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum standards for grading and drainage to
protect the health, safety, and welfare of citizens and property owners. Hillside views are an
important feature that is protected by this ordinance.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 271/279
B. APPLICABILITY
These standards shall apply to all zones within North Ogden City.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 272/279
C. Procedural Regulations:
The following table identifies the excavation and grading types, approval requirements, and the
approving authority for excavation and grading activities.
EXCAVATION AND
GRADING
Excavation and Grading
Types Approval Requirements Approving Authority
SWPPP State Permit Required1 PW Inspector
Right of Way
City Right of Way Permit
Required2 PW Inspector
Parcel Design Plans Required3 City Engineer
Subdivision Design Plans Required3 City Engineer
Building Permit for Parcel or
Subdivision Lot Grading Plan Required4 Building Official
Brush Removal
Brush Removal Permit
Required5
City Engineer or Building
Official
Consistent with the provisions of this chapter, the following standards apply to making application
for grading and excavation.
1. SWPPP Permits. SWPPP permits are subject to the North Ogden City Public Works and
State of Utah Standards. Approved SWPPP plans are required at the time of
preconstruction meeting.
2. Right of Way Permits. Right of Way permits are required to include any excavation within
the public right of way or public easements.
3. Parcel and Subdivisions are required to provide a rough grading plan at the time of
application; to be reviewed by the City Engineer. A revegetation plan is required as part of
preliminary plan review. The rough grading plan and revegetation plan shall be
referenced on the final plat Mylar.
4. Building Permits. A fine grading plan is required at the time of building permit application.
The final grading plan must be consistent with the approved subdivision rough grading
plan and revegetation plan and city drainage standards. (See Subsection B Applicability)
The City Engineer shall have the authority to waive any of these requirements as he / she
sees fit for any lot which was in existence prior to June 1, 2018 and which does not have
a rough grading plan already approved by the City. Any provision may be applied to any
lot in the City if the City Engineer determines there is a health and safety issue which
requires compliance.
5. Brush Removal Permit. A rough grading plan that includes the size of the area to be
impacted, the depth of excavation, and the extent of landscape grubbing shall be included
with the brush removal permit. (Limited to disturbed areas in excess of 10,000 square
feet.)
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 273/279
6. Plan of Development: Prior to the issuance of a zoning clearance, a plan of development
or rough grading plan shall be submitted to and approved by the city engineer. Prior to
development plan approval, the city engineer may require that reasonable additional
requirements as to grading, cut and fill, slope restoration, signs, vehicular ingress and
egress, parking, lighting, setbacks of buildings, etc., to the extent that the noted purpose
and objectives of this chapter are maintained and ensured.
7. Application Requirements: In addition to the otherwise noted procedural and information
requirements of this provision, all applications for a zoning clearance, subdivision
approval, or rough grading plan approval shall contain the following materials and
information:
a. Site plan, prepared and stamped by a Utah registered land surveyor or engineer
with the following information:
i. A topographic survey at least ten feet (10') beyond the exterior property
line of the site.
ii. Contour intervals not exceeding two feet (2') within twenty feet (20') of any
proposed improvement and five foot (5') intervals for the remainder of the
lot or parcel.
iii. Scale of the site plan shall be not less than one inch equals twenty feet (1"
= 20'). For large scale projects, the planning director may allow a different
scale.
iv. If structures are proposed, show cross sections through site and building at
twenty five foot (25') intervals perpendicular to slope, giving percentage of
slope at each, and showing exact heights of structures at each existing
contour.
v. If structures are proposed, each floor level shall be shown with different
shading with a legend giving grade or elevation of each level.
vi. If a garage is proposed, give proposed elevation or grade at garage floor
and at existing street level at drive entry. Give percentage of total average
slope, and percent and length of single steepest portion of driveway.
vii. List the individual square footage of buildings, garages, patios, footprint,
disturbance area, buildable areas and, if applicable, pool.
viii. Include all disturbed (or graded) areas and show the proposed method of
final treatment. Indicate all retaining walls, showing the actual and
allowable heights.
ix. Show how drainage is altered, and if so, how it is redirected to original
channel and show that the requirements regarding storm water runoff and
drainage have been met.
x. Show location of all proposed utility lines. (11) Give legal description,
property dimensions and heading, along with the name, address, and
telephone number of applicant.
b. Elevations, to be submitted if structures are proposed.
i. Show all exterior elevations, giving accurate existing and proposed grades
lines. (Scale 1/4" = 1') Show total height of buildings and give height and
total length of all retaining walls.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 274/279
D. EXCAVATION AND GRADING
1. Parcel Excavation and Grading. Plan Required: Natural vegetation (oak brush, shrubs
and small trees) located outside the boundaries of a subdivision, shall be removed only
when necessary for authorized construction, driveways, sidewalks, landscaping and like
residential purposes. No person shall excavate or grade any site located within or outside
the boundaries of a subdivision until and unless an excavation or grading plan has been
reviewed by the city engineer and the city engineer has approved and issued a grading
permit. All cuts and fills shall be made such that the resulting surface has an angle equal
to or less than the natural angle of repose. The excavation or grading plan shall contain a
revegetation plan providing for the revegetation of any cuts or slope disturbances and
such revegetation shall be completed within one year of the surface disturbance.
2. Subdivision Excavation and Grading. Properties within a subdivision are subject to the
final plat conditions. Properties within a subdivision are also subject to the conditions in
subsection C(1) at the time of issuance of a building permit.
3. Brush Removal. Brushing (to remove grass, weeds and other undesirable vegetation
without the disturbance of soil to a depth greater than 1 foot in depth, which may present
a potential fire hazard), requires a brush removal permit. This permit shall be required
only for disturbed areas exceeding 10,000 square feet.
4. Site Examination: Concurrent with the submission of an excavation or grading plan to the
city engineer, the building official or city engineer may examine the site of the proposed
excavation.
E. GRADING STANDARDS:
1. Grading Permit Requirement: There shall be no clearing or grading on, or to, any site that
is different than the approved grading plan of the subdivision or other parcel of land (other
than soil tests that are 100 square feet maximum in size or geological trenching done in
conjunction with detailed geological investigations) prior to the issuance of a grading
permit.
2. Grading of all Unplatted Land: The extent of disturbance shall be in accordance with the
grading limitations of Title 11 and Title 12.
3. Total Disturbance: All grading and/or disturbance performed subsequent to December 1,
1999, or subdivision improvement grading, is considered to be cumulative under this title.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 275/279
F. CUT AND FILL STANDARDS:
1. Importation of Fill Material: Except as exempted in the adopted international building
code, the importation of fill material to a lot or parcel is prohibited unless a grading permit
allowing such fill is first secured.
2. Exportation of Excavated Material: Prior to the exportation of any material from a site, a
proper final placement location for such material and an acceptable haul route must be
identified in order to secure a grading permit to remove such material.
3. Height of Unretained Cut or Fill: If the natural grade or the subdivision finished grade if the
property was platted or replatted after December 1, 1999, is more than a twenty percent
(20%) gradient, the maximum amount of unretained fill or cut shall be four feet (4')
above/below the natural grade, or subdivision grade if platted after December 1, 1999.
Where the natural grade or the subdivision finished grade if the property was platted after
December 1, 1999, has a gradient of twenty percent (20%) or less , the maximum amount
of unretained fill or cut shall be six feet (6') above/below the natural grade or the
subdivision finished grade if the property was platted after December 1, 1999. When fill is
placed on existing grades of 20% or more and the depth of the fill exceeds 5 feet,
benching shall be provided. Such benching shall include a keyway of at least 10 feet in
width and 2 feet in depth. Any fill or cut grading in excess of these amounts must be
contained by retaining walls.
4. Limitations on Cut and Fill: The height of any fill or the depth of any cut area, as
measured from natural grade, shall not be greater than ten feet (10'), regardless of
whether the fill or cut is retained, unretained, or a combination thereof. The total
combined height of any fill or the depth of any cut area as a result of subdivision
improvement grading and/or any subsequent grading, including, but not limited to, grading
approved as a part of building permit approval, shall not total more than ten feet (10'), as
measured from natural grade.
5. Maximum Slope of Fill Grading: Any unretained fill slope, if allowed, shall have a
maximum three feet (3') horizontal to every one foot (1') vertical fill, unless it is otherwise
designed and stamped by an engineer licensed in the state and substantiated by
recommendation of a geotechnical report.
6. The slope immediately above or below a retaining wall may not exceed 4(H) to 1(V)
unless it is otherwise designed and stamped by an engineer licensed in the state and
substantiated by recommendation of a geotechnical report.
7. Permanent cut slopes steeper than 2(H) to 1(V) or fill slopes steeper than 3(H) to 1(V) will
require a retaining wall unless otherwise recommended by an engineering analysis and
approved by the city engineer. All recommendations must be stamped by an engineer
licensed in the state and substantiated by recommendation of a geotechnical report. In no
case shall an un-retained slope be left steeper than the natural angle of repose of the soil.
8. Permanent cut or fill slopes cannot exceed a vertical height of 6 feet measured from the
toe to the top of the cut or fill unless otherwise recommended by an engineering analysis
and approved by the city engineer. All recommendations must be stamped by an
engineer licensed in the state and substantiated by recommendation of a geotechnical
report. The toe or top of a cut or fill must be set back at least 15 feet from a structure’s
foundation.
9. When creating grading plans consideration should be given to provide sufficient space for
equipment and personnel to access retaining walls in order to provide the maintenance of
the walls and slopes.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 276/279
10. Restoration of Graded Surfaces: A revegetation process shall be completed as identified
in the subdivision final plat requirements or within one and one-half (11/2) years if the
grading took place in the front and side yards, and two (2) years if the grading took place
in the rear yard of a certificate of occupancy or occupancy of the premises (whichever
comes first), unless a specific exemption is granted by the city engineer or designee.
However, grading for drainage and erosion control purposes shall be completed prior to
final inspection.
11. Stabilization of Slopes: Slope stabilization can be required if necessary as set forth in the
edition of the international building code that is adopted at the time the application for
grading is made.
12. Preexisting Grading: A grading permit or building permit shall not be conditioned on
altering, modifying or not utilizing existing grading, if the existing grading work was
completed in conformance with valid permits, and does not present a threat or danger to
the proposed development or neighboring properties. This provision does not prevent the
city engineer from requiring necessary documentation of site suitability to assure soil
stability, compaction and other geotechnical purposes.
13. Dust Control: During all grading, and until revegetation or site restoration is completed,
dust should be minimized by application of approved dust control methods as approved
by the city public works inspector or building official.
G. DRAINAGE:
1. Maintenance of Continuity: The entrance and exit points and continuity of all natural
drainage channels on a lot or parcel shall be preserved. Ponding of water shall not be
permitted immediately above cut or fill slopes. Building sites must be designed to carry
surface waters away from buildings and retaining walls. A drainage plan is required for all
building permits that is consistent with the subdivision rough grading plan and
revegetation plan
2. Erosion Prevention: Erosion controls should be constructed and maintained to prevent
erosion of all slopes and graded areas. Surface drainage interceptors may be provided at
the top of all cut and fill slopes where surface runoff will create erosion problems.
Subsurface drainage facilities may be required for stability and protection of affected
areas due to ground water seepage.
3. Swale Grading: The minimum amount of swale grading necessary for drainage purposes
is not subject to the restoration procedures of subsection E10 of this section.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 277/279
H. RETAINING WALLS:
Retaining walls in this section refer to walls that retain earth.
1. Measurement of Height: For the following rules, wall heights are measured from the
finished grade below the wall or wall system to the finished grade above the wall or wall
system. The term “wall system” refers to tiered walls which will be considered collectively
for review purposes.
2. A building permit is needed to construct retaining walls that are over 4 feet in height
measured from the finished grade below the wall to the finished grade above the wall.
The building official may require a permit on shorter walls if they support a surcharge
such as sloped earth, footings, vehicles, etc.
3. When submitting for a building permit, a grading plan must be submitted showing
retaining walls. This plan will be reviewed and approved by the building official. If the plan
includes retaining wall heights that exceed 4 feet then the plan must also include typical
section views cut through the walls with dimensioned wall heights and distances from
walls to structures, property lines and spacing between walls.
4. Grading should be designed to divert surface water away from wall structures. Wall
design should also include a system to collect and drain away any water that may collect
behind the wall.
5. Tiered Retaining Walls: Tiered walls must be separated horizontally by a distance that
exceeds the largest adjacent wall height. Tiered walls with a horizontal separation less
than this are not permitted even though they may be engineered and stable. Walls with a
horizontal separation of more than twice the largest adjacent wall height are not
considered tiered wall system and may be reviewed as separate structures. Tiered
retaining wall systems will require a global slope stability analysis stamped by an
engineer licensed in the state. Fencing that does not retain earth is not considered part of
a retaining wall or retaining wall system and shall be subject to North Ogden’s fencing
requirements.
6. Any wall or wall system over 4 feet in height will need to be engineered and stamped by
an engineer licensed in the state. The maximum retaining wall height shall be 8 feet.
7. Walls 8 feet in height or less should be designed and constructed according to standard
design and construction practices, manufacturer recommendations and published design
charts. Regardless of the height of a retaining wall, the building official or city engineer
may require stamped engineered plans if it is suspected that the retaining wall needs
additional engineering due to design requirements or environmental conditions. This may
also be true for areas with a high water table or poor soil conditions. Plans must be
stamped by an engineer licensed in the state.
8. Gravity rock walls and gravity block walls cannot exceed 6 feet in height. Gravity rock
walls or gravity block walls can be tiered to create additional height (i.e. they must be
spaced horizontally by the height of the tallest adjacent retaining wall).
9. Mechanically stabilized earth (MSE) walls such as Keystone with geogrid or other tie-back
systems are permitted. Reinforced concrete cantilevered retaining walls are also
permitted. These walls may be tiered but any tier cannot exceed 8 feet in height.
10. Rock or other coverings on a steepened slope (rockery) may be considered a retaining
wall when the slope exceeds the maximum permanent cut or fill slope recommended by a
geotechnical analysis. If a slope requires a rockery to be stable then it is to be treated as
a retaining wall.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 278/279
11. If these requirements are more restrictive than the standards found elsewhere in the
ordinance then these standards will apply.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2018-17 on 9/18/2018
11-25: DEVELOPMENT CONSTRAINTS
A. PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum standards for grading and drainage to
protect the health, safety, and welfare of citizens and property owners.
B. APPLICABILITY:
These standards shall apply to zones within North Ogden City.
C. Studies Required: Prior to any development or any grading activity within this zoning district, the
developer or landowner shall provide site specific studies addressing the geomorphology,
geology, faults, hydrology, slopes, soils, recharge, vegetation and wildlife, fire, and utility and
parks constraints of the site. No development shall take place in any area where development
hazards are identified, without mitigating measures, as proposed, designed and certified by the
developer's engineer, taking place that will overcome or protect the area from the identified
hazards. These measures must be acceptable to the city council. The city council shall not
approve any development proposals until it receives a recommendation of the planning
commission and city staff. However, if the city believes it is appropriate, the city may still conduct
an independent review of the property. By submitting plans and specifications to the city, the
developer agrees to allow the city's engineer, surveyor, or other agents onto the property to
conduct further reviews.
1. Determinations: The studies shall make the following determinations:
a. Whether the site has constraints to development that are too hazardous to be
developed and therefore should not be developed.
b. What areas of the site can be developed if mitigating measures are taken and the
identification of the mitigation measures.
c. What areas of the site have no hazards to development.
D. Sensitive Areas: Development in the sensitive areas shall take place only after the developer's
engineer certifies and the city accepts the developer's engineer's conclusion, that development in
such areas is safe. However, if the city believes it is appropriate, the city may still conduct an
independent review of the property. By submitting plans and specifications to the city, the
developer agrees to allow the city engineer, surveyor or other agents onto the property to
conduct further reviews.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=11:_ZONING_REGULATIONS 279/279
E. Minimum Building Area Without Development Constraints:
1. There shall be a minimum of ten thousand (10,000) square feet of buildable area on each
lot or parcel.
2. The entire building area shall be free of any development constraints. None of the
development building area shall be located in an area where development hazards are
identified, without mitigating measures, as proposed, designed and certified by the
developer's engineer, taking place that will overcome or protect the area from the
identified hazards.
3. Each development area or buildable area must be a contiguous area not less than eighty
feet (80') continuously in width and one hundred feet (100') continuously in depth.
4. If the development area is not adjacent to the public street, it shall be accessible to the
public street with an access way that is a minimum of thirty feet (30') wide from the public
street to the development area. The access way shall be developed in conformance with
the grading standards specified in this chapter.
F. Development on natural slopes steeper than 20% shall be prohibited without a request for and
approval of a variance submitted to the City including engineering recommendations from a
certified and licensed engineer and subject to approval of the City Engineer. Any such approved
variance, including any additional engineering to accommodate slope development, shall
become an enforceable requirement for any development, construction, excavation or other
activity on any such slope.
1. Natural slope is considered to be existing undisturbed terrain.
2. These sloped areas shall remain undisturbed even though they may be part of a
subdivision lot except as authorized by any approved variance permitting development or
other construction activities on any natural slope in excess of 20%.
3. Any area of a lot in excess of 20% natural slope shall not be included when the minimum
lot area is calculated for the zone in which the subdivision is to be developed if no
variance to this slope restriction has been granted.
4. Conditional Use Permit shall be required to cross these areas with street improvements.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2018-17 on 9/18/2018
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 1/69
12: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
12-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
12-2: DEFINITIONS
12-3: DEVELOPMENT PROCEDURE AND APPROVAL PROCESS
12-4: ASSURANCE FOR COMPLETION AND MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS
12-5: MINOR SUBDIVISIONS
12-6: IMPROVEMENTS, RESERVATIONS AND DESIGN
12-7: IMPACT FEES
12-8: CONDOMINIUM APPROVAL
12-9: BOUNDARY LINE ADJUSTMENT
12-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
12-1-1: TITLE
12-1-2: POLICY
12-1-3: PURPOSES
12-1-4: JURISDICTION
12-1-5: INTERPRETATION, CONFLICT AND SEPARABILITY
12-1-6: SAVING PROVISION
12-1-7: RESERVATIONS AND APPEALS
12-1-8: AMENDMENTS
12-1-9: CONDITIONS IMPOSED
12-1-10: RESUBDIVISION OF LAND
12-1-11: VACATION OF PLAT
12-1-12: SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
12-1-13: ENFORCEMENT
12-1-14: VALIDITY
12-1-15: PENALTY
12-1-16: VARIANCES
12-1-1: TITLE
These regulations shall hereafter be known, cited and referred to as the SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
OF NORTH OGDEN CITY.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 16.08.010 on 1/1/1987
12-1-2: POLICY
A. It is declared to be the policy of the city to consider the subdivision of land and the subsequent
development of the platted subdivision as subject to the control of the city pursuant to the official
general plan of the city for the orderly, planned, efficient and economical development of the city.
B. Land to be laid out and platted shall be of such character that it can be used safely for building
purposes without danger to health or peril from fire, flood or other menace, and land shall not be
laid out and platted until available public facilities and improvements exist and proper provision
has been made, where required, for drainage, culinary water, irrigation water, sewerage and
capital improvements such as schools, parks, recreation facilities, electrical and natural gas
distribution facilities, transportation facilities and improvements.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 2/69
C. The existing and proposed public improvements shall conform to and be properly related to the
proposals shown in the general plan, official map and the capital facilities plan and program of
the city, and it is intended that these regulations shall supplement and facilitate the enforcement
of the provisions and standards contained in building and housing codes, public works standards,
zoning ordinances, general plan, official map and land use plan, and capital facilities plan and
program of the city.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 16.08.020 on 1/1/1987
12-1-3: PURPOSES
These regulations are adopted for the following purposes:
A. To protect and provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of the city;
B. To guide the future growth and development of the city, in accordance with the general plan;
C. To provide for adequate light, air and privacy, to secure safety from fire, flood and other danger
and to prevent overcrowding of the land and undue congestion of population;
D. To protect the character, social and economic stability and to encourage the orderly and
beneficial development of all parts of the city;
E. To protect and conserve the value of land throughout the city and the value of buildings and
improvements upon the land, and to minimize the conflicts among the uses of land and buildings;
F. To guide public and private policy and action in order to provide adequate and efficient
transportation, culinary and irrigation water, sewer, schools, parks, playgrounds, recreation,
streets, curb and gutter, sidewalk, storm drainage, and other public facilities needs;
G. To provide the most beneficial relationship between the uses of land and buildings and the
circulation of traffic throughout the city, having particular regard to the avoidance of congestion
on the streets and highways, the pedestrian traffic movements appropriate to the various uses of
land and buildings, and to provide for the proper location and width of streets and building lines;
H. To establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for subdivisions and resubdivisions,
in order to further the orderly layout and use of land; and to ensure proper legal descriptions and
monuments;
I. To ensure that public facilities are available and will have a sufficient capacity to serve the
proposed subdivision;
J. To prevent the pollution of air, streams and ponds; to assure the adequacy of drainage facilities;
to safeguard the water table; and to encourage the wise use and management of natural
resources throughout the city in order to preserve the integrity, stability and beauty of the
community and the value of the land;
K. To preserve the natural beauty and topography of the city and to ensure appropriate
development with regard to these natural features.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 16.08.030 on 1/1/1987
12-1-4: JURISDICTION
A. These subdivision regulations shall apply to all "subdivisions" of land, as defined in CCNO 12-2-
2, located within the corporate limits of the city.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 3/69
B. No person shall lay out and plat any tract of land located wholly or partially within the city except
in compliance with this title.
C. No land shall be laid out and platted within the corporate limits of the city until:
1. The city council has given final approval of the plat; and
2. The approved plat is filed with the county recorder.
D. No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any parcel or plat of land which
was created by subdivision after the effective date hereof, and not in conformity with the
provisions of these subdivision regulations, and no excavation of land or construction of any
public or private improvements shall take place or be commenced except in conformity with the
regulations.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 16.08.040 on 1/1/1987
12-1-5: INTERPRETATION, CONFLICT AND SEPARABILITY
A. Interpretation: In their interpretation and application, the provisions of these regulations shall be
held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety and general
welfare.
B. Conflict With Public And Private Provisions:
1. Public Provisions: These regulations are not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul
any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law. Where any
provision of these regulations imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any
other provision of these regulations or any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other
provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher standards
shall control.
2. Private Provisions: These regulations are not intended to abrogate any easement,
covenant, condition, restriction or any other private provisions; provided, that where the
provisions of these regulations are more restrictive or impose higher standards or
regulations than such easement, covenant or other private agreement or restriction, the
requirements of these regulations shall govern. Where the provisions of the easement,
covenant, condition, restriction or private agreement, or restriction impose duties and
obligations more restrictive, or higher standards than the requirements of these
regulations, or the determinations of the planning commission or the city in approving a
subdivision or in enforcing these regulations, and such private provisions are not
inconsistent with these regulations or determinations thereunder, then such private
provisions shall be operative and supplemental to these regulations and determinations
made thereunder. Nothing contained therein shall empower or require the city to enforce
such private agreements or restrictions.
C. Separability: If any part or provision of these regulations or application thereof to any person or
circumstances is adjudged invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall be
confined in its operation to the part, provision or application directly involved in the controversy in
which such judgment shall have been rendered and shall not affect or impair the validity of the
remainder of these regulations or the application thereof to other persons or circumstances. The
city council declares that it would have enacted the remainder of these regulations even without
any such part, provision or application.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 4/69
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 16.08.050 on 1/1/1987
12-1-6: SAVING PROVISION
These regulations shall not be construed as abating any action now pending under, or by virtue of prior
existing subdivision regulations, or as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accruing
or about to accrue or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of
the city under any section of provision existing at the time of adoption of these regulations, or as
vacating or annulling any rights obtained by any person, firm or corporation, by lawful action of the city
except as shall be expressly provided for in these regulations.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 16.08.060 on 1/1/1987
12-1-7: RESERVATIONS AND APPEALS
Upon the adoption of this title according to law, the subdivision ordinance of the city adopted July 13,
1953, as amended, is repealed, except as to such sections expressly retained herein.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 16.08.070 on 1/1/1987
12-1-8: AMENDMENTS
These subdivision regulations may be amended from time to time by the city council after holding a
public hearing upon proper notice. All proposed changes and amendments shall be proposed by or
submitted to the planning commission for its recommendation, which, within thirty (30) days, shall be
forwarded to the city council for its consideration. Failure of the planning commission to submit a
recommendation within the prescribed time shall be deemed approval by such commission of the
proposed change or amendment. The city council shall uphold or overrule the recommendation of the
planning commission by a majority vote of its members within thirty (30) days following the final vote of
the planning commission.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 16.08.080 on 1/1/1987
12-1-9: CONDITIONS IMPOSED
A. Authority: Regulation of the subdivision of land and the attachment of reasonable conditions to
land subdivision is an exercise of valid police power delegated by the state to the city. The
developer has the duty of compliance with reasonable conditions laid down by the planning
commission for design, dedication, improvement and restrictive use of the land so as to conform
to the physical and economical development of the city and to the safety and general welfare of
the future plot owners in the subdivision and of the community at large.
B. Referral To Planning Commission: Any matter upon which action may or shall be taken under the
provisions of this title may, at the city council's discretion, unless otherwise provided for in this
title, be referred to the planning commission for its study, consideration and recommendations.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 16.08.090 on 1/1/1987
12-1-10: RESUBDIVISION OF LAND
A. Procedure: For any change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision plat, if such change
affects any street layout shown on such map, area reserved thereon for public use, or any lot
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 5/69
line, or if it affects any map or plan legally reached prior to the adoption of any regulations
controlling subdivisions, such parcel shall be approved by the planning commission and city
council by the same procedure, rules and regulations as for a subdivision.
B. Future Resubdivision Indicated: Whenever a parcel of land is laid out and platted and the
subdivision plat shows one or more lots containing more than one acre of land and there are
indications that such lots will eventually be laid out and platted into small building sites, the
planning commission may require that such parcel of land allow for the future opening of streets
and the ultimate extension of adjacent streets. Easements providing for the future opening and
extensions of such streets may be made a requirement of the plat.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 16.08.100 on 1/1/1987
12-1-11: VACATION OF PLAT
A. Authority: Any plat or any part of any plat may be vacated in compliance with and according to
the terms of Utah Code § 10-9-808, as amended.
B. Approval: Such an instrument shall be approved by the planning commission and city council in
like manner as plats of subdivisions. The city council may reject any such instrument which
abridges or destroys any public rights in any of its public uses, improvements, streets or alleys.
C. Filing: Such an instrument shall be executed, acknowledged or approved, and recorded or filed,
in like manner as plats of subdivisions; and being duly recorded or filed shall operate to destroy
the force and effect of the recording of the plat so vacated and to divest all public rights in the
streets, alleys and public grounds, and all dedications laid out or described in such plat.
D. Owners: When lots have been sold, the plat may be vacated in the manner herein provided by all
the owners of lots in such plat joining in the execution of such writing.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 16.08.110 on 1/1/1987
12-1-12: SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
A. General: Where the City Council finds that extraordinary hardships or practical difficulties may result from
strict compliance with these regulations and/or the purpose of these regulations may be served to a
greater extent by an alternative proposal, it may approve Special Exceptions to these subdivision
regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured. The Special Exception
shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purposes of Titles 11 or 12 of this code. Special
Exceptions, by nature, are legislative, policy making decisions with no applicant entitled to receive a
Special Exception.
B. Applicability: Special Exceptions will only be considered for standards required under Title 12 of this
Code. No applicant is entitled to receive a Special Exception.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 6/69
C. Guidelines: In granting Special Exceptions the City Council and Planning Commission shall consider the
guidelines found below. To obtain a Special Exception an applicant is not required to achieve a positive
finding for each guideline. However, each guideline must be considered and addressed in the findings
before the Planning Commission and City Council with an overall determination of whether or not to grant
the Special Exception. In certain situations, a finding related to one of the guidelines below may override
considerations for the other guidelines.
1. The health, safety, general welfare, and the best interest of the City.
2. The impact on neighboring properties, including the ability to develop neighboring parcels in
accordance with the general plan.
3. Unique character of the property such as physical surroundings, shape, topographical conditions,
the use of natural features, preservation of a historical/cultural/community features.
4. Community design including connectivity between subdivisions, including utilities, trails, roads,
bus routes, parks, open space, and other similar considerations.
5. Traffic Flow, safety, and future transportation requirements as outlined by the City Engineer.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 7/69
D. Prohibitions:
1. The Special Exception will not in any manner vary the provisions of the zoning ordinance (Title
11).
2. The Special Exception will not be granted for monetary purposes, such as increasing the number
of lots which can be sold.
3. Special Exceptions shall not be granted to the following provisions:
a. Cul-de-sac lengths (except as provided for in D 4)
b. Lot sizes
c. Lot frontages
d. Width of drivable surface in the right-of-way
e. Slope of buildable area
f. Single access subdivisions
g. Utility requirements
h. Density
4. Cul-de-sacs may be granted an exception as to length if all of the following criteria are met:
a. The maximum cul-de-sac length with a special exception extension is 750 feet.
b. There is no reasonable opportunity for connecting to the adjoining street network at this
time. If connectivity to an adjoining property can be made in the future; a development
agreement is required specifying the conditions and timing of the improvement, e.g.,
providing for a fire access road and or right of way dedication.
c. The property to be subdivided is an infill and surrounded by developed subdivisions.
d. The maximum acreage of the subdivision to be served is 5 acres.
e. If a special exception is granted connectivity to trails and pedestrian walkways may be
required by the Planning Commission after considering a recommendation from the Parks
and Recreation Department.
f. If a special exception is granted, the number of lots on the cul-de-sac may be up to 20 as
approved by the Planning Commission.
E. Conditions: In approving Special Exceptions, the City Council may require such conditions as will, in its
judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements of these regulations. The
Planning Commission may recommend any condition(s) it feels is relevant to the approval of the Special
Exception.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 8/69
F. Procedures:
1. A complete application for any such Special Exception shall be submitted in writing by the
applicant at the time when the preliminary plat is filed for consideration by the Planning
Commission. The application shall state fully the grounds for the application request and all of the
facts relied upon by the petitioner.
2. Within sixty (60) days after receipt of the petition, the Planning Commission shall hold a public
hearing and forward a recommendation of approval or denial to the City Council. At least ten (10)
days' notice of time and place of such hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city. Property owners within three hundred feet (300') of the property boundaries
shall also receive notification of the public hearing. Failure of the Planning Commission to submit
a recommendation within the prescribed time shall be deemed a favorable recommendation by
the Planning Commission of the requested Special Exception to the City Council, unless
consideration of the petition is continued for further review within the prescribed time limits.
3. Within thirty (30) days after receipt of the recommendation by the Planning Commission the City
Council shall uphold or overrule the recommendation of the Planning Commission by a majority of
its members after discussing it in an open meeting with an opportunity for public comment during
the agenda item. Any failure of the City Council to render a final decision within thirty (30) days
shall be deemed a denial by the City Council.
a. No additional notice is required for the meeting before the City Council.
4. The decision of the City Council shall be final. Any appeal of the decision shall proceed directly to
District Court as an appeal on the record before the City Council to determine if the City Council
abused its legislative powers and if the decision is arbitrary, capricious, or illegal.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 16.08.120 on 1/1/1987
Repealed & Reenacted by Ord. 2016-15 on 6/16/2016
Amended by Ord. 2018-16 on 7/17/2018
12-1-13: ENFORCEMENT
A. General:
1. It shall be the duty of the zoning enforcement officer, as designated by the city
administrator, to enforce these regulations and to bring to the attention of the city attorney
any violations or lack of compliance herewith.
2. No owner, or agent of the owner, of any parcel of land located in a proposed subdivision
shall transfer or sell any such parcel before a plat of such subdivision has been approved
by the planning commission and city council, in accordance with the provisions of these
regulations, and filed with the county recorder.
3. The subdivision of any lot or any parcel of land, by the use of metes and bounds
description for the purpose of sale, transfer or lease with the intent of evading these
regulations shall not be permitted. All such described subdivisions shall be subject to all
of the requirements contained in these regulations.
4. No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any building or structure located
on a lot or parcel of property which has not been laid out and platted in accordance with
this title unless and until all applicable requirements of the ordinance have been met.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 9/69
B. Inspection: Appropriate departments of the city shall inspect or cause to be inspected all
buildings, streets, concrete work, fire hydrants, and water supply, storm drainage, and sewage
disposal systems in the course of construction, installation or repair. Excavation for fire hydrants
and water and sewer mains and laterals shall not be covered or backfilled until such installation
shall have been approved by the city. If any such installation is covered before being inspected
and approved, it shall be uncovered after notice to uncover has been issued to the responsible
person by the inspector. All other required utilities placed underground or overhead shall meet all
city public works standards as required by franchise agreements. Funds held in bond or escrow
accounts will not be released for any work which has not been inspected by the appropriate city
department.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 16.08.130 on 1/1/1987
12-1-14: VALIDITY
A. Any plat of a subdivision filed or recorded without the approvals as required by this title is void.
B. Any sale or transfer of any land in a subdivision not platted in accordance with the provisions of
this title is null and void.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 16.26.020 on 1/1/1987
12-1-15: PENALTY
A. Misdemeanor: Any person violating any of the provisions of this title shall be guilty of a class C
misdemeanor and, upon conviction of any such violation, subject to penalty as provided in CCNO
1-4-1 or as provided in Utah Code § 10-9a-803, as amended.
B. The description by metes and bounds and the instrument of transfer or other documents used in
the process of selling or transferring does not exempt the transaction from a violation or from the
penalties or remedies provided for in this title.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 16.08.130, 16.26.010 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
12-1-16: VARIANCES
A. All variance applications under this Title shall be processed in accordance with Utah Code § 10-
9a-702 or its successors. Hearing procedures shall be the same as found in CCNO Title 11
under CCON 11-4-4 or its successors.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2016-15 on 6/16/2016
12-2: DEFINITIONS
12-2-1: USAGE
12-2-2: DEFINITIONS
12-2-1: USAGE
A. For the purpose of these regulations, certain numbers, abbreviations, terms and words used
herein shall be used, interpreted and defined as set forth in this chapter.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 10/69
B. Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, words used in the present tense include the
future tense; words used in the plural number include the singular; the word "herein" means "in
these regulations"; the word "regulations" means these regulations.
C. A "person" includes a corporation, partnership and an unincorporated association of persons
such as a club; "shall" is always mandatory; a "building" includes a "structure"; a "building" or
"structure" includes any part thereof; "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall
be construed to include the words "intended, arranged or designed to be occupied".
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 16.04.010 on 1/1/1987
12-2-2: DEFINITIONS
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section:
ADJACENT LANDOWNERS: Any property owner of record, according to the records of the county
recorder, whose property adjoins or abuts property proposed for subdivision, or any portion thereof.
ALLEY: A public or private right of way which is less than twenty six feet (26') wide primarily designed to
serve as secondary access to the side or rear of those properties whose principal frontage is on some
other street.
APPLICANT: The owner of land proposed to be laid out and platted, or his agent. An agent shall be
required to provide legal documentation to prove he has consent from the legal owner of the property.
BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and public parks, cemeteries
or boundary lines of municipalities.
BOND: Any form of security, including a cash deposit, surety bond, collateral, property or instrument of
credit in an amount and form satisfactory to the city council. All bonds shall be approved by the city
council wherever a bond is required by these regulations.
BUILDING: Any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or
movable property of any kind, and includes any structure.
BUILDING AREA: A portion of a lot, parcel or tract of land which is to be utilized as the building site
having an area of at least two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet with an average slope of less
than twenty percent (20%), such building area to be designated as the only area in which building may
take place and outlined on the subdivision plat in which the lot is located.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PROGRAM: A proposed schedule of all future projects listed in order of
construction priority, together with cost estimates and the anticipated means of financing each project.
All major projects requiring the expenditure of public funds, over and above the annual city operating
expenses, for the purchase, construction or replacement of the physical assets for the community are
included.
CITY: North Ogden City, Utah.
CITY COUNCIL: The city council of North Ogden City, Utah.
CITY ENGINEER: A professional, registered engineer retained by the city.
CONSTRUCTION PLAN: The maps or drawings accompanying a subdivision plat and showing the
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 11/69
specific location and design of improvements to be installed in the subdivision in accordance with the
requirements of the city council as a condition of the approval of the plat.
COUNTY HEALTH OFFICER: The administrative and executive officer of the Weber County health
department and local registrar of vital statistics or his duly authorized representatives.
DEVELOPER: The owners, or their agent, of land proposed to be laid out and platted in accordance with
this title. An agent of the owners shall be required to provide legal documentation, to be approved by the
city attorney, which establishes his authority to act as agent for the owners.
EASEMENT: That portion of a lot or lots reserved for present or future use by a person or agency other
than the legal owner or owners of the property or properties. The easement may be for use under, on or
above the lot or lots.
FLAG LOT: See CCNO 11-10-30 Flag Lots
FRONTAGE: All the property fronting on one side of the street between intersecting or intercepting
streets, or between a street and a right of way, waterway, end of dead end street, or political subdivision
boundary, measured along the street line. An intercepting street shall determine only the boundary of the
frontage of the side of the street which it intercepts.
GENERAL PLAN: A comprehensive plan for development of the city prepared and recommended for
adoption by the planning commission, pursuant to state law, and including any part of such plan
separately adopted and any amendment to such plan, or parts thereof.
GRADE: The slope of a road, street or other public way, specified in percentage terms.
HALF STREET: That portion of a street within a subdivision comprising one-half (½) the required right of
way width upon which improvements in accordance with one-half (½) of an approved typical street cross
section are constructed.
JOINT OWNERSHIP: Among persons shall be construed as the same owner for the purpose of
imposing subdivision regulations.
LOT: A parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied by a permitted or conditional use building
or group of buildings (main or accessory), together with such yards, open spaces, parking spaces and
other areas required by this title, the uniform zoning ordinance, and the hillside development ordinance
of North Ogden City, having frontage upon a street or upon a right of way approved by the administrative
law judge. Except for group dwellings and guesthouses, not more than one dwelling structure shall
occupy any one lot.
LOT IMPROVEMENT: Any building, structure, place, work of art, or other object, or improvement of the
land on which they are situated constituting a physical betterment of real property or any part of such
betterment. Certain lot improvements shall be properly bonded or escrowed as provided in these
regulations.
LOT, RESTRICTED (R LOT): A lot having an average slope of twenty percent (20%) or more which
contains a building area of at least two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet and which contains or
is susceptible to special events or conditions, including, but not limited to, flooding, wetlands, improper
drainage, steep slopes, rock formations, adverse earth formations or topography, fault lines, water table,
and snow, mud, and debris slides. Such lot shall be subject to and regulated and developed in
accordance with the restricted lot development ordinance, the North Ogden City zoning ordinance, and
the North Ogden City subdivision ordinance. All R lots shall be clearly identified on the recorded plat.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 12/69
LOT RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land of not less than twenty feet (20') wide connecting a lot to a street
for use as private access to that lot, and recorded as part of same.
MASTER STREET PLAN: A plan, labeled "master street plan of North Ogden City".
NORTH OGDEN PUBLIC WORKS STANDARDS: Standards governing public and private contractors
performing work within the city as adopted in the North Ogden City public works standards and technical
specifications ordinance.
OFF SITE FACILITIES: Improvements not on individual lots but generally within the boundaries of the
subdivision which they serve. Certain off site facilities shall be properly bonded or escrowed as provided
in these regulations.
OFFICIAL MAP: The map established by the city council pursuant to law showing the streets, highways,
parks, drainage systems and setback lines theretofore laid out, adopted and established by law, and any
amendments or additions thereto adopted by the city council.
OWNER: Any person, group of persons, firm or firms, corporation or corporations, condominium projects
or any other legal entity having legal title to or sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be laid
out and platted under these regulations.
PARCEL OF LAND: Contiguous quantity of land, in possession of, or owned by, or recorded as the
property of, the same claimant person. Land in one ownership, but physically divided by a public
highway, road or street, is not considered contiguous under this definition, and may therefor be used as
two (2) or more individual parcels of land.
PLANNING COMMISSION: The city planning commission of North Ogden City.
PLAT: A map, plan or depiction of a subdivision showing thereon the division of a tract or parcel of land
into lots, blocks, streets and alleys or other divisions and dedications.
PLAT, FINAL: A proposed subdivision drawn accurately to scale and which has all measurements, data,
certificates and dedications thereon which are required for approval and acceptance by the proper
agencies and for recording in the office of the county recorder.
PROPERTY, INTERVENING: Property located between the existing utilities and public service facilities,
and the property under development.
PROTECTION STRIP: A strip of land bordering both the boundary of a subdivision and a street within
the subdivision for the purpose of controlling the access to the street from property abutting the
subdivision.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT: Any water system, drainage ditch, subsurface drainage system, storm
drainage system, sewer system, roadway, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrianway, tree, lawn, off street
parking area, lot improvement, or other facility for which the city may ultimately assume the responsibility
for maintenance and operation or which may affect an improvement for which city responsibility is
established. All such improvements shall be properly bonded or escrowed.
RESUBDIVISION: A change in the map of an approved or recorded subdivision plat if such change
affects any street layout on or area reserved thereon for public use, any lot line, or any map or plan
legally recorded prior to the adoption of any regulations controlling subdivisions.
RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, crosswalk, road,
electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, shade tree, or for
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 13/69
another special use. The usage of the term "right of way" for land platting purposes shall mean that
every right of way hereafter established and shown on a final plat is to be separate and distinct from the
lots or parcels adjoining such right of way and not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or
parcels. Rights of way intended for streets, crosswalks, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm drains,
shade trees, or any other use involving maintenance by a public agency, shall be dedicated to the public
use by the maker of the plat on which such right of way is established.
ROAD: See definition of Street.
SCREENING: Either:
A. A strip at least five feet (5') wide, densely planted (or having equivalent natural growth) with
shrubs or trees at least four feet (4') high at the time of planting, of a type that will form a year
round dense screen at least six feet (6') in height; or
B. An opaque wall or barrier or uniformly painted fence at least six feet (6') high.
SINGLE ACCESS DEVELOPMENT: A development or subdivision, or a portion of a development or
subdivision, containing one or more streets where a vehicle must utilize the same public or private
roadway segment to gain egress as it used to gain ingress in order to gain access to a through street.
STREET: A thoroughfare which has been dedicated or abandoned to the public and accepted by proper
public authority, or a thoroughfare not less than twenty six feet (26') wide which has been made public
by right of use and which affords the principal access to the abutting property.
STREET, ARTERIAL: A street, existing or proposed, which serves or is intended to serve as a major
trafficway, and is designated on the master street plan as a controlled access highway, major street,
parkway or other equivalent term to identify those streets comprising the basic structure of the street
plan.
STREET, COLLECTOR: A street, existing or proposed, of considerable continuity, which is the main
means of access to the major street system.
STREET, CUL-DE-SAC: A single dead end street terminating with a permanent turnaround bulb that
meets the North Ogden public works standards.
STREET, MINOR: A street, existing or proposed, which is supplementary to a collector street and of
limited continuity which serves or is intended to serve the local needs of a neighborhood.
STREET, PRIVATE: A thoroughfare within a subdivision which has been reserved by dedication unto
the developer or lot owners to be used as private access to serve the lots platted within the subdivision.
Private streets shall comply with the adopted street cross section standards of the city and shall be
maintained by the developer or other private agency.
STREET, THROUGH: A street that provides two (2) separate accesses, at least three hundred feet
(300') apart, to the North Ogden City public street system.
SUBDIVISION: Any land that is divided, resubdivided or proposed to be divided into two (2) or more lots,
parcels, sites, units, plots or other division of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, for offer,
sale, lease or development either on the installment plan or upon any and all other plans, terms and
conditions. Subdivision includes:
A. The division or development of land whether by deed, metes and bounds description, devise and
testacy, lease, map, plat or other recorded instrument; and
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 14/69
B. Divisions of land for all residential and nonresidential uses, including land used or to be used for
commercial, agricultural and industrial purposes.
SUBDIVISION, MINOR: A subdivision of less than five (5) lots.
TURNAROUND, TEMPORARY: A turnaround area with full cul-de-sac diameter, but not constructed to
North Ogden City public works standards.
UTILITIES: Gas lines, culinary water lines, storm drainage systems, irrigation systems, sewer lines,
electric power transmission lines, telephone transmission lines, cable television systems, with all poles,
wires, pipes, guy wires, bracing pertaining thereto.
WETLANDS: Generally, those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a
frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a
prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. When in conflict, federal
definitions and standards shall prevail.
ZONING ORDINANCE: The uniform zoning ordinance of North Ogden City as adopted by the city
council May 11, 1953, as amended from time to time.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 16.04.020 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2000-09 on 5/23/2000
Amended by Ord. 2000-16 on 11/14/2000
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
Amended by Ord. 2011-11 on 5/24/2011
Amended by Ord. 2016-03 on 1/20/2016
12-3: DEVELOPMENT PROCEDURE AND APPROVAL PROCESS
12-3-1: OUTLINE OF PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS
12-3-2: STAGE I; PREAPPLICATION CONFERENCE
12-3-3: STAGE II; PRELIMINARY PLAT APPLICATION
12-3-4: STAGE III; SUBDIVISION TECHNICAL REVIEW
12-3-5: STAGE IV; PRELIMINARY PLAT APPROVAL
12-3-6: STAGE V; FINAL PLAT/IMPROVEMENT PLANS
12-3-7: VACATING OR CHANGING A SUBDIVISION PLAT
12-3-8: APPENDIX
12-3-9: DEVELOPMENT IN HP-1, HP-2 AND HP-3 ZONES
12-3-1: OUTLINE OF PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS
A. Specified: The preparation, submittal and review of all subdivision plats located inside the
corporate limits of the city shall proceed through the following progressive stages:
Stage I Preapplication conference.
Stage II Preliminary plat application.
Stage III Subdivision technical review.
Stage IV Preliminary plat approval.
Stage V Final plat/improvement plans.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 15/69
B. Modification: This procedure may be modified by the community development director based on
unique circumstances.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-06 on 5/11/2010
12-3-2: STAGE I; PREAPPLICATION CONFERENCE
A. Actions By Subdivider:
1. The subdivider shall meet with community development department staff and submit
seven (7) copies of the proposed "sketch plan" with general information regarding land
use, street and lot arrangement, tentative lot sizes, slopes, existing topography, proposed
grading and building pad concepts, and such additional information as may be required
by staff in order to complete the submittal.
2. Tentative proposals shall be based on information from the city engineer or other
appropriate agencies regarding water supply, sewage disposal, drainage, detention and
street improvements. Where methods may be considered unconventional, or private,
these may be indicated by notes.
B. Actions By Community Development Department: The community development department shall
discuss the proposal with the subdivider in general terms, advising the subdivider of the
procedural steps, design and improvement standards, and general platting requirements.
Depending on the scope of the proposed development, the community development department
shall distribute the seven (7) "sketch plans" to the following agencies, requesting that the
following investigations be made:
1. Community development department:
a. To check the existing zoning of the tract and its compliance with the general plan
goals and objectives, including the proposed relationship to adjacent land uses
and potential park sites;
b. To review the compliance with subdivision ordinance regulations and any other
applicable regulations.
2. North Ogden City engineer:
a. To review relationship of property to major streets, the culinary water distribution
system, the wastewater collection system, line sizing and location, utility systems
and any unusual characteristics such as topography, flooding, landscaping, etc.;
b. To determine street width and right of way requirements, driveway relationships,
minimum curve requirements and other traffic control related characteristics;
c. To identify possible off site public improvements and dedications.
3. Central Weber sewer improvement district: To review treatment plant capacity and other
requirements of the district.
4. North View fire department: To review the fire flow water system, line sizing and location
and other requirements of the department.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-06 on 5/11/2010
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 16/69
12-3-3: STAGE II; PRELIMINARY PLAT APPLICATION
A. Submittal Requirements: The following information is required and shall be shown graphically, by
note, or by letter, and may comprise several sheets showing various elements of the required
data. All mapped data for the same plat shall be drawn at the same standard engineering scale,
adjusted to produce an overall drawing of twenty four inches by thirty six inches (24" x 36") and
in conformance with requirements contained in this title, and by the city engineer and other
reviewing agencies.
1. The applicant may use more than one sheet if necessary, using one of the standard
engineering scales. In cases of multiple residence PRUDs, the scale shall be not less
than one inch to forty feet (1" = 40'), providing sufficient detail to illustrate the subdivider's
intent.
2. Required copies of the proposed plat and elevations accompanying the submittal shall
also comply with the maximum sheet size of twenty four inches by thirty six inches (24" x
36").
B. Copies; Sets Required: Fifteen (15) copies/sets of the proposed preliminary plat are required.
The proposed plats shall be printed on twenty four inch by thirty six inch (24" x 36"), blue or black
line paper. In cases of PRUDs, which are to be reviewed and approved by the land use authority,
fifteen (15) copies of the proposed plat, typical floor plans and elevations, shall also be
submitted. In addition, one electronic copy, as specified by the city, shall also be submitted.
C. Identification And Descriptive Data:
1. The title shall contain the proposed subdivision name which shall be clearly indicated, and
include the location by section, township and range with reference by dimension and
bearing to a quarter section corner. The proposed subdivision name shall not duplicate
any other recorded plat name within the city. The subdivision name should be carefully
considered as it will become a part of the public record once a final plat has been
recorded.
2. Subdivider/developer's firm name, address, phone number and name of a contact person.
3. Engineering, surveying, land planning or architectural firm name, address, phone number
and the name and title of a contact person.
4. Scale, north arrow (pointing up or to the right), and date of preparation, including any
subsequent revision dates.
5. Location map with reference to main arterial streets.
6. Scaled drawing by a registered land surveyor showing platted boundaries.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 17/69
D. Existing Conditions And Data: All subdivision submittals shall provide the following existing
information by graphic representation or note:
1. Topography by contour lines as related to USGS datum or approved equal. The contour
intervals shall be noted on the same map as the subdivision layout and shall adequately
reflect character and drainage patterns of the land.
2. Location of fences, existing structures, wells, ditches (open or covered), washes, trees, all
significant vegetation and significant rock outcroppings, and all other features or
characteristics that could have a bearing on the review.
3. Location, frequency and extent of areas subject to flooding or storm runoff must be
defined.
4. Location, rights of way and names of all dedicated streets and utility rights of way of
public record which may exist around the perimeter of the site boundaries, in, through or
across the site. Show any permanent structures that are to remain, including water wells
and public or private utility lines within or adjacent to the tract or subdivision. Show all
driveways, streets and median openings within three hundred twenty five feet (325') of
any proposed driveway or street intersection on the opposite side of the perimeter streets.
5. Name, book and page number of any recorded subdivision adjacent to or having common
boundaries with this plat.
6. Base zone of the subject and adjacent tract, the zoning case number, if any, and case
number of a planned residential unit development approved by the city, if applicable.
7. Gross acreage of subject tract. Do not include previously dedicated rights of way in this
figure.
8. Grading information necessary for the city engineer to determine the ability of the
developer to build the subdivision improvements as proposed.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 18/69
E. Proposed Conditions And Data: All subdivision submittals shall provide the following proposed
information by graphic representation or note:
1. Layout of proposed streets, giving widths and proposed street names based on existing
projected alignments wherever possible.
2. Typical lot dimensions, dimensions of all corner lots, lots on curvilinear sections of streets,
and all lots where the number of sides exceed four (4). Number each lot individually and
give the total number of lots. Where plats will consist of a number of units/phases, utilizing
the same subdivision name, the lot numbering shall be consecutive through the total
number of lots or units.
3. Designation of all land to be dedicated or reserved for open space, parks,
detention/retention basins, schools, well sites, substations, sewer lift stations, reservoirs,
water pump stations or other public or private uses.
4. If multiple uses are planned (multiple residential, commercial, industrial, office), such
areas shall be clearly designated, together with existing zones and proposed zoning
changes, if any.
5. Show minimum setback lines. Where there are lots with more than four (4) sides or
whose shape may be considered atypical, show all setbacks.
6. Soil erosion and sediment control plan, including grading of waterways and design of
erosion control devices.
7. Vegetation preservation and protection plan, including trees and other vegetation
proposed to be removed and which areas are to be protected.
F. Proposed Utility System:
1. Show method of sewage disposal (a statement as to the type of facilities shall appear on
the preliminary plat). Also show the preliminary sewer layout indicating line sizes and
manhole and cleanout locations.
2. The preliminary layout of the water system shall be shown, indicating fire hydrants,
valves, meter vaults, water line sizes and locations.
3. Preliminary landscaping plan for any public or common areas showing general plant
areas and materials.
4. Proposed street lighting plan.
G. Proposed Drainage And Grading Plans: Preliminary calculations and layout of the proposed
storm drainage system based on a 10-year storm and checked for the 100-year storm. Where off
site detention has not been provided, or where there are known downstream drainage problems,
design shall be such that water from streets and lots shall be detained on site in the subdivision
until the peak of the storm passes. Two (2) sets of calculations shall be submitted at the time of
technical review for analysis by the city engineer. Calculations shall be typed on separate letter
sized sheets with any necessary maps attached.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 19/69
H. Condominiums: Application requirements, processing and approval regulations contained within
this chapter shall apply to all condominiums.
1. The land use authority shall not refuse approval of a final plat of a condominium that is in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the zoning ordinance, as long as the
location of buildings shown on the plat and the manner in which airspace is to be divided
in conveying the condominium are not in violation of this chapter and the zoning
ordinance. This subsection does not limit the power of the land use authority to regulate
the location of buildings in such a project by or pursuant to the zoning ordinance.
2. In order for the condominium application to be considered complete, the applicant shall
provide to the city any plans, specifications and/or analyses needed to show that the
proposed condominium subdivision is in compliance with this chapter and the zoning
ordinance, including, but not limited to, grading plans, floor plans, elevations, landscape
plans, and hillside disturbance plans and analyses.
3. Upon final condominium approval and recordation, the owner of the condominium may
build that condominium, including individual condominium units, using the exact
dimensions and locations as shown on the final condominium plat map, regardless of any
legal nonconforming attribute that the condominium may have at the time of building
permit application. However, if the owner proposes any changes to the dimensions or
locations as shown on the final condominium plat map, including, but not limited to, the
locations and dimensions of individual condominium units, the owner shall be required to
replat the condominium, and the replat shall be required to be in conformance with the
subdivision and zoning regulations in effect at the time of replat application.
I. Filing Fee: The subdivider shall, at the time of filing the preliminary plat, pay to the department
the preliminary plat application fee established by the city council.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-06 on 5/11/2010
12-3-4: STAGE III; SUBDIVISION TECHNICAL REVIEW
A. Process: The city hosts a subdivision technical review committee (STRC) meeting on a periodic
basis. In order for a preliminary plat to be scheduled for a particular STRC meeting, a complete
preliminary plat application must be received and accepted by the city prior to a date
approximately one month prior to the STRC meeting at which the applicant desires the project to
be discussed. The community development department maintains this schedule.
B. Meeting With Representatives: The applicant is provided an opportunity to meet with
representatives from all applicable utilities and other interested governmental agencies to receive
comments regarding the preliminary plat application. At this meeting the applicant will also
receive written comments from the city, detailing the extent to which the plans are required to be
revised in order for the city to schedule land use authority consideration of their approval.
Extensive revisions caused by the STRC comments or by voluntary action of the applicant, may
require additional STRC meetings.
C. Timetables: Critical path preliminary plat processing project timetables, including monthly
preliminary plat application deadlines, STRC meeting dates, required resubmittal dates and land
use authority meeting dates are established and maintained by the community development
department.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-06 on 5/11/2010
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 20/69
12-3-5: STAGE IV; PRELIMINARY PLAT APPROVAL
The preliminary plat approval stage involves the resubmission of the preliminary plat to address the
STRC comments. Included in this stage is the review of the resubmitted plans and approval of the
preliminary plat. The subdivider shall provide the department with all information essential to determine
the character and general acceptability of the proposed development.
A. Preliminary Plat Submission:
1. Requirements: The applicant shall submit fifteen (15) full sized, twenty four inch by thirty
six inch (24" x 36"), blue or black line paper prints of the preliminary plat. Preliminary plats
that correctly contain all of the information requested or required by the STRC shall be
filed with the department not less than sixteen (16) days prior to the commission meeting
at which the plat will be considered. Incomplete or incorrect submittals could cause delays
in a preliminary plat being presented to the land use authority. (Note: The submittal
requirements given herein pertain only to those plats of a conventional nature for which
rezoning is not a condition of approval. Consult with the department staff for complete
submittal, time requirements and procedures for those subdivisions involving rezoning,
planned residential unit developments, conditional use permits, and other land use
exceptions.)
2. Incomplete; Rejection: The submittal shall be checked by the department for content. If
incomplete, the subdivider will be notified and given the opportunity to comply within five
(5) days. If compliance has not been met, the submittal is rejected.
3. Timetables: Any preliminary plat pending at the time of the effective date hereof shall be
required to conform to the processing time limitations stated below. Pending preliminary
plats that have been reviewed by the STRC shall be placed into the processing time line
by observing the effective date hereof as the date of the STRC meeting, and shall be
required to meet the processing timetables as any preliminary plat submitted after the
effective date hereof.
4. Resubmittal: An applicant has ninety (90) days from the date of the STRC meeting, or
ninety (90) days from the date of receipt of later redlines, in which to resubmit said plans.
Failure to resubmit plans which address all of the STRC comments, or subsequent redline
comments, within ninety (90) days of the STRC meeting or ninety (90) days from the date
of receipt of later redlines, shall cause the application to be null and void.
5. Presentation To Land Use Authority: The preliminary plat shall be presented to the land
use authority at the first regularly scheduled meeting held at least twenty one (21) days
after the city receives preliminary plat plans addressing all of the STRC comments.
6. Substantial Nonconformance: An applicant shall be required to submit a new preliminary
plat application, including fees and another review of the subdivision by the STRC, if the
preliminary plat application, including any resubmitted versions, is not in substantial
conformance from the original application. Substantial nonconformance is considered to
be the following:
a. An increase in the number of lots or units.
b. A change in the size or configuration of the area proposed to be disturbed.
c. The realignment of any vehicular rights of way or utility facilities.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 21/69
B. Preliminary Plat Review Responsibilities:
1. Zoning: The proposed plat shall be designed to meet the specific requirements of the
zoning district within which it is located. However, in the event that rezoning is necessary
for preliminary plat approval or if a planned unit development approval is sought, such
action shall be initiated concurrently with preliminary plat review by the property owner or
his/her authorized agent.
2. Sanitary Sewerage, Water Supply And Other Public And Utility Services: As a
prerequisite of preliminary plat approval, the subdivider shall review tentative concepts
with the city engineer, the water department, the Central Weber sewer improvement
district, the electrical utility provider, the telecommunications providers, cable television
provider, Questar Gas and the North View fire department for general approval of the
preliminary design to be used.
3. Parks, Recreation And Open Space: The proposed plat shall be designed to provide the
amount and type of parks and other public open space requirements for the area as
determined by the city general plan's parks, open space and recreation plan.
4. Grading, Drainage And Streets: The proposed plat shall be designed in conformance with
the grading standards contained in this title. Drainage plans must be approved by the city
engineer. The circulation patterns must be in conformance with the city general plan's
transportation plan.
C. Preliminary Plat Approval:
1. Land Use Authority Consideration; Recommendation: The land use authority shall
consider the preliminary plat and the subdivision technical review committee requirements
and recommendations. If satisfied that all objectives and requirements of this chapter
have been met, the land use authority may grant approval of the preliminary plat and
make a notation of the land use authority's approval on the copy retained in the
permanent commission file.
2. Minor Revisions: If the plat is generally acceptable, but requires minor revisions, the land
use authority may grant conditional approval and the required revisions will be noted in
the minutes of the meeting.
3. Denial: If all of the objectives and requirements of this chapter have not been met, the
land use authority may deny approval of the preliminary plat.
D. Significance Of Preliminary Plat Approval: Preliminary plat approval constitutes authorization for
the subdivider to proceed with the preparation of the final plat and improvement plans and
specifications for public improvements. Preliminary plat approval is based on the following terms:
1. Subject To Basic Approval: The basic conditions under which preliminary approval of the
preliminary plat is granted will not be substantially changed prior to the expiration date.
2. One Year Approval With Extension: Approval is valid for a period of one year from the
date of land use authority approval. A request can be made for a single, one year
extension of the original preliminary plat approval. An extension of the preliminary plat
approval may be granted by the land use authority upon receipt of a letter from the
subdivider prior to the expiration date. Extensions are not automatically approved and are
at the discretion of the land use authority.
3. No Authority To Record: Preliminary plat approval, in itself, does not constitute
authorization to record the plat.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 22/69
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-06 on 5/11/2010
12-3-6: STAGE V; FINAL PLAT/IMPROVEMENT PLANS
This stage includes the final design of the subdivision, engineering of public improvements, and
submittal by the subdivider of improvement plans to the city engineer, Central Weber sewer
improvement district, water department, and other utilities for approval, including the submittal of the
final plat for review by the land use authority.
A. Final Plat Preparation: The final plat shall be prepared in accordance with requirements set forth
in this section and shall conform to the approved preliminary plat.
1. Improvement Plans: Improvement plans shall be submitted in accordance with the
procedures and standards adopted by the city, and the appropriate public utilities.
2. Filing Fee: The subdivider shall, at the time of filing the application(s) for the final plat and
improvement plans, pay the city the final plat application fee and any improvement plan
review, permit and inspection fees that are established by the city council.
3. Title Report: The subdivider shall, at the time of filing the application for the final plat and
improvement plans, submit an American Land Title Association (ALTA) title report
certifying that the applicant has title, acceptable to the city attorney, for all of the land
being subdivided.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 23/69
B. Information Required For Final Plat Submittal:
1. Prefinal Review: The subdivider shall file with the community development department
three (3) full sized (24 inch by 36 inch) blue or black line copies and one electronic copy,
as specified by the city, of the final plat for conventional subdivisions, and three (3) copies
for PRUDs, commercial, office and industrial centers, together with a letter of transmittal,
indicating "prefinal review requested". This review can take place anytime following the
technical review stage. The community development department, upon receipt of the
prefinal plat submittal, shall review the plat for conformity to the approved preliminary plat,
transferring the second copy to the city engineer (and/or building department for a
condominium) for their review and approval for conformance to requirements of the
subdivision regulations, subdivision technical review committee requirements and the
engineering plans.
2. Identification Data Required:
a. A title which includes the name of the subdivision and its location by number of
section, township, range and county.
b. Name, address and registration number of the seal of the Utah registered land
surveyor preparing the plat.
c. Name, address and registration number of the seal of a Utah registered
professional civil engineer responsible for the engineering that is necessary in
preparation of the proposed subdivision. The professional civil engineer shall
provide a wet seal and signature on the plat.
d. Scale, north arrow and date of plat preparation.
e. The name, address and telephone number of the property owner.
f. Address block showing the lot number and a space for an address for each lot.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 24/69
3. Survey Data Required:
a. Boundaries of the tract to be subdivided shall be fully balanced and closed,
showing all bearings, distances and mathematical calculations, determined by an
accurate survey in the field. The surveyor of record shall also provide a copy of
the computer closure, properly stamped and signed showing registration number.
All dimensions shall be expressed in feet and decimals thereof.
b. Any excepted parcels within the plat boundaries shall show all bearings and
distances, determined by an accurate survey in the field. All dimensions shall be
expressed in feet and decimals thereof.
c. Corners of the plat shall be noted and monuments found or set shall be indicated.
Each of two (2) corners of the subdivision traverse shall be tied by course and
distance to separate section corners or quarter section corners. Portions of any
adjacent property between major road intersections shall not be excluded from
within the boundaries of the subdivision when needed or required for dedication or
improvement of any traffic, drainage or flood control facility. Such areas may be
indicated as excluded tracts after necessary dedications are shown.
d. In areas subject to flooding, minimum finished floor elevations shall be shown as
determined by the city engineer.
e. Location and description of cardinal points to which all dimensions, angles,
bearings, and similar data on the plat shall be referenced. Each of two (2) corners
of the subdivision traverse shall be tied by course and distance to separate
section or quarter section corners.
f. Location of all physical encroachments upon the boundaries or the tract.
g. Total subdivision gross acres.
h. Total number of lots and parcels, and the size, in square feet, of each lot or parcel.
The size of lots or parcels greater than ten (10) acres in size may be expressed in
acres.
i. Soil erosion and sediment control plan, including grading of waterways and design
of erosion control devices.
j. Vegetation preservation and protection plan, including trees and other vegetation
proposed to be removed and which areas are to be protected.
k. Detailed information shall be provided to ensure compliance with the grading
standards of this chapter. This information includes, but is not limited to, a slope
analysis of the existing topography, slope area calculations and cut and fill grading
exhibits proposed for subdivision improvements.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 25/69
4. Descriptive Data Required:
a. Names, centerlines, right of way lines, courses, lengths and width of all public
streets, alleys, pedestrianways and utility easements; radii, points of tangency,
curve lengths, and central angles of all curvilinear streets, alleys and intersection
corners.
b. All drainageways, significant vegetation, rock outcroppings, and other natural
features shall be shown on the plat. The rights of way of all major drainageways
shall be dedicated drainage easements or right of way as determined by the city
engineer.
c. All easements for right of way provided for public services or utilities and any
limitations of the easements. The following notations shall be placed on all final
plats:
Construction within easements, except by public agencies and utility companies,
shall be limited to utilities or removable section type fencing.
d. Location, dimensions and square footage of all lots:
i. All lots shall be numbered by consecutive numbers throughout the plat.
"Exceptions", "tracts", and "common open space" shall be so designated,
lettered, or named and clearly dimensioned. Ownership and maintenance
responsibility for common open space areas shall be indicated on the plat.
ii. Location, dimensions, bearings, radii, arcs, and central angles of all sites to
be dedicated to the city with the use clearly indicated.
iii. Location of all adjoining subdivisions with date, book and page number of
recordation noted, or if unrecorded or unsubdivided, so noted.
iv. Any deed restrictions or restrictive covenants required or to be imposed
upon the plat or any part or parts thereof pertaining to the intended use of
the land shall be submitted as a part of the total recording submittal.
v. Dedication and acknowledgment:
(1) Statement of dedication of all streets, alleys, drainage
detention/retention basins and drainageways, pedestrian/bicycle
ways, and easements for public use, including sanitation, utility, fire
and other emergency related vehicles, executed by the person
holding title of record, by persons holding titles as vendees under
land contract, by the spouses of said parties, lienholders and all
other parties having an interest in the property. If lands dedicated
are liened, the lienholder shall also sign the plat. Dedication shall
include a written location by section, township and range of the
tract. If the plat contains private streets, the public easement which
shall be reserved shall include the right to install and maintain
utilities in any approved private street, including refuse collections,
fire and other emergency services.
(2) Execution of dedication shall be acknowledged and certified by a
notary public.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 26/69
5. Required Certification: Certification by the Utah registered land surveyor preparing the
plat that the plat is correct and accurate and that the monuments described in it have
either been set or located as described. All maps shall contain the seal of a registered
land surveyor, as per Utah Code § 10-9-804.
6. Corrections: Discrepancies, errors and omissions are noted on the prefinal copies and
returned to the subdivider or his/her representative for correction. When corrections are
minor, the community development department shall give notification of the next land use
authority meeting date and its associated resubmittal cutoff date. When corrections or
discrepancies are of major importance or of a significant nature, the department staff may
require a second review prior to scheduling the plat for land use authority action.
7. Time Limit For Corrections: The subdivider shall make all required corrections prior to
submitting for land use authority action. The submittal shall include one eleven inch by
seventeen inch (11" x 17") black line print of all final plat sheets in the set, one electronic
copy as specified by the city, and three (3) full sized, twenty four inch by thirty six inch
(24" x 36") set of blue or black line paper prints of all final plat and improvement plan
sheets to the department, along with a letter of transmittal requesting to be scheduled for
land use authority approval.
C. Certifications: Prior to land use authority approval, the following certifications shall be made:
1. Certification by the city engineer of plat approval and that all engineering conditions and
requirements have been met and that the improvement plans have been completed and
approved by the city engineer.
2. Certification by the community development director of plat approval and that the final plat
meets all subdivision ordinance regulations.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 27/69
D. Final Approval:
1. The applicant shall submit fifteen (15) full sized twenty four inch by thirty six inch (24" x
36") blue or black line paper prints of the final plat, one eleven inch by seventeen inch
(11" x 17") black line print, and one electronic copy as specified by the city. Final plats
that correctly contain all of the information requested or required by the land use authority
shall be filed with the department not less than sixteen (16) days prior to the land use
authority meeting at which the plat will be considered.
2. The land use authority shall approve the final plat if satisfied that all the requirements of
preliminary approval and the objectives and requirements of this title have been met.
3. The final approval of the land use authority is valid for one year from the date of granting
final approval by the land use authority. After the one year of approval has passed, the
final approval shall be null and void unless an extension of final approval has been
requested by the developer and granted by the land use authority.
During the time of final approval of the subdivision by the land use authority, the
developer shall submit a copy of the subdivision mylar(s), subdivision improvement
drawings, a copy of the subdivision improvement guarantee documents and any other
documents the subdivider desires to record with the subdivision.
4. The land use authority may grant a maximum of one extension for a period of one year. It
may also grant a shorter time, depending on conditions of approval.
5. The final plat shall be drawn in black ink on polyester mylar, measuring exactly twenty
four inches by thirty six inches (24" x 36") with a left hand margin of two inches (2") and
be drawn to an accurate engineering scale from an accurate survey. The scale shall be
approved by the city engineer. The applicant shall also submit a computerized drawing of
the final plat in a file format required by the city.
6. The applicant shall submit, prior to final plat recordation and at the time of mylar
submission, computerized file drawings of the final plat and some or all of the approved
improvement plans in a file format required by the city.
7. Certification by the land use authority secretary attesting to the land use authority chair's
signature and the date the map was approved by the land use authority.
8. When the certificate of approval by the land use authority has been transcribed on the
plat, the city engineer shall retain the recording copy until the city engineer certifies that
the subdivision has been staked; that the engineering plans have been approved;
computer closure of the plat has been received; that the subdivision improvement
construction assurances are in the form and amount to the satisfaction of the city
engineer and the city attorney, along with the engineer's estimated cost of said
improvements has been received; and that any drainage or other restrictive covenants
have been signed, notarized and received from the subdivider.
9. Upon receipt of the fees and documents listed in subsection D8 of this section, the city
shall then cause the final plat to be recorded in the office of the county recorder with the
petitioner paying any fees due to the Weber County recorder's office.
10. A certificate of recordation by the county recorder is caused to be placed on the recording
copies and filed in the office of the county recorder. (Copies with book and page number
can be requested by the subdivider for the county's standard fee.)
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-06 on 5/11/2010
12-3-7: VACATING OR CHANGING A SUBDIVISION PLAT
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 28/69
A. Recorded Subdivision: Any division of a lot in a recorded subdivision, or any change in lot lines in
a recorded subdivision, shall be processed in accordance with CCNO 12-3-6, after a
preapplication conference with city staff as provided in CCNO 12-3-2.
B. Vacation, Alteration Or Amendment: The procedure for vacating, altering or amending a
subdivision plat shall be as provided in Utah Code § 10-9a-608.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-06 on 5/11/2010
12-3-8: APPENDIX
Multiple notations are required to appear on a final plat. The notations that are standard on every final
plat include, but are not limited to the following:
A. Assurance statement as follows:
ASSURANCE STATEMENT:
ASSURANCE IN THE FORM OF A, ISSUED FROM IN THE AMOUNT OF $ HAS BEEN
DEPOSITED WITH THE CITY ENGINEER TO GUARANTEE CONSTRUCTION OF THE
REQUIRED SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS.
B. Conveyance and dedication statement as follows:
CONVEYANCE AND DEDICATION:
KNOW ALL BY THESE PRESENTS THAT (OWNER'S NAME), AS OWNER(S), HAVE
SUBDIVIDED (OR RESUBDIVIDED) UNDER THE NAME OF (NAME OF SUBDIVISION), (ADD
SECTION, TOWNSHIP AND RANGE) OF THE SALT LAKE BASE AND MERIDIAN, WEBER
COUNTY, UTAH AS SHOWN PLATTED HEREON, AND HEREBY PUBLISHES THIS PLAT AS
AND FOR THE PLAT OF SAID (SUBDIVISION NAME), AND HEREBY DECLARES THAT SAID
PLAT SETS FORTH THE LOCATION AND GIVES THE DIMENSIONS OF ALL LOTS,
EASEMENTS, TRACTS AND STREETS CONSTITUTING THE SAME, AND THAT EACH LOT,
TRACT AND STREET SHALL BE KNOWN BY THE NUMBER, LETTER AND NAME GIVEN
EACH RESPECTIVELY, AND THAT (OWNER'S NAME), AS OWNER, HEREBY DEDICATES
TO THE PUBLIC FOR USE AS SUCH THE STREETS AND HEREBY DEDICATES TO THE
PUBLIC THE DRAINAGE AND PUBLIC UTILITY EASEMENTS AS SHOWN ON SAID PLAT. IN
WITNESS (OWNER'S NAME), AS OWNER, HAS HEREUNTO CAUSED ITS NAME TO BE
SIGNED AND THE SAME TO BE ATTESTED BY THE SIGNATURE OF (OWNER OR
DESIGNATED SIGNATORY AND TITLE).
BY: DATE:
OWNER'S NAME AND TITLE
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 29/69
C. Notary acknowledgment statement as follows:
NOTARY ACKNOWLEDGMENT:
STATE OF UTAH)
COUNTY OF WEBER)
ON THIS, THE DAY OF , (YEAR), BEFORE ME THE UNDERSIGNED (TITLE) PERSONALLY
APPEARED (NAME) WHO ACKNOWLEDGES THAT HE/SHE EXECUTED THE FOREGOING
INSTRUMENT FOR THE PURPOSES CONTAINED THEREIN.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF I HEREUNTO SET MY HAND AND OFFICIAL SEAL
NOTARY PUBLIC
MY COMMISSION EXPIRES
D. Land use authority approval certifications as follows:
LAND USE AUTHORITY APPROVAL:
APPROVED BY THE LAND USE AUTHORITY OF NORTH OGDEN CITY, UTAH, THIS DAY OF
, (YEAR)
BY:
LAND USE AUTHORITY CHAIR
ATTEST:
LAND USE AUTHORITY SECRETARY
APPROVALS:
THIS PLAT WAS APPROVED BY THE CITY ENGINEER AND THE COMMUNITY
DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR.
BY:
CITY ENGINEERDATE
BY:
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTORDATE
E. City attorney certification as follows:
CITY ATTORNEY CERTIFICATION:
I CERTIFY THAT THE REQUIREMENTS OF ALL APPLICABLE STATUTES AND
ORDINANCES PREREQUISITE BY THE STATE OF UTAH AND THE ORDINANCES OF
NORTH OGDEN CITY OF THE FOREGOING PLAT AND DEDICATIONS HAVE BEEN
COMPLIED WITH. DATED THIS DAY OF (MONTH), (YEAR).
CITY ATTORNEY DATE
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 30/69
F. Surveyor's certification as follows:
SURVEYORS CERTIFICATION:
THIS IS TO CERTIFY THE SURVEY AND SUBDIVISION PREMISES DESCRIBED AND
PLATTED HEREON WERE MADE UNDER MY DIRECTION DURING THE MONTH OF ,
(YEAR), THAT THE PLAT IS CORRECT AND ACCURATE, THAT THE MONUMENTS SHOWN
HEREON HAVE BEEN LOCATED OR ESTABLISHED AS DESCRIBED AND LOT CORNERS
HAVE BEEN PERMANENTLY SET.
(SURVEYOR'S NAME AND REGISTRATION NUMBER) (STAMP)
(SURVEYOR'S ADDRESS)
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-06 on 5/11/2010
12-3-9: DEVELOPMENT IN HP-1, HP-2 AND HP-3 ZONES
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the procedure for submission and review of
subdivisions in the hillside protection zones (HP-1, HP-2 and HP-3) shall be as follows:
A. Steps Generally: The submission and review process consists of four (4) basic review steps:
1. Submission of a conceptual sketch plan and review of the sketch plan with the community
development director;
2. Submission and review of a preliminary plat and preliminary development plan ("the
preliminary documents") and review of the preliminary documents by the land use
authority;
3. Submission and review of a final plat and final development plan ("the final documents")
and review and approval of the final documents by the land use authority; and
4. Review and approval of the final documents by the city council.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 31/69
B. Conceptual Sketch Plan:
1. The purpose of the conceptual sketch plan is to evaluate the appropriateness of the
proposed development based on the consideration of the existing features and perceived
constraints of the proposed site.
2. The conceptual sketch plan shall contain:
a. All items required by CCNO 12-3-2A;
b. Basic site analysis, including existing features of the site (i.e., existing plant
materials, steep slopes, rock outcroppings, views, etc.), and describe how the
existing features will be incorporated into the proposed development;
c. Traffic flow patterns into, through and out of the proposed development, including
vehicular traffic, pedestrian traffic and any other traffic the applicant anticipates in
the site;
d. The general location of housing units by type (i.e., detached dwelling units and
attached dwelling units), along with other appropriate uses and amenities; andThe
existing land uses bordering the proposed site.
3. The applicant shall meet with the community development director to discuss the
conceptual sketch plan and what constraints for development are believed to exist at the
site.
4. Following the meeting with the applicant, the community development department shall
undertake the actions described in CCNO 12-3-2B.
5. Following the meeting with the community development director, the applicant may, at the
applicant's option, present the conceptual sketch plan to the land use authority. During
the presentation, the applicant may explain why he or she believes the proposed
development is appropriate for the site.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 32/69
C. Preliminary Document Review:
1. Following completion of conceptual plan review, the applicant may file a preliminary plat
and a preliminary development plan ("the preliminary documents").
a. The preliminary plat shall meet all of the requirements of CCNO 12-3-3A through
G.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 33/69
b. The preliminary development plan shall contain the following information:
i. An engineering study of the site which complies with the requirements of
CCNO 11-9-4C;
ii. Topographic maps of the entire site in accordance with CCNO 11-9-4D1a;
iii. A tabulation of the total acreage of the site and the percentages of the
acreage to be dedicated for:
(1) parking;
(2) streets and travelways;
(3) various types of residential units;
(4) other buildings and structures;
(5) open space;
(6) waterways; and
(7) other relevant aspects of the site;
iv. The proposed circulation patterns, including public and private streets and
any path systems;
v. The proposed location of all parking and ingress and egress;
vi. The proposed location of parks, common open spaces, playgrounds,
schools, recreation facilities and other similar types of improvements;
vii. The proposed location of all dwellings by type and number of dwelling units
per building, along with other buildings (e.g., recreational buildings or
clubhouses) or structures (e.g., fencing, lighting and signs);
viii. The proposed location of each phase, if the project is to be done in
phases;
ix. A table of densities for each development phase with an overall density for
the entire development;
x. A general landscape plan showing the areas to be landscaped and the
retention of existing plant materials and landscape features, along with the
use of plant materials for buffers and screening;
xi. Preliminary building elevations with notation of building materials of all
building types proposed within the development, excluding detached
single-unit dwellings;
xii. A preliminary subdivision design, showing a general layout and buildable
area;
xiii. A preliminary utility plan showing the manner in which adequate sewage
disposal, subsurface drainage and water will be provided to the site. The
utility plan should also show where these services will be extended;
xiv. All information necessary to establish that all proposed grading and cut
and fill work in the proposed subdivision complies with the cut and fill
standards of CCNO 11-9-5; and
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 34/69
xv. Other information as required by the community development director as
being necessary to determine whether the proposed development is in
accordance with the applicable standards.
c. The preliminary plat and the preliminary development plan may be included in a
single submission; provided, that all of the requirements of both documents are
met.
d. At the time the preliminary documents are submitted, the applicant shall also
submit an application fee pursuant to CCNO 12-3-3I.
e. Following submission of the preliminary documents, the community development
department shall submit the preliminary documents to the subdivision technical
review committee (STRC) pursuant to CCNO 12-3-4.
f. After the STRC review of the preliminary documents, the applicant will be required
to make changes to the preliminary documents to comply with the findings of the
STRC and resubmit the preliminary documents.
g. Following the review of the preliminary documents by the STRC, the applicant
shall submit amended preliminary documents pursuant to the terms of CCNO 12-
3-5A.
h. Following resubmission of the preliminary documents, the preliminary documents
shall be reviewed in compliance with the terms of CCNO 12-3-5B through D.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 35/69
D. Final Plat And Final Development Plan Review:
1. The final plat and final development plan ("the final documents") shall be submitted to the
city in compliance with CCNO 12-3-6A through C. The final documents must be submitted
within twelve (12) months of the date of approval of the preliminary documents. Failure to
submit the final documents within this time shall result in the approval of the preliminary
documents becoming null and void; provided, that the land use authority may grant a
onetime six (6) month extension upon a showing of good cause. Requests for this
extension must be made prior to the expiration of the approval period.
2. The final documents shall contain all of the information required in the preliminary
documents.
3. In addition, the final documents shall contain the following information:
a. A detailed site plan showing the precise location of all buildings and structures, the
location of developed common activity area and recreational uses, and
waterways;
b. Detailed circulation patterns, streets and trails, and any other relevant aspects of
the site;
c. Parking layout showing the location of individual stalls and all areas of ingress and
egress;
d. Design of entryways, along with elevations of proposed signs;
e. A detailed landscape plan showing the location, types and sizes of all plant
materials, sprinkling or irrigation systems, screening and fencing;
f. Final elevations of all buildings proposed within the development with notation of
building materials, excluding detached single-family dwellings;
g. Detailed engineering plans, including site grading, street improvements, drainage
and public utility locations; and
h. A time schedule for the completion of landscaping and amenities (e.g.,
recreational facilities, trails and entry signs).
i. Prior to recording the final plat each public utility will sign the plat of the proposed
subdivision.
4. The final documents shall include a plat in a form acceptable for recording in the Weber
County recorder's office.
5. The final documents shall be reviewed by the land use authority. The land use authority
may approve the final documents, deny approval of the final documents or approve the
final documents with conditions.
6. After the land use authority approves the development, the community development
department shall record the plat in the office of the Weber County recorder, with the
petitioner paying any fees due to the Weber County recorder's office.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2010-06 on 5/11/2010
12-4: ASSURANCE FOR COMPLETION AND MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS
12-4-1: IMPROVEMENTS AND GUARANTEE
12-4-2: INSPECTION OF IMPROVEMENTS
12-4-3: ACCEPTANCE OF OFF SITE IMPROVEMENTS
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 36/69
12-4-4: SPECIAL EXCEPTION FOR SIDEWALK
12-4-5: ISSUANCE OF PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES
12-4-1: IMPROVEMENTS AND GUARANTEE
A. Required; Method: The owner of any land which has been laid out, platted and recorded
pursuant to the provisions of this title shall at his own expense install the required improvements
within a period of two (2) years from the date the final plat is recorded. The owner shall ensure or
guarantee the installation of such improvements by one or a combination of one or more of the
following methods designated by the city:
1. Performance Bonds: The developer may furnish and file with the city recorder a corporate
surety bond, approved by the city council and city attorney, in an amount equal to the cost
of the required improvements plus ten percent (10%), as estimated by the developer and
approved by the city engineer, to secure the installation of required improvements within
two (2) years from the date the final plat is recorded.
2. Deposit In Escrow: The developer may deposit in escrow with an escrow holder approved
by the city council an amount of money equal to the cost of improvements required plus
ten percent (10%), as estimated by the developer and approved by the city engineer,
under an escrow agreement conditioned for the installation of the improvements within
two (2) years from the date the final plat is recorded. The escrow agreement aforesaid
shall be approved by the city council and city attorney and shall be filed with the city
recorder.
3. Letters Of Credit: The developer may cause the issuance of a letter of credit by a financial
institution approved by the city council and city attorney in an amount equal to the cost of
the required improvements plus ten percent (10%), as estimated by the developer and
approved by the city engineer, to secure the installation of required improvements within
two (2) years from the date the final plat is recorded.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 37/69
4. Lien Agreement:
a. The developer shall be required to execute, acknowledge and cause to be
recorded in the office of the county recorder a written agreement with the city by
which he will covenant and agree not to lease or convey any land located within
the subdivision to anyone whomsoever unless he shall first, as a condition
precedent thereto, either:
i. Install and pay for all of the improvements set forth in this title necessary to
the full, effective and practical use and enjoyment thereof by the lessee or
grantee of the lands so to be conveyed, including, but not limited to, all
street improvements in front of such property and thence along the
dedicated streets to a connection with existing improvements of the same
kind or to the boundary of the subdivision nearest said existing
improvements, whichever is closer;
ii. File a bond as provided in subsection A1 of this section to secure the
installation and/or completion of all uncompleted improvements specified in
CCNO 12-6; or
iii. Establish an escrow account as provided in subsection A2 of this section to
secure the installation and or completion of all incomplete improvements
specified in CCNO 12-6.
b. The lien agreement shall specifically provide that it shall be deemed to be a
covenant running with the land located within the subdivision for the benefit of the
city and shall particularly and accurately describe the lands. By the agreement, the
developer shall further give and grant to the city a lien on the lands to secure
performance of the covenant and agreement and to secure the installation of all of
the required improvements, together with the payment of all costs, including
reasonable attorney fees, which the city may incur in enforcing any of the terms
and provisions of the agreement.
B. Default; Extension: In the event the developer defaults, fails or neglects to satisfactorily install the
required improvements within two (2) years from the date the final plat is recorded, the city may
declare the bond or escrow deposit forfeited, and the city may install or cause the required
improvements to be installed using the proceeds from the collection of the bond or escrow to
defray the expense thereof. The city council may, upon proof of difficulty, extend the completion
date for a maximum period of one additional year.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 16.16.010 on 1/1/1987
12-4-2: INSPECTION OF IMPROVEMENTS
A. General Procedure: The building inspector, with the advice of the city engineer, shall provide the
inspection of required improvements during construction and ensure their satisfactory
completion. If he finds, upon inspection, that any of the required improvements have not been
constructed in accordance with the city construction standards and specifications, the applicant
shall be responsible for completing the improvements.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 38/69
B. Reduction Of Performance Bond Or Escrow Funds: The city shall not release nor reduce a
performance bond or escrow funds on any required improvement until the developer provides a
statement for monies requested signed by the city engineer or building inspector noting the
improvements have been satisfactorily completed. In no event shall escrow funds or a
performance bond be reduced below ten percent (10%) of the principal amount.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 16.16.020 on 1/1/1987
12-4-3: ACCEPTANCE OF OFF SITE IMPROVEMENTS
A. Conditional Acceptance; Seal Coat:
1. After the completion of all off site improvements and upon receiving a written statement
from the city engineer that all required improvements have been satisfactorily completed,
the city council shall conditionally accept the improvements for a one year guarantee
period. Such approval shall not be given until the applicant's engineer has certified to the
city engineer, through submission of detailed as built construction plans of the
subdivision, indicating location, dimensions, materials and other information required by
the city engineer, that the layout of the line and grade of all public improvements is in
accordance with the construction plans filed with the final plat. The as built plans shall be
submitted in ink on reproducible Mylar. A minimum of ten percent (10%) of the total
principal amount of the escrow funds or performance bond will be held during this one
year guarantee period.
2. Developer would have option of paying to city the necessary funds to cover cost of seal
coat. If this option is taken, conditional acceptance could be given prior to completion of
seal coat work by city.
B. Guarantee Period: The developer shall warrant and guarantee that the improvements provided
for hereunder and every part thereof will remain in good condition for a period of one year after
the date of conditional acceptance by the city, and agrees to make all repairs to maintain the
improvements and every part thereof in good condition during the guarantee period at no cost to
the city. The guarantee shall extend to and include, but shall not be limited to, the entire street,
subgrade base and surface, all pipes, curbs, gutters, approaches, sidewalks, fences and other
accessories that are or may be affected by the construction operations. Whenever in the
judgment of the city engineer, the work shall be in need of repair, maintenance or rebuilding, the
engineer shall cause a written notice to be served upon the developer and thereupon the
developer shall undertake and complete such repairs, maintenance or rebuilding. The
determination of the necessity for repairs and maintenance of the work rests with the city
engineer, whose decision upon the matter shall be final and binding upon the developer. Upon
the developer's failure to perform the required repair work within sixty (60) days from the date of
service of such written notice, the city shall have such repairs made, and the cost of such repairs
shall be paid out of the ten percent (10%) escrow account held by city.
C. Final Acceptance: Except for sidewalks and seal coat, final inspection by the city engineer shall
be made eleven (11) months after conditional acceptance or as close as weather conditions
permit. All defects as noted in the final inspection report of the city engineer shall be corrected to
the satisfaction of the city engineer. Final acceptance shall be in writing by the city council after
written approval is received from the city engineer. After final acceptance by the city council, the
remaining balance in the escrow fund or performance bond shall be released. Final acceptance
may be given with respect to seal coat after the developer has deposited with the city such sums
as may be necessary to cover the cost of seal coat as determined by the city engineer. In such
event, the city would then assume responsibility for applying or causing the application of the
seal coat.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 39/69
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 16.16.030 on 1/1/1987
12-4-4: SPECIAL EXCEPTION FOR SIDEWALK
A. Conditional Acceptance: The building official, in his/her discretion, may allow the developer an
additional one year from the date of conditional acceptance of the off site improvements to install
the sidewalk in the subdivision; provided, that:
1. The subdivision does not front on a major street where installation of the sidewalks is
necessary for the safety of the general citizenry;
2. All lots built on in the subdivision have sidewalk installed on the lot where shown on the
construction plan;
3. Sidewalks must be installed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any
dwelling in the subdivision;
4. No more than seventy five percent (75%) of the lots are built on in the subdivision. When
the percentage of lots built on exceeds seventy five percent (75%), the sidewalk must be
installed before any additional building permits are issued;
5. The city shall not conditionally accept any of the sidewalks prior to the installation of the
entire sidewalk required in the subdivision;
6. The city retains ten percent (10%) of the escrow funds for the sidewalk until it receives
final acceptance by the city council.
B. Guarantee Period: The developer shall warrant and guarantee that the sidewalk will remain in
good condition for a period of twelve (12) months after the date of conditional acceptance of the
sidewalk by the city council and shall make all repairs to and maintain the sidewalk in good
condition during the guarantee period at no cost to the city. The determination of the necessity
for repairs and maintenance or work rests with the city engineer, whose decision upon the matter
shall be final and binding on the developer.
C. Final Acceptance: Final acceptance of the sidewalk will follow the same procedure as outlined in
CCNO 12-4-3C.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2009-09 on 7/28/2009
12-4-5: ISSUANCE OF PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES
A. Certificate Of Occupancy: The extent of street improvements shall be adequate for vehicular
access by the prospective occupancy and by police and fire equipment prior to the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy. For purposes of this section, "adequate" shall mean grading and road
base (crushed gravel).
B. Building Permit: No building permit shall be issued nor liens released for the final ten percent
(10%) of lots in a subdivision, or if ten percent (10%) is less than two (2), for the final two (2) lots
of a subdivision, until all public improvements required by the city council for the plat have been
fully completed and conditionally accepted by the city council.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 16.16.050 on 1/1/1987
12-5: MINOR SUBDIVISIONS
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 40/69
12-5-1: DEFINED
12-5-2: CITY COUNCIL APPROVAL
12-5-3: AGRICULTURAL LAND
12-5-4: UNAPPROVED SUBDIVISIONS
12-5-1: DEFINED
"Minor subdivision" means a subdivision of less than ten (10) lots, each having frontage on an existing,
dedicated street.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2005-06 on 7/26/2005
12-5-2: CITY COUNCIL APPROVAL
A. Less Than Ten Lots: Before the approval of a minor subdivision, the city council shall certify on a
document the following:
1. The planning commission has made recommendation to the city council;
2. The subdivision is not traversed by the mapped lines of a proposed street as shown in the
general plan;
3. The subdivision does not require the dedication of any street or other public purposes;
4. Each lot meets the frontage, width and area requirements of the zoning district where the
subdivision is located, or has been granted a variance from those requirements by the
administrative law judge;
5. The subdivision has less than ten (10) lots;
6. The subdivision does not require any new utilities or utility line extensions.
B. Less Than Five Lots:
1. Subdivisions with fewer than five (5) lots which also meet subsections A2, A3, A4 and A6
of this section may be approved by the community development director, mayor and the
city administrator.
2. Any such subdivision approval shall be reported to the planning commission and city
council at their respectively next scheduled meeting.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2011-11 on 5/24/2011
12-5-3: AGRICULTURAL LAND
A. Subject to subsection B of this section, a lot or parcel resulting from a division of agricultural land
is exempt from the plat requirements of this title, if the lot or parcel:
1. Qualifies as land in agricultural use under Utah Code 59-2 Part 5, farmland assessment
act;
2. Meets the minimum size requirement of applicable zoning ordinances; and
3. Is not used and will not be used for any nonagricultural purpose.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 41/69
B. The boundaries of each lot or parcel exempted under subsection A of this section shall be
graphically illustrated on a record of survey map that, after receiving the same approvals as are
required for a plat under CCNO 12-3, shall be recorded with the county recorder.
C. If a lot or parcel exempted under subsection A of this section is used for nonagricultural
purposes, the city may require the lot or parcel to comply with the requirements of CCNO 12-3.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2005-06 on 7/26/2005
12-5-4: UNAPPROVED SUBDIVISIONS
A. A person may not submit to the county recorder's office for recording a document that
subdivides property by metes and bounds unless it contains the certificate or written approval
required by CCNO 12-5-2.
B. The recording of a document that subdivides property by metes and bounds and does not
contain the certificate or written approval required by CCNO 12-5-2:
1. Does not affect the validity of the document; and
2. Does not affect whether the subdivided property complies with applicable city ordinances
on land use and development.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2005-06 on 7/26/2005
12-6: IMPROVEMENTS, RESERVATIONS AND DESIGN
12-6-1: GENERAL IMPROVEMENTS
12-6-2: LOT IMPROVEMENTS
12-6-3: STREETS
12-6-4: DRAINAGE AND STORM SEWERS
12-6-5: SUBSURFACE DRAINAGE
12-6-6: WATER FACILITIES
12-6-7: SECONDARY WATER SYSTEM
12-6-8: SEWERAGE FACILITIES
12-6-9: SIDEWALKS
12-6-10: UTILITIES
12-6-11: PUBLIC USES
12-6-12: IRRIGATION WATER
12-6-13: PRESERVATION OF NATURAL FEATURES AND AMENITIES
12-6-14: NONRESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION
12-6-15: STREETLIGHTS
12-6-16: TRAILS
12-6-1: GENERAL IMPROVEMENTS
A. Conformance To Applicable Rules And Regulations: In addition to the requirements established
herein, all subdivision plats shall comply with the following laws, rules and regulations:
1. All applicable statutory provisions;
2. The zoning ordinance, building and housing codes, and all other applicable laws of the
city;
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 42/69
3. The general plan, official street map and capital facilities plan of the city, including all
streets, drainage systems and parks shown on the official street map or general plan, as
adopted;
4. The special requirements of these regulations and any rules of the health department
and/or appropriate state agencies;
5. The rules of the state highway department if the subdivision or any lot contained therein
abuts a state highway;
6. The public works standards and technical specifications of the city.
B. Monuments: The applicant shall place permanent reference monuments in the subdivision as
required herein and as approved by the city engineer:
1. Monuments shall be located on street right of way centerlines, at street intersections, and
at such other points as determined necessary by the city engineer.
2. All monuments shall be set in an approved ground box as specified in the public works
standards for the city.
3. All monuments shall be properly set in the ground by the developer and approved by the
city engineer prior to the time the city council grants conditional acceptance of the
subdivision.
C. Character Of The Land: Land which the planning commission finds to be unsuitable for
subdivision or development due to flooding, wetlands, improper drainage, steep slopes, rock
formations, adverse earth formations or topography, utility easements or other such features
which will reasonably be harmful to the safety, health and general welfare of the present or future
inhabitants of the subdivision and/or its surrounding areas, shall not be laid out or platted or
developed unless adequate methods are formulated by the developer and approved by the
planning commission and city council, upon recommendation of the city engineer, to solve the
problems created by the unsuitable land conditions. Such land shall be set aside for uses as
shall not involve such a danger.
D. Soil Conditions: Buildings or structures shall not be sited on soft or unsuitable soils, where there
is a high water table, or a site subject to flooding as noted on the city's floodplain map, or on
uncompacted fill in accordance with the city public works standards.
E. Subdivision Name: The proposed name of the subdivision shall not duplicate or too closely
approximate phonetically the name of any other subdivision in Weber County.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 16.20.010 on 1/1/1987
12-6-2: LOT IMPROVEMENTS
A. Lot Arrangement: The lot arrangement shall be such that there will be no foreseeable difficulties,
for reasons of topography or other conditions, in securing building permits to build on all lots in
compliance with the zoning ordinance and health regulations and in providing driveway access to
building on such lots from an approved street.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 43/69
B. Lot Dimensions: Lot dimensions shall comply with the minimum standards of the zoning
ordinance. Where lots are more than double the minimum required area for the zoning district,
the planning commission may require that such lots be arranged so as to allow further
subdivision and the opening of future streets where they would be necessary to serve such
potential lots, all in compliance with the zoning ordinance and these regulations. In general, side
lot lines shall be at right angles to street lines (or radial to surveying street lines) unless variation
from this rule will give a better street to allow for erection of buildings, observing the minimum
front yard and side setbacks from both streets. Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out
for business, commercial or industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off street
parking and loading facilities required for the type of use and development contemplated, as
established in the zoning ordinance; all property located within a subdivision shall be included
within the boundaries of a road, lot or other improved area such that no parts or parcels of land
therein remain unusable.
C. Double/Reversed Frontage Lots And Access To Lots:
1. Double Frontage Lots: Double frontage and reversed frontage lots shall be avoided
except where necessary to provide separation of residential development from streets or
to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation.
2. Access From Arterial Streets: Lots should not, in general, derive access exclusively from
an arterial street. Where driveway access from a primary or secondary arterial street may
be necessary for several adjoining lots, the planning commission may require that such
lots be served by a combined access drive in order to limit possible traffic hazard on such
street. Where possible, driveways should be designed and arranged so as to avoid
requiring vehicles to back into traffic on major streets.
D. R Lot:
1. All R lots shall be developed in accordance with CCNO 11-19.
2. All R lots shall be clearly identified on the recorded plat and on a recordable instrument in
form acceptable to the city. The instrument shall be recorded in the office of the Weber
County recorder at the time the final plat is recorded in order to provide notice to potential
lot purchasers of the existence of limitations imposed upon R lot development.
E. Debris And Waste: No cut trees, timber, debris, earth, rocks, stones, soil, junk, rubbish or other
waste materials of any kind shall be buried on any land, or left or deposited on any lot or street at
the time of conditional acceptance of the subdivision by the city council, and removal of the same
shall be required prior to final acceptance by the city council.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 44/69
F. Fencing: The developer of a subdivision shall be required to furnish and install a solid board,
chainlink, wrought iron, or other solid material fence not less than 6’ in height, as part of the
approval of a subdivision, according to the following requirements:
1. Open Canals and Irrigation Ditches: Fencing meeting the requirements of this ordinance
shall be installed along lots and other property in a subdivision in areas where a
subdivision borders an existing open canal or irrigation ditch.
2. Open Reservoirs and Drainage Channels: Fencing meeting the requirements of this
ordinance shall be constructed along lots and other property in a subdivision, in areas
where the subdivision borders upon open reservoirs, and drainage channels.
3. Schools, Churches, Park Sites and Double-Fronted Lots: In areas where a subdivision
borders schools, churches, and park sites, fencing meeting the requirements of this
ordinance shall be constructed along lots and other property in the subdivision. Fencing
meeting the requirements of this ordinance shall also be constructed in the rear yards of
double-fronted lots.
4. Screening Value, Maintenance, Plat Notes, and Certificates of Occupancy: A 90%
screening value shall be considered a ‘solid material’ for the purposes of this ordinance.
All such fences shall be maintained and kept in good repair by the owner of the property
contiguous to or upon which the fence is erected. A note shall be required to be included
on the subdivision plat, indicating where the fence was required by the Planning
Commission, and the basic characteristics of the required fence. No certificate of
occupancy shall be issued for buildings upon lots where fencing has been required until
that fencing has been installed as required.
5. Interpretation, Waiver of Required Fencing in Specific Locations, and Modification of
Fencing Materials and Characteristics: The areas where fences are required by this
ordinance may be interpreted broadly by the Planning Commission, if such interpretation
furthers the purpose of creating a more effective barrier between a subdivision and a
safety hazard or an incompatible land use. The requirement for fencing may be waived in
specific locations, if the applicant requests such, upon the approval of the Planning
Commission. Factors to be considered in this determination may include topography,
slope, total elevation change, traffic, or additional safety-related factors. Similarly, the
Planning Commission may approve a fence made of other materials which are
determined by the Commission to serve as an effective barrier fence, if the applicant
requests such. The Commission may also, upon request of the applicant, approve other
variations in fence characteristics.
G. Staking Of Lots: Permanent corner markers shall be placed at all rear lot corners to completely
identify the lot boundaries on the ground. Front lot corners shall be identified with permanent
reference plugs or nails in the concrete curb. All lot corner markers must be in place prior to the
issuance of building permits and after the completion of all subdivision improvements. All lot
corners shall be designated in accordance with state/county survey laws.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 16.20.020 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2016-03 on 1/20/2016
Amended by Ord. 2018-26 on 11/13/2018
12-6-3: STREETS
A. General Requirements:
1. Frontage On Improved Streets: No subdivision shall be approved unless the area to be
laid out and platted shall have frontage on and access from an existing street on the
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 45/69
official map or if there be no official map, unless the street is:
a. An existing state or county highway; or
b. A street shown upon a plat approved by the city council and recorded in the
county recorder's office. Such street or highway must be suitably improved as
required by the city public works standards or be secured by a performance bond
or escrow required under these subdivision regulations, with the width and right of
way required by these subdivision regulations or the official street plan.
Wherever the area to be laid out and platted is to utilize existing street frontage,
such street shall be suitably improved as provided hereinabove.
2. Grading And Improvement Plan: Streets shall be graded and improved and conform to
the city public works standards and shall be approved as to design and specifications by
the city engineer, in accordance with the construction plans required to be submitted prior
to final plat approval.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 46/69
3. Topography And Arrangement:
a. Streets shall be related appropriately to the topography. All streets shall be
arranged so as to obtain as many as possible of the building sites at or above the
grades of the streets. Grades of streets shall conform as closely as possible to the
original topography. A combination of steep grades and curves shall be avoided.
Specific standards are contained in the public works standards of the city.
b. All streets shall be properly integrated with the existing and proposed system of
thoroughfares and dedicated rights of way established on the official map and/or
general plan. Such integration shall take topographical conditions into
consideration. The street arrangements shall not cause unnecessary hardship to
owners of adjoining property when they plat their own land and seek to provide
convenient access to it.
i. Half streets proposed along a subdivision boundary or within any part of a
subdivision shall not be permitted.
ii. Standard residential streets shall approach the arterial or collector streets
at an angle of not less than eighty degrees (80°).
c. All streets shall be properly related to special traffic generators such as industries,
business districts, schools, churches and shopping centers; to population
densities; and to the pattern of existing and proposed land uses.
d. Minor streets shall be laid out to conform as much as possible to the topography,
to discourage use by through traffic, to permit efficient drainage and utility
systems, and to require the minimum number of streets necessary to provide
convenient and safe access to property.
e. Proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of the subdivision. All
streets required to be extended to the boundary lines of the subdivision shall be
properly barricaded to the satisfaction of the city engineer.
f. In business and industrial developments, the streets and other accessways shall
be planned in connection with the grouping of buildings, and the provision for
alleys, truck loading and maneuvering areas, walks and parking areas so as to
minimize conflict or movement between the various types of traffic, including
pedestrian.
g. All streets in subdivisions in the city shall be dedicated to the city except that
private streets may be approved under special circumstances as determined by
the planning commission.
h. Arterial, collector and/or residential streets shall conform to the width designated
on the master street plan whenever a subdivision falls in an area for which a
master street plan has been adopted. For territory where such street plan has not
been completed at the time the preliminary plat is submitted to the planning
commission, arterial or collector streets shall be provided as required by the city
public works standards.
i. Standard residential streets shall have a minimum width of sixty feet (60'). (1987
Code § 16.20.030)
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 47/69
j. Cul-de-sacs shall be not longer than six hundred feet (600'), measured from the
center of the cul-de-sac bulb to the center of the intersection of the connecting
street. Each cul-de-sac must be terminated by a permanent turnaround bulb that
meets the city public works standards. If surface water drainage is into the
turnaround due to the grade of the street, necessary catch basins and drainage
easements shall be provided. A cul-de-sac must not serve more than fifteen (15)
residential units or lots, whichever is less, nor more than fifty thousand (50,000)
square feet of commercial or industrial space. In a situation where a cul-de-sac is
serving both residential and nonresidential uses, each dwelling unit shall reduce
the maximum commercial or industrial space by two thousand (2,000) square feet.
k. Utility and drainage easements shall be provided along lot lines of all subdivision
lots and at such other locations as deemed necessary and as directed by the city.
The easements shall have a minimum width of fourteen feet (14'), but may
encumber adjoining lots by extending across adjoining lot lines. In some cases,
larger size easements may be required as directed by the city. Proper
coordination shall be established between the developer and the applicable utility
company for the establishment of utility easements on adjoining properties.
l. All proposed streets, whether public or private, shall conform to the street cross
section standards as recommended by the city engineer and adopted by the city
council.
m. Streets shall be numbered unless the planning commission determines, based
upon topography and other like considerations, that streets should be named.
4. Blocks:
a. Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for two (2) tiers of lots of appropriate
depths. Exceptions to this prescribed block width may be permitted in blocks
adjacent to major streets, waterways or topography concerns.
b. The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be such as are appropriate for the
locality and the type of development contemplated, but block lengths in residential
areas shall not exceed one thousand three hundred twenty feet (1,320') nor be
less than four hundred feet (400') in length. Wherever practicable, blocks along
major streets and collector streets shall be not less than six hundred sixty feet
(660') in length.
c. In long blocks, the planning commission may require the reservation of an
easement through the block to accommodate utilities, drainage facilities or
pedestrian traffic.
Pedestrianways or crosswalks, not less than six feet (6') wide, may be required by
the planning commission through the center of blocks more than eight hundred
feet (800') long where deemed essential to provide circulation or access to
schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation or other community
facilities. Blocks designed for industrial uses shall be of such length and width as
may be determined suitable by the planning commission for prospective use.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 48/69
5. Access To Major Streets: Where a subdivision borders on or contains an existing or
proposed major street, the planning commission may require that access to such streets
be limited by one of the following means:
a. The subdivision of lots so as to back on the street and front on a parallel local
street; no access shall be provided from the street in the rear, and screening shall
be provided in a strip of land no less than five feet (5') in width along the rear
property line of such lots.
b. A marginal access or service road (separated from the street by a planting or
grass strip and having access thereto at suitable points).
6. Street Regulatory Signs:
a. The applicant shall deposit with the city at the time of final subdivision approval a
sum determined by the director of public works for each sign required by the city.
The city shall install all street signs before issuance of certificates of occupancy for
any residence on the streets approved.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 49/69
B. Street name signs are to be placed at all intersections within or abutting the subdivision, the type
and location of which to be approved by the public works director.
Design Standards:
1. General: In order to accommodate prospective traffic, streets should be of suitable
location, width and improvement to afford satisfactory access to police, firefighting, snow
removal, sanitation and street maintenance equipment, and to coordinate streets so as to
compose a convenient system and avoid undue hardships to adjoining properties. Design
standards for streets shall be as outlined in the city public works standards for rights of
way, travelled width, grade minimum, radius of curves and design speed.
2. Road Surfacing And Improvements: After pipes, lines and related facilities pertaining to
sewer, water, gas, cable TV, electricity and like utility services, where required, have been
installed by the developer, the applicant shall construct curbs and gutters and shall
surface or cause to be surfaced roadways to the widths prescribed in these regulations.
The surfacing shall be in accordance with the city public works standards. Adequate
provision shall be made for culverts, drains and bridges. Driveway approaches shall not
be installed at the time of placement of curb and gutter unless approval for a building
permit has been issued by the city.
3. Intersections:
a. Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles. A
proposed intersection of two (2) new streets at an angle of less than eighty
degrees (80°) shall not be acceptable. An oblique street shall be curved
approaching an intersection and should be approximately at right angles for at
least one hundred feet (100') therefrom. Not more than two (2) streets shall
intersect at any one point unless specifically approved by the planning
commission.
b. Proposed new intersections along one side of an existing street shall, wherever
practicable, coincide with any existing intersections on the opposite side of such
street. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred fifty feet (150')
shall not be permitted, except where the intersected street has separated dual
drives without median breaks at either intersection. Where streets intersect major
streets, their alignment shall be continuous. Intersection of major streets shall be
at least eight hundred feet (800') apart.
c. Where any street intersection will involve earth banks or existing vegetation inside
any lot corner that would create a traffic hazard by limiting visibility, the developer
shall cut such ground and/or vegetation (including trees) in connection with the
grading of the public right of way to the extent deemed necessary to provide an
adequate sight distance.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 50/69
C. Street Dedications And Reservations:
1. New Perimeter Streets:
a. Street systems in new subdivisions shall be laid out so as to eliminate or avoid
new perimeter half streets. Where an existing half street is adjacent to a new
subdivision, the other half of the street shall be improved and dedicated by the
developer.
b. The city council, with or without recommendation by the planning commission,
may authorize a new perimeter street where the developer improves and
dedicates the entire required street right of way width within his own subdivision
boundaries. At the discretion of the city council, after recommendation of the
planning commission, and in accordance with all city ordinances, the developer
may retain a protection strip of one foot (1') in width between the street and
adjacent property. An agreement with the city, approved by the city attorney, shall
be made by the developer contracting to dedicate the one foot (1') protection strip
free of charge to the city for street purposes upon payment by the present owners
of the contiguous property to the developer of a consideration named in the
agreement. Such consideration is to be equal to the cost, at the time of the
agreement, of the street improvements, including utility lines properly chargeable
to the contiguous property, plus the value of the land from the right of way line to
the centerline of the street at the time of the agreement, together with interest
computed at the then statutory rate. Interest shall accrue only from the time of
agreement until the time of subdivision of such contiguous property or ten (10)
years from the date of the agreement, whichever is less. All charges to be
associated with the protection strip, as well as the interest rate, shall be recorded
as part of the aforementioned agreement. All property owned by the developer
shall be included on both preliminary and final plat.
c. Where the developer is required to improve the full width of an existing city owned
right of way on the perimeter of his subdivision, the city council may enter into a
similar agreement as outlined above. In this agreement, the developer will not own
a one foot (1').
d. protection strip and the consideration named in the agreement will not include the
value of the land or any utilities installed in the right of way prior to the agreement.
However, the agreement will stipulate that before approval is given to the
development on the adjacent property abutting the street, the adjacent property
owners will reimburse the aforementioned developer as outlined in the agreement.
2. Widening And Realignment Of Existing Streets: Where a subdivision borders an existing
narrow street or when the general plan, official map or zoning setback regulations indicate
plans for the realignment or widening of a street that would require use of some of the
land in the subdivision, the applicant shall be required to improve and dedicate, at his
expense, such areas for widening or realignment of such streets. Such frontage streets
shall be improved and dedicated by the applicant at his own expense to the full width as
required by these subdivision regulations. Land reserved for any street purposes may not
be counted in satisfying yard or area requirements of the zoning ordinance whether the
land is to be dedicated to the municipality in fee simple or an easement is granted to the
city.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 51/69
D. Single Access Development: Single access developments are permitted under the following
circumstances and with the following conditions:
1. No single-family residentially zoned lot nor multi-family unit shall be more than one
thousand six hundred feet (1,600') from a through street.
2. No more than sixty (60) single-family residentially zoned lots or sixty (60) dwelling units,
whichever is less, or one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of commercial or
industrial space, whichever is less, shall be located in a single access development.
3. A single access development must adjoin vacant or agricultural properties capable of
being developed for future through streets that will make the single access development
comply with the cul-de-sac and through street standards of the city upon development of
the adjoining property.
4. There shall be stubbed streets at intervals of at least every six hundred feet (600') to the
adjoining properties to assure better circulation with future developments.
5. The topography and character of the adjoining land must be such that a through street
connection can be made upon development.
6. A temporary turnaround, with one foot (1') nonvehicular access easement around the
portion not connecting to a publicly dedicated and accepted street, shall be located at the
end of each stubbed street.
7. The temporary turnaround areas shall be all weather surfaced and constructed in
accordance with standards required by the city engineer.
8. No parking or storage shall be permitted in temporary turnaround areas.
9. All streets must at least meet the city public works standards.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 16.20.030 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2000-16 on 11/14/2000
Amended by Ord. 2006 Code on 1/1/2006
Amended by Ord. 2008-13 on 7/8/2008
12-6-4: DRAINAGE AND STORM SEWERS
A. General Requirements: The planning commission shall not recommend for approval any plat of
subdivision which does not make adequate provision for storm or floodwater runoff channels or
basins. The city engineer shall make the determination of adequate provision. The storm water
drainage system shall be separate and independent of any sanitary sewer system. Storm
drainage point of discharge from channel or conduit shall be protected from erosion by suitable
structure or lining. Storm sewers, where required, shall be protected from erosion by suitable
structure or lining, with the design and method approved by the city engineer. A copy of design
computations shall be submitted along with the construction plans. All locations and sizes of
storm sewer lines and basins shall be in conformance with the city storm sewer master plan. The
developer shall deed to the city those areas designated as detention basins and drainage
channels, giving the city the ability to control and maintain said areas. For basins that are of a
single building lot size and considered as temporary in nature, the city would grant to the
developer a reversionary clause on ownership when use is terminated.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 52/69
B. Nature Of Storm Water Facilities:
1. Location: The applicant may be required by the planning commission to carry away by
pipe or open ditch any spring or surface water that may exist either previous to, or as a
result of, the subdivision. Such drainage facilities shall be located in the road right of way
where feasible or in perpetual unobstructed easements of appropriate width and shall be
constructed in accordance with the city public works standards.
2. Accessibility To Public Storm Sewers: Where a public storm sewer is accessible, the
applicant shall install storm sewer facilities, or if no outlets are within a reasonable
distance, adequate provision shall be made for the disposal of storm waters, subject to
the city public works standards. However, in commercial zones, underground storm sewer
systems shall be constructed throughout and be conducted to an approved outfall.
Inspection of facilities shall be conducted by the city engineer and public works director.
3. Accommodation Of Upstream Drainage Areas: A storm sewer line or other drainage
facilities shall in each case be large enough to accommodate potential runoff from its
entire upstream drainage area whether inside or outside the subdivision. The city
engineer shall determine the necessary size of the facility based on the provisions of the
city public works standards and city sewer general plan, assuming conditions of maximum
potential watershed development permitted by the city comprehensive plan.
4. Effect On Downstream Drainage Areas: The city engineer shall also study the effect of
each subdivision on existing downstream drainage facilities outside the area of the
subdivision. The city storm sewer general plan, together with such other studies as shall
be appropriate, shall serve as a guide to needed improvements. Where it is anticipated
that the additional runoff incident to the development of the subdivision will overload an
existing downstream drainage facility, the city council may withhold approval of the
subdivision until provision has been made for the improvement of the potential condition
in a manner the city council shall determine. No subdivision shall be approved unless
adequate drainage will be provided to an adequate drainage watercourse or facility.
5. Detention Basins: Large multiple use detention basins serving multiple neighborhoods will
be located in the city as designated on the city storm sewer general plan map, size of
storm capacity to be determined by the city engineer. Single lot detention basins located
in individual subdivisions shall not be encouraged. Should on site water detention be
desired or necessary for the feasibility of the subdivision, the detention basin must:
a. Serve as a multiple use area such as an open area for park activities;
b. Be adequately landscaped with grass and shrubs. Such landscaping shall also
include a means to keep it irrigated;
c. Be designed to hold water only during a storm and shortly thereafter. At all other
times, it must remain dry.
6. Temporary Detention Basins: Temporary detention basins may be authorized by the city
council in which the above requirements for individual basins may be relaxed.
C. Floodplain Areas: The city council may, when it deems it necessary for the health, safety or
welfare of the present and future population of the area and necessary to the conservation of
water, drainage and sanitary facilities, prohibit the subdivision of any portion of the property
which lies within the floodplain of any stream or drainage course. These floodplain areas shall be
preserved from any and all destruction or damage resulting from clearing, grading or dumping of
earth, waste material or stumps, except at the discretion of the planning commission.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 53/69
D. Dedication Of Drainage Easements:
1. General Requirements: Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway,
channel or stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage right of
way conforming substantially to the lines of such watercourse, and of such width and
construction or both as will be adequate for the purpose.
2. Drainage Easements:
a. Where topography or other conditions are such as to make impractical the
inclusion of drainage facilities within road rights of way, perpetual unobstructed
easements at least fifteen feet (15') in width for such drainage facilities shall be
provided across property outside the road lines and with satisfactory access to the
road. Easements shall be indicated on the plat. Drainage easements shall be
carried from the road to a natural watercourse or to other drainage facilities.
b. When a proposed drainage system will carry water across private land outside the
subdivision, appropriate drainage rights must be secured and indicated on the
plat.
c. The applicant shall dedicate, either in fee or by drainage or conservation
easement, land on both sides of existing watercourses, to a distance to be
determined by the planning commission. Said easements shall be deemed rights
of way for lawful municipal purposes.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 16.20.040 on 1/1/1987
12-6-5: SUBSURFACE DRAINAGE
The applicant is required to provide the design and installation of a subsurface drainage system which
meets the city public works standards when determined to be necessary by the city engineer.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 16.20.050 on 1/1/1987
12-6-6: WATER FACILITIES
A. General Requirements:
1. The owner/developer of any land proposed to be developed as a subdivision shall at his
expense be required to comply with all regulations of the current city water service
development policy in providing domestic water use and fire protection.
2. Where a public water main is accessible, the developer shall install adequate water
facilities, including fire hydrants. All water mains shall be at least six inches (6") in
diameter, except as otherwise permitted by the city public works standards. All water lines
must be extended across the entire frontage of all existing streets and to the boundary of
the subdivision on all existing or proposed streets. Main valves shall be installed at all
intersections and other locations as required by the city engineer.
3. Water main extensions shall be approved by the city engineer.
4. All proposed water improvements shall comply with the city master water plan.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 54/69
B. Fire Hydrants: Fire hydrants shall be required for all subdivisions. Fire hydrants shall be located
no more than five hundred feet (500') apart and within two hundred fifty feet (250') of any
structure and shall be approved by the North View fire department. To eliminate future street
openings, all underground utilities for fire hydrants, together with the fire hydrants themselves
and all other supply improvements, shall be installed before any final paving of a street shown on
the subdivision plat.
C. Closure Of Wells: When an existing well lies on the property being developed, the
owner/developer shall, in coordination with and pursuant to applicable regulations of the state
water engineer, seal the well and cause the water rights to be transferred to state ownership. All
costs associated therewith shall be borne by the owner/developer and included in the cost
estimate for improvements.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 16.20.060 on 1/1/1987
12-6-7: SECONDARY WATER SYSTEM
The applicant is required to provide secondary water as a condition of approval, provided the design of
the system meets with the approval of the city engineer and the engineer for the secondary water
district.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 16.20.070 on 1/1/1987
12-6-8: SEWERAGE FACILITIES
A. General Requirements: The applicant shall install sanitary sewer facilities in a manner
prescribed by the city public works standards. Sanitary sewerage facilities shall connect with
public sanitary sewerage systems. Sewers shall be installed to serve each lot and to grades and
sizes required by the city public works standards. No individual disposal system or treatment
plants (private or group disposal systems) shall be permitted. All sewer lines must be extended
across the entire frontage of all existing streets and to the boundary of the subdivision on all
existing or proposed city streets unless determined otherwise by the city engineer.
B. Televiewing Lines: Prior to approval and acceptance by the city, developer shall inspect all
sanitary sewer pipe lines by means of remote televiewing equipment and shall record the entire
televiewing inspection on video tape or other acceptable reproduction means for review by city
officials.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 16.20.080 on 1/1/1987
12-6-9: SIDEWALKS
Sidewalks shall be included within the dedicated right of way of all streets as shown in the public works
standards or as required by the planning commission in consultation with the city engineer.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 16.20.090 on 1/1/1987
12-6-10: UTILITIES
A. Location: The applicant is required to provide for the installation of all utility facilities, including,
but not limited to, gas, electric power, telephone and CATV cables, which shall be located
underground through the subdivision. Wherever existing utility facilities are located aboveground,
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 55/69
except where existing on public roads and rights of way, developer shall cause facilities to be
removed and placed underground upon request by the city. Underground service connections to
the street property line of each platted lot shall be installed at the developer's expense. Buried
electrical transformers shall be located as to avoid all drainage channels or flooding due to final
grade.
B. Sharing Of Trenches: All public utilities and cable television operators shall cooperate in good
faith in an effort to share the use of underground trenches with all other public utilities and cable
television operators in accordance with the city public works standards and subject to the full
review and approval of the city engineer.
C. Notice To Utility Operators Of Open Trenches: The developer shall be responsible to provide
reasonable notice of at least thirty (30) days to public utilities and cable television operators of
the approximate date on which open trenching will be available for the installation of the pipes,
conduits, cables, wires and like means of transmitting the applicable services of public utilities
and cable television.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 16.20.100 on 1/1/1987
12-6-11: PUBLIC USES
A. Recreation:
1. Recreation Sites: Land reserved for recreation purposes shall be of a character and
location suitable for use as a playground, or for other recreation purposes, and shall be
relatively level and dry; and shall be improved by the developer to the standards required
by the city council, which improvements shall be included in the performance bond or
escrow. The planning commission may refer any subdivision proposed to contain a
dedicated park to the shade tree committee for a recommendation. All land to be reserved
for dedication to the city for park purposes shall have prior approval of the city council and
shall be shown marked on the plat "reserved for park and/or recreation purposes".
2. Other Recreation Reservations: The provisions of this section are minimum standards.
None of the subsections above shall be construed as prohibiting a developer from
reserving other land for recreation purposes in addition to the requirements of this
section.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 56/69
B. Other Public Uses:
1. Plat To Provide For Public Uses: Except when an applicant utilizes planned unit
development or density zoning in which land is set aside by the developer as required by
the provisions of the zoning ordinance, whenever the subdivision includes a school,
recreation use or other public use as indicated on the general plan or any portion thereof,
such space shall be suitably incorporated by the applicant into his preliminary plan. After
proper determination of its necessity by the planning commission and the appropriate city
officials or other public agency involved in the acquisition and use of each such site and a
determination has been made to acquire the site by the public agency, the site shall be
suitably incorporated by the applicant into the final plats.
2. Referral To Public Body: The planning commission shall refer the plat to the public body
concerned with acquisition for its consideration and report. The planning commission may
propose alternate areas for such acquisition and shall allow the public body or agency
thirty (30) days for reply. The agency's recommendation, if affirmative, shall include a
map showing the boundaries and area of the parcel to be acquired and an estimate of the
time required to complete the acquisition.
3. Notice Of Property Owner: Upon receipt of an affirmative report, the planning commission
shall notify the property owner and shall designate on the preliminary and final plats that
area proposed to be acquired by the public body.
4. Duration Of Land Reservation: The acquisition of land reserved by a public agency on the
final plat shall be initiated within twelve (12) months of notification, in writing, from the
owner that he intends to develop the land. Such letter of intent shall be accompanied by a
plat of the proposed development and a tentative schedule of construction. Failure on the
part of the public agency to initiate acquisition within the prescribed twelve (12) months
shall result in the removal of the "reserved" designation from the property involved and
the freeing of the property for development in accordance with these regulations.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 16.20.110 on 1/1/1987
12-6-12: IRRIGATION WATER
A. No open irrigation ditches shall be permitted within the boundary of a subdivision. All necessary
irrigation ditches, whether used for the purpose of transporting irrigation or waste flow water that
must be maintained within a subdivision shall be replaced with a pipe culvert. This pipe culvert
shall be at least fifteen inch (15") diameter concrete pipe and be satisfactory to the irrigation
company. The developer of a subdivision must provide for maintaining the existing rights of all
irrigation users, both upstream and downstream of the proposed development.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 16.20.120 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2018-26 on 11/13/2018
12-6-13: PRESERVATION OF NATURAL FEATURES AND AMENITIES
A. General: Existing features which would add value to a residential development or to the city as a
whole, such as trees, historic spots and similar irreplaceable assets, are encouraged to be
preserved in the design of the subdivision. Such existing features shall not be removed from any
subdivision nor any change of grade of the land affected until approval of the preliminary plan
has been granted.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 57/69
B. Water Rights: All water or water rights used upon, appurtenant to or running with any land
located within a proposed subdivision shall be offered to the city for purchase at the market value
existing at the time the preliminary plan is submitted for approval.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 16.20.130 on 1/1/1987
12-6-14: NONRESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION
A. General:
1. If a proposed subdivision includes land that is zoned for commercial or industrial
purposes, the layout of the subdivision with respect to such land shall make such
provisions as the planning commission may require.
2. A nonresidential subdivision shall also be subject to all the requirements of site plan
approval set forth in the zoning ordinance. Site plan approval and nonresidential
subdivision plat approval may proceed simultaneously at the discretion of the planning
commission. A nonresidential subdivision shall be subject to all the requirements of these
regulations, as well as such additional standards required by the planning commission,
and shall conform to the proposed land use and standards established in the general
plan, official map and zoning ordinance.
B. Standards: In addition to the principles and standards in these regulations, which are appropriate
to the planning of all subdivisions, the applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
commission that the street, parcel and block pattern proposed are specifically adapted to the
uses anticipated and take into account other uses in the vicinity. The following principles and
standards shall be observed:
1. Proposed industrial parcels shall be suitable in area and dimensions to the types of
industrial development anticipated;
2. Street right of way and pavement shall be adequate to accommodate the type and
volume of traffic anticipated to be generated thereupon;
3. Special requirements may be imposed by the city with respect to street, curb, gutter and
sidewalk design and construction;
4. Special requirements may be imposed by the city with respect to the installation of public
utilities, including, but not limited to, water, sewer and stormwater drainage;
5. Every effort shall be made to protect adjacent residential areas from potential nuisance
from a proposed commercial or industrial subdivision, including the provision of extra
depth in parcels backing upon existing or potential residential development and provisions
for a fence or other barrier, or a permanently landscaped buffer strip, when necessary;
6. Streets carrying nonresidential traffic, especially truck traffic, shall not normally be
extended to the boundaries of adjacent existing or potential residential areas.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 16.20.140 on 1/1/1987
12-6-15: STREETLIGHTS
The developer shall, at its own cost and expense, erect and install all streetlights, poles, cables, wires,
pedestals and other street lighting facilities and equipment as required and prescribed by the city public
works standards in such locations and in such manner as approved by the city engineer.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 58/69
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 16.20.150 on 1/1/1987
12-6-16: TRAILS
A. General Requirements:
1. Policy Statement: Development of public trails as an alternative form of travel serves
important community interests of improving air quality, increasing opportunity for
recreation and improved health, reducing motor vehicle congestion and preserving scarce
energy resources. Development within any new subdivision of a segment of a trail system
designated in the city's general plan or trails master plan shall be an essential feature of
new subdivision infrastructure.
2. Connection To City Trail System: Where a proposed subdivision includes or adjoins an
existing or planned public trail system as described in the city's general plan or trails
master plan, no subdivision shall be approved unless the area to be laid out and platted
shall include public trail infrastructure as provided in the city's general plan or trails master
plan.
3. Standards: Trails shall be developed according to minimum standards published by the
city which shall be of sufficient width to safely accommodate two-way bicycle and
pedestrian traffic into, out of and within the development. The trail design specifications
and standards contained in the North Ogden subdivision standards as well as any
subsequent revisions are hereby adopted.
4. Dedication: Public trail improvements shall be dedicated to the city and, after final
acceptance, the city shall become responsible for future trail maintenance.
5. Trail Exaction: To determine whether the trail exaction required of a subdivision owner is
roughly proportional to the impact on the trail system generated by the subdivision, the
city will consider if the developer is asked to dedicate more than the minimum width of
right of way necessary for safe trail development and the length of the trail segment to be
dedicated is excessive when compared to what is required to serve the subdivision alone.
Whenever it appears likely to the city and/or developer that the required dedication of trail
right of way by a subdivision owner may result in a disproportionate burden, the city will
consider trading additional development bonuses in exchange for the excess portion of
the exaction such as reduced minimum lot size, reduced setback requirements, waiver of
development fees, etc. The bargain between the city and the subdivision owner for the
excess exaction shall be set forth in a development agreement to be signed by the
subdivision owner and approved by the city council.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2011-14 on 6/28/2011
12-7: IMPACT FEES
12-7-1: DEFINITIONS
12-7-2: FINDINGS AND PURPOSE
12-7-3: SERVICE AREAS ESTABLISHED
12-7-4: IMPACT FEES LEVIED
12-7-5: TIME OF COLLECTION
12-7-6: USE OF FEES
12-7-7: ADJUSTMENTS
12-7-8: ACCOUNTING, EXPENDITURE AND REFUND
12-7-9: CHALLENGES AND APPEALS
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 59/69
12-7-1: DEFINITIONS
As used in this chapter:
CAPITAL FACILITIES PLAN: The capital facilities plan adopted by resolution of the city council dated
June 30, 1997, as the same shall be amended from time to time.
CITY: North Ogden City, a Utah municipal corporation.
DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY: Any construction or expansion of a building, structure or use, any change in
use of a building or structure, or any changes in the use of land that creates additional demand and
need for public facilities.
DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL: Any written authorization from the city that authorizes the
commencement of development activity.
IMPACT FEES: A payment of money imposed upon development activity as a condition of development
approval.
SERVICE AREA: The geographic area designated by the city within which a defined set of public
facilities provides service within the area.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 16.24.010 on 1/1/1987
12-7-2: FINDINGS AND PURPOSE
The city council finds and determines:
A. There is a need for public facilities for new development which have not been constructed and
which are required to be consistent with the city general plan and to protect the public's health,
safety and welfare.
B. The rapid and continuing growth of the city necessitates the imposition and collection of impact
fees pursuant to law that require development to pay its fair share of the cost of providing public
facilities occasioned by the demands and needs of the development project at service levels
necessary to promote and preserve the public health, safety and welfare.
C. The city council hereby adopts the following documents as the capital facilities plan required by
Utah Code § 11-36-201(2): "Development Impact Fee Calculation Report For North Ogden City"
(1997) by Management Services Institute; the "Sanitary Sewer Master Plan And Impact Fee
Study" (1997) by Jones and Associates; and "Development Impact Fee Calculation Report"
(1999) by Revenue and Costs Specialists, LLC. Adoption of a report includes adoption of all
related supporting data which establish the costs of providing public facilities occasioned by
development projects within the city.
D. The impact fees established by this chapter are based upon the costs which are generated
through the need for new facilities and other capital acquisition costs required, incremently, by
new development within the city.
E. The impact fees established by this chapter do not exceed the reasonable cost of providing
public facilities occasioned by development projects within the city.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 16.24.020 on 1/1/1987
Amended by Ord. 2000-07 on 5/25/2000
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 60/69
12-7-3: SERVICE AREAS ESTABLISHED
The following service areas are established within the city:
A. Section 1: Water pressure zones 7 through 11, which are between five thousand eighteen feet
(5,018') and five thousand seven hundred feet (5,700') of elevation as shown on the city culinary
water master plan;
B. Section 2: Water pressure zones 1 through 6, which are between four thousand three hundred
fifty feet (4,350') and five thousand seventeen feet (5,017') of elevation as shown on the city
culinary water master plan.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 16.24.030 on 1/1/1987
12-7-4: IMPACT FEES LEVIED
The impact fees imposed in the city are contained in resolution 11-97 and may be changed by the city
council by resolution from time to time.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 16.24.040 on 1/1/1987
12-7-5: TIME OF COLLECTION
Unless otherwise provided by the city council, impact fees shall be payable by the developer prior to the
issuance of a city building permit.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 16.24.050 on 1/1/1987
12-7-6: USE OF FEES
The fees shall be used solely to:
A. Pay for the described public facilities to be constructed by the city;
B. For reimbursing the city for the development's share of those capital improvements already
constructed by the city; or
C. To reimburse developers who have constructed public facilities where those facilities were
beyond that needed to mitigate the impact of the developers' projects.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 16.24.060 on 1/1/1987
12-7-7: ADJUSTMENTS
The city may, upon a proper showing, adjust the standard impact fee at the time the fee is charged to:
A. Respond to unusual circumstances in specific cases; and
B. Ensure that the impact fees are imposed fairly; and
C. Adjust the amount of the fee based upon studies and data submitted by the developer which are
approved by the city after review of the same; and
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 61/69
D. Allow credits as approved by the city for dedication of land for improvement to, or new
construction of, public facilities providing services to the community at large, provided such
facilities are identified in the capital facilities plan and are required by the city as a condition of
approving the development activity. No credit shall be given for project improvements as defined
by Utah Code § 11-36-102.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 16.24.070 on 1/1/1987
12-7-8: ACCOUNTING, EXPENDITURE AND REFUND
The city shall account for, expend and refund impact fees in accordance with the provisions of Utah
Code § 11-36-101 et seq.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 16.24.080 on 1/1/1987
12-7-9: CHALLENGES AND APPEALS
A. Property Owners And Residents: Any person or entity residing in or owning property within a
service area, and any organization, association or corporation representing the interests of
persons or entities owning property within a service area, may file a declaratory judgment action
challenging the validity of the fee.
B. Request For Information: Any person or entity required to pay an impact fee imposed by the city
who believes the fee does not meet the requirements of law may file a written request for
information with the city as provided by law.
C. Written Analysis: Within two (2) weeks of the receipt of the request for information, the city shall
provide the person or entity with the written analysis required by the act and with any other
relevant information relating to the impact fee.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 62/69
D. Appeal Procedure: Within thirty (30) days after paying an impact fee, any person or entity who
has paid the fee and wishes to challenge the fee shall:
1. File a written appeal with the city council by delivering a copy of such appeal to the city
administrator setting forth in detail all grounds for the appeal and all facts relied upon by
the appealing party with respect to the fees appealed. Upon receipt of the appeal, the city
council shall thereafter schedule a public hearing on the appeal at which time all
interested persons will be given an opportunity to be heard. The city council shall
schedule the appeal hearing and thereafter render its decision on the appeal no later than
thirty (30) days after the challenge to the impact fee is filed. Any person or entity who has
failed to comply with the administrative appeal remedies established by this section may
not file or join an action challenging the validity of any impact fee.
2. Within ninety (90) days of a decision upholding an impact fee by the city or within one
hundred twenty (120) days after the date the challenge to the impact fee was filed,
whichever is earlier, any party to the appeal that is adversely affected by the city council's
decision may petition the second judicial district court in and for Weber County for review
of the decision.
3. In the event of a petition to the second judicial district court, the city shall transmit to the
reviewing court the record of its proceedings including its minutes, findings, orders and, if
available, a true and correct transcript of its proceedings.
4. If the proceeding was tape recorded, a transcript of that tape recording is a true and
correct transcript for the purposes of subsection D3 of this section.
5. If there is a record:
a. The district court's review is limited to the record provided by the city; and
b. The district court may not accept or consider any evidence outside the city's
record unless that evidence was offered to the city and the court determines that it
was improperly excluded by the city.
6. If there is an inadequate record, the district court may call witnesses and take evidence.
7. The district court shall affirm the decision of the city if the decision is supported by
substantial evidence in the record.
8. The judge may award reasonable attorney fees and costs to the prevailing party in any
action brought under this section.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 1987 Code § 16.24.090 on 1/1/1987
12-8: CONDOMINIUM APPROVAL
12-8-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT
12-8-2: SUBMISSION OF APPLICATION
12-8-3: STAFF REVIEW
12-8-4: PRELIMINARY PLAT REVIEW BY PLANNING COMMISSION
12-8-5: NOTICE TO TENANTS IN CONVERSION PROJECT
12-8-6: FINAL APPROVAL BY CITY COUNCIL
12-8-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT
A. The procedures and requirements of this chapter shall apply to and govern the processing of
condominium record of survey maps pursuant to the requirements of the condominium
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 63/69
ownership act of 1975, Utah Code 57-8. Said procedures and requirements shall supplement
zoning, site development, health, building and other ordinances applicable to a particular
condominium project, and shall apply to the approval of such projects involving new construction
as well as those involving the conversion of existing structures. In addition, condominium
projects, which contemplate dedication of real property or improvements for the use of the public,
or condominium projects in which units are not contained in existing or proposed buildings, shall
also be considered subdivisions requiring compliance with the applicable provisions of this
chapter.
B. It is the intent of this chapter to establish a reasonable process whereby the city can assess the
impact of mixing collective and individual ownerships, as presented in a particular condominium
project, upon the public health, safety, welfare and convenience of the city. In the case of
conversions of existing commercial or residential buildings to condominiums, corrections of
building code violations, the upgrading of vehicle parking facilities, and safety of common
functional elements of the structures are of prime importance. It is also recognized that the
conversion of existing apartments or similar multi-family rental dwelling structures presents the
potential of relocation hardship to existing tenants, especially senior citizens, and warrants that
reasonable notice and disclosure requirements be established by the city to minimize said
hardships.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2003-02 on 1/28/2003
12-8-2: SUBMISSION OF APPLICATION
A. Documents And Information Required: The owner or developer of a proposed condominium
project desiring approval shall file the following with the planning commission:
1. An application for condominium approval on a form prescribed by the city;
2. Twenty (20) copies of the proposed record of survey map required by Utah Code § 57-8-
13. The map shall also:
a. Be drawn to a scale no smaller than one inch equals forty feet (1" = 40');
b. Contain diagrammatic floor plans identifying boundaries of the project units,
convertible and expandable areas or spaces and common areas;
c. Contain a designation of the intended use of common areas, such as storage
areas, recreational areas, parking areas for guests, open space, etc.;
d. Contain a designation of the common areas which are open to the public, which
are assigned to specific units and which are semiprivate and available only to unit
owners; and
e. Contain a detailed description of existing or proposed driveways, pedestrianways,
curb cuts, walls, structures, fences, landscaping and sprinkling systems;
f. Show individual utility connections for each unit.
3. Two (2) copies signed in the original of the proposed condominium declarations and
bylaws.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 64/69
4. If the development will include the conversion of one or more existing buildings to
condominium ownership, the developer shall also submit two (2) copies of a property
report prepared by a licensed architect or engineer. This property report shall contain:
a. The age of the buildings;
b. A description of the general condition of the buildings and the expected useful life
of the buildings;
c. A description of the condition of the structural and mechanical elements of the
buildings and an estimate of their useful life, including the roof, foundation,
mechanical system, electrical system, plumbing system, boiler (if any) and other
structural or mechanical systems;
d. A description of all known conditions constituting deficiencies requiring repair to
meet existing building codes;
e. A description of how each unit will have its own utility connections and a drawing
of the utility lines for each unit;
f. All known conditions which may require repair or replacement within the next
succeeding five (5) year period;
g. A plan for proposed improvements, renovations and repairs to the existing
buildings; and
h. A certification from the building inspector that all violations of the applicable
building codes have been repaired and that the buildings comply with all building
codes at the time the application is made.
5. Proof of notice to tenants as required by CCNO 12-8-5 have been sent to tenants;
provided, that the developer may send those notices after the planning commission has
made a recommendation for approval of the plans to the city council; and
6. A condominium application filing fee, which shall be equal to the filing fee the developer
pays for the subdivision application.
B. Meetings: The building inspection department or the community development department may,
at their discretion, meet with developers to comment on incomplete applications. Such meetings
shall not be deemed acceptance of such incomplete applications for purposes of determining
vested rights, and the city departments shall not retain copies of such incomplete applications.
The city shall not schedule meetings and hearings before the planning commission on an
application that is not complete.
C. Variances: If a developer proposes to convert one or more buildings to condominium ownership
and the developer believes that there are circumstances existing in one or all of the buildings
which would not allow literal application of the building codes, the developer shall file a request
for variance from the administrative law judge. The administrative law judge may grant variances
only when he determines that:
1. The building codes do not apply;
2. The building codes have been incorrectly interpreted; or
3. The developer is proposing a form of construction, which is as good as, or better than, the
forms described in the building codes.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2011-11 on 5/24/2011
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 65/69
12-8-3: STAFF REVIEW
Upon receipt of a completed application for approval of a condominium project, the city planning staff
shall route copies of the application and development plans in the same manner as a standard
subdivision. Additionally, preliminary review by the planning staff, fire chief and building inspection
department shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
A. Community Development Department Staff Review:
1. Letter Of Intent: A letter of intent shall be submitted indicating proposed concept of project
for staff review. The condominium declarations and bylaws shall be reviewed as part of
the final approval process and will include provisions addressing and fixing responsibility
for the maintenance, upkeep and repair of common areas, including common walls,
electrical, mechanical, plumbing or utility systems, recreational areas, landscaping,
private streets and parking areas. The declarations shall also restrict the use of any
individual residential dwelling unit to single families. The staff shall also review the
declaration to require appropriate disclosure of any unusual circumstances, variances or
conditions placed upon the condominium project for approval.
2. Plans And Related Documents: The staff shall review the plans and related documents to
determine whether the project conforms to applicable requirements of this title, the status
or extent of nonconforming rights, applicable conditions imposed upon the building or use
by ordinance, administrative law judge variance, conditional use permit and/or prior
approval under a PRUD, clustered or group dwelling plan. If the planning staff finds there
are violations of applicable zoning ordinances or requirements, the staff may recommend
denial of the condominium project until such violations have been corrected or
requirements completed or monies escrowed for one hundred ten percent (110%) of the
cost for correction before a recommendation can be made by the planning commission.
B. Building Department Review:
1. Upon receipt of the application for approval of a condominium project, the building
department shall review the proposed building plans for new construction and/or in the
case of a conversion project, the property report and plan of improvement, renovations
and repairs to determine conformance with applicable building codes. In the case of a
conversion, the department shall require inspections of the property and may require
supplementation, revision and resubmission of the property report where necessary.
2. Assurance that each unit has individual utility connections, including, but not limited to,
water, sewer, electrical and gas.
3. In the preliminary review report to the planning commission, the inspection department
shall note corrections, repairs and replacements which must be made to bring the
structures into code compliance, together with a list of renovation improvements proposed
by the owner-developer which are not required by code. The chief building official shall
also list any requirements of the adopted building codes that need consideration due to
unique circumstances associated with the structure. The building official may then
recommend denial until such time as existing violations of the code are corrected or may
recommend preliminary approval of the project and building report, subject to correction
of the violations prior to final approval.
C. Fire Safety Review: The fire marshal shall inspect each structure proposed for conversion and
shall submit a report thereon to the planning staff outlining the conditions of the structures as
they relate to fire safety. The fire marshal shall stipulate those conditions requiring improvement
prior to occupancy in the report.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 66/69
D. City Attorney: The city attorney shall review the declaration of condominium to assure its
conformance to Utah Code Annotated and city ordinances.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2011-11 on 5/24/2011
12-8-4: PRELIMINARY PLAT REVIEW BY PLANNING COMMISSION
A. Compliance Requirements: Upon completion of the recommendations of the staff, the matter
shall be set for consideration by the planning commission. The planning commission shall review
the application to determine if it is in full compliance with:
1. Applicable city ordinances;
2. The requirements of the condominium ownership act;
3. Proper notice to tenants has been given; and
4. In every way, the project is ready for final approval.
B. Recommendation To City Council: Upon completion of the planning commission's review, it shall
make a recommendation to the city council.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2003-02 on 1/28/2003
12-8-5: NOTICE TO TENANTS IN CONVERSION PROJECT
A. Notice: As part of the application for approval of a condominium project when the project involves
the conversion of an existing structure where the structure has been occupied by residential or
commercial tenants prior to application for conversion, the owner-developer shall provide notice
of intended conversion to said tenants by certified mail. This notice requirement shall not apply to
a structure that was vacant and remained so during the year prior to filing of the developer's
application for conversion; nor shall it preclude the approval of a project where every tenant has
executed a waiver relinquishing his or her right of notice under this provision. The notice shall be
sent at least twenty one (21) days prior to the planning commission meeting when the conversion
will be considered.
B. Contents: Such notice shall include:
1. The proposal for the conversion of the building to a condominium project;
2. The established dates of commencement of the construction period and termination of
rental occupancy which shall be no less than the later of: a) sixty (60) days from the date
notice is served upon occupants; or b) the expiration of individual leases;
3. The disclosure of the sales price for each unit shall be no greater than the price initially
advertised and offered to the general public at such time as when the condominiums are
offered for public sale;
4. Relocation information for the tenants, specifying available alternative housing relocation
resource agencies and organizations, and a plan of any services to be voluntarily
provided by the owner/developer;
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 67/69
C. Dissemination Of Notice: A copy of the notice, together with a list prepared by the
owner/developer identifying names, apartment or unit numbers, approximate ages, rental rates
and other known special handicaps or factors affecting relocation needs of the tenants shall be
submitted to the county social services department to advise the agency of the conversion and/or
solicit their assistance with relocation services. No final approval of such a conversion project
shall be granted by the planning commission until the owner/developer has provided proof of
notice by certified mail or subsequent proof of actual delivery, by methods of service allowed
under Utah Code § 78-36-6, of such notices and relocation information as required above, and
any plans for relocation services to be voluntarily provided by the owner/developer, and the time
designated therein for termination of rental occupancy (a minimum of 60 days) will expire.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2003-02 on 1/28/2003
12-8-6: FINAL APPROVAL BY CITY COUNCIL
A. Submission: Upon receiving a recommendation from the planning commission, the community
development department shall ensure all conditions of the planning commission's
recommendation have been completed, all final documentation is signed and submitted,
including any required agreements required to be filed, and shall then submit such materials,
together with the recommendation of the planning commission, to the city council for
consideration of final plat approval.
B. Review Of Recommendations: The city council shall review recommendations of the planning
commission for work that is proposed for subsequent completion, bonding or waiver, and may
otherwise impose appropriate terms or conditions upon its recommended approval.
C. Approval Granted: If upon submission of the recommendations of the planning commission the
city council finds that the project is in compliance with applicable ordinances and the
requirements of final plat approval, the city council shall grant approval.
D. Disapproval: If the city council determines said project is not in conformity with requirements of
the ordinances of the city; or if it rejects any offers of dedication; the city council may disapprove
the plat specifying the reasons for disapproval.
E. Reconsideration: Within thirty (30) days after the city council has disapproved any final plat, the
developer may file with the community development department a revised plat and/or documents
altered to meet the requirements of the city council. Upon receipt of the revised final plat and/or
documents, the matter shall be referred back to the city council by the community development
department for reconsideration.
F. Approval And Recording Required: No final plat shall have any force or effect until the same has
been approved by the signature of the mayor and has been officially recorded with the county
recorder within sixty (60) days from the date of the city council's approval.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 2003-02 on 1/28/2003
12-9: BOUNDARY LINE ADJUSTMENT
12-9-1: PURPOSE
12-9-2: APPLICATION AND APPROVAL AUTHORITY
12-9-3: APPROVAL CRITERIA
12-9-4: APPROVAL PROCESS
12-9-5: RECORDATION OF APPROVED BOUNDARY LINE ADJUSTMENT
12-9-6: PLAT MAP MAY BE REQUIRED
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 68/69
12-9-7: SPECIAL SERVICE DISTRICT ANNEXATION
12-9-8: EXPIRATION
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. Amended 2018-04 on 3/6/2018
12-9-1: PURPOSE
Boundary line adjustments are intended to provide a streamlined and simplified method of complying
with State law by allowing property owners to adjust parcel lines within the limits of this chapter.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. Amended 2018-04 on 3/6/2018
12-9-2: APPLICATION AND APPROVAL AUTHORITY
Any adjoining property owners may submit an application, proposed map, and proposed legal
descriptions for a boundary line adjustment. The Planning Director is designated as the land use
authority and may either approve, conditionally approve, or deny boundary line adjustments.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. Amended 2018-04 on 3/6/2018
12-9-3: APPROVAL CRITERIA
The following approval criteria must be complied with in order to approve a boundary line adjustment.
A. The change in boundary lines does not result in the creation of a new lot or parcel;
B. The change in boundary does not involve a recorded subdivision lot;
C. The proposed change to a lot does not result in the creation of a parcel of size or shape that
does not conform to all City zoning regulations and site development standards. If the proposed
change is to a legally existing nonconforming parcel, the change may not increase the
nonconformity;
D. The proposed change to a parcel does not result in changing a conforming structure into a
nonconforming structure as a result of setbacks, proximity to other structures, use, landscaping,
or any other site development requirement;
E. The petition to change the boundaries must include signatures from representatives of each
parcel affected by the boundary line adjustment; and
F. The parcel is subject to CCNO 11-10-2 Additional Use Regulations. Each parcel of land was held
in separate ownership prior to December 31, 2000.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. Amended 2018-04 on 3/6/2018
12-9-4: APPROVAL PROCESS
A. The application shall be reviewed to ensure that it is complete to include a map drawn to scale of
the proposed boundary line adjustment.
B. If determined by the Planning Director to be necessary the application will be circulated to
members of the Technical Review Committee for review, comment, and any recommended
conditions.
C. The Planning Director or his designee will write a notice of decision for the application.
7/17/2019 Print Preview
https://northogden.municipalcodeonline.com/book/print?type=code&name=12:_SUBDIVISION_REGULATIONS 69/69
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. Amended 2018-04 on 3/6/2018
12-9-5: RECORDATION OF APPROVED BOUNDARY LINE ADJUSTMENT
Following final approval the applicant is responsible for recording the appropriate documents with the
Weber County Recorder.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. Amended 2018-04 on 3/6/2018
12-9-6: PLAT MAP MAY BE REQUIRED
In conformance with Utah law, if a boundary line adjustment results in the need for dedication of a public
right-of-way or other public dedication, a plat shall be required. Public improvements shall either be
required or a deferral agreement signed.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. Amended 2018-04 on 3/6/2018
12-9-7: SPECIAL SERVICE DISTRICT ANNEXATION
If parcel boundaries proposed to be adjusted or combined are crossed by a special service district. The
entire parcels must either be deannexed or annexed into or from the special service district.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. Amended 2018-04 on 3/6/2018
12-9-8: EXPIRATION
Any boundary line adjustment that has not been recorded within ninety days of the date of approval shall
be deemed to have expired.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. Amended 2018-04 on 3/6/2018