CITY CODE
of
OGDEN CITY
UTAH
1999
Code current through:
Ord. 2020-25, passed June 23, 2020
 
Published by:
STERLING CODIFIERS
an
American Legal Publishing Company
525 Vine Street  *  Ste. 310  *  Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
         This code of Ogden City, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to
and including ordinance 2020-25, passed June 23, 2020.  Ordinances of the City
adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to the
extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City
office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the code has
been amended, superseded or repealed.
                     Sterling Codifiers
                     Cincinnati, Ohio
PENDING ORDINANCES
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 99-31
AN ORDINANCE OF OGDEN CITY, UTAH, ADOPTING THE OGDEN MUNICIPAL CODE, AS SUCH
CODE HAS BEEN CODIFIED PURSUANT TO THE PROVISIONS OF UTAH CODE ANNOTATED,
SECTION 10-3-707 THROUGH 10-3-711, AS AMENDED, WHICH CODIFICATION INCLUDES THE
REPEAL OF AND REVISIONS TO VARIOUS ORDINANCES OF THE CITY (INCLUDING REVISIONS
TO THE ZONING ORDINANCES, THE SUBDIVISION ORDINANCES AND THE OUTDOOR SIGN
ORDINANCES) IN ORDER TO ELIMINATE CONFLICTS AND UNNECESSARY PROVISIONS, TO MORE
ACCURATELY REFLECT COMMON PRACTICES, AND TO BRING PROVISIONS INTO CONFORMANCE
WITH STATE LAW AND THE COUNCIL-MAYOR OPTIONAL FORM OF GOVERNMENT; AND PROVIDING
THAT THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE IMMEDIATELY UPON PUBLICATION AFTER
FINAL PASSAGE.
   The Council of Ogden City hereby ordains:
   SECTION 1. [Section
1-1-1] Pursuant to the provisions of Sections 10-3-707 through 10-3-711, Utah
Code Annotated, 1953, as amended, and successor sections, there is hereby
adopted the "Ogden Municipal Code," as compiled, edited and published by the
authority of the Council of Ogden City.
   SECTION 2. [Section
1-1-2] This Code shall be known as the "Ogden Municipal Code." It shall be
sufficient to refer to the Code as the "Ogden Municipal Code" in any
prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof, or in any proceeding at
law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to,
amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an
addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the "Ogden Municipal Code."
Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections
of the "Ogden Municipal Code," and such references shall apply to that numbered
title, chapter, section and subsection as it appears in the Code. Whenever a
reference is made to this code as the "Ogden Municipal Code," or to any portion
thereof, or to any ordinance of the City of Ogden City, Utah, the reference
shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or
hereafter made.
   SECTION 3. [Section
1-1-3)][A.] This Code consists of all the regulatory and penal ordinances and
certain of the administrative ordinances of the City of Ogden, Utah, codified
pursuant to the provisions of Sections 10-3-707 through 10-3-711 of the Utah
Code Annotated, 1953, as amended, and successor sections.
   [B.] The adoption and recodification of these ordinances shall supersede all
ordinances previously codified as part of the 1979 Code and all ordinances
comprising the Zoning Ordinance, which was not included in the 1979 Code,
except to change its title from Title 29 to Title 19 of the "Ogden Municipal
Code."
   [C.] This Code shall not supersede or repeal uncodified ordinances or
ordinances of a private, local or temporary nature, including, but not limited
to: ordinances authorizing the execution and issuance of bonds; ordinances
related to the creation of special improvement districts; budget ordinances;
ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; the adoption of the Zoning
Map or any amendments thereto; ordinances relating to the vacating or naming of
streets; franchise ordinances or other ordinances granting special rights to
persons or corporations; ordinances relating to elections, etc.
   SECTION 4. [Section
1-1-4] The provisions of this Code shall not in any manner affect matters which
have heretofore been made of record and which refer to ordinances specifically
designated by number. Any such reference shall be construed to apply to the
corresponding provisions contained within this Code.
   SECTION 5. [Section
1-1-5] Neither the adoption of this Code nor the repeal or amendments hereby of
any ordinance or part or portion of any ordinance of the City shall in any
manner affect or impair any right which has accrued, any duty which was
imposed, any act performed, any penalty incurred or which may be applied, or
any suit, prosecution or proceeding, under previous ordinances. The provisions
of all general ordinances contained in this Code shall be deemed to be
continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall
this Chapter be deemed as discontinuing, or as effecting the liability of any
person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the City under any
ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the adoption of this
Code.
   SECTION 6. [Section
1-1-6] The last ordinance included in the initial code is Ordinance 99-16,
passed March 16, 1999. Ordinances passed subsequent to Ordinance 99-16, but
prior to the adoption of this Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this
Code.
   SECTION 7. [Section
1-1-7] Sterling Codifiers, Inc., of Coeur d'Alene, Idaho, as the compiler of
this Code, or such other editor or publisher as hereafter appointed by the
Mayor, is authorized to assign numbers and headings to titles, chapters and
sections, and to make technical corrections to this Code.
   SECTION 8.Effective date. This Ordinance shall become effective immediately
upon publication after final passage.
   PASSED, ADOPTED AND ORDERED PUBLISHED by the Council of Ogden City, Utah
this 22nd day of June, 1999.
Publication date:    
Effective date:       
[Certain sections of this ordinance are incorporated into the Ogden Municipal
Code as Chapter 1, Title 1 of such code. The applicable section numbers are
bracketed above for reference purposes only.]
TITLE 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 1
CODE ADOPTION
SECTION:
1-1-1: Ogden Municipal Code Adopted
1-1-2: Title; Citation; Reference
1-1-3: Codification; Effect On Prior Legislation
1-1-4: References To Specific Ordinances
1-1-5: Effect Of Code; Past Actions And Obligations
1-1-6: Ordinances Passed Before Code Adoption
1-1-7: Technical Corrections
1-1-1: OGDEN MUNICIPAL CODE ADOPTED:
Pursuant to the provisions of Utah Code Annotated sections 10-3-707 through 10-
3-711, as amended, and successor sections, there is hereby adopted the Ogden
Municipal Code, as compiled, edited and published by the authority of the
Council of Ogden City.
(1999 Code)
1-1-2: TITLE; CITATION; REFERENCE:
This Code shall be known as the OGDEN MUNICIPAL CODE. It shall be sufficient to
refer to the Code as the Ogden Municipal Code in any prosecution for the
violation of any provision thereof, or in any proceeding at law or equity. It
shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting
or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment
to, correction or repeal of the Ogden Municipal Code. Further reference may be
had to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the Ogden Municipal
Code, and such references shall apply to that numbered title, chapter, section
and subsection as it appears in the Code. Whenever a reference is made to this
Code as the Ogden Municipal Code, or to any portion thereof, or to any
ordinance of the City, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections
and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made.
(1999 Code)
1-1-3: CODIFICATION; EFFECT ON PRIOR LEGISLATION:
   A.   This Code consists of all the regulatory and penal ordinances and
certain of the administrative ordinances of the City, codified pursuant to the
provisions of Utah Code Annotated sections 10-3-707 through 10-3-711, as
amended, and successor sections.
   B.   The adoption and recodification of these ordinances shall supersede all
ordinances previously codified as part of the 1979 Code and all ordinances
comprising the Zoning Ordinance, which was not included in the 1979 Code.
   C.   This Code shall not supersede or repeal uncodified ordinances or
ordinances of a private, local or temporary nature, including, but not limited
to: ordinances authorizing the execution and issuance of bonds; ordinances
related to the creation of special improvement districts; budget ordinances;
ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; the adoption of the Zoning
Map or any amendments thereto; ordinances relating to the vacating or naming of
streets; franchise ordinances or other ordinances granting special rights to
persons or corporations; ordinances relating to elections, etc.
(1999 Code)
1-1-4: REFERENCES TO SPECIFIC ORDINANCES:
The provisions of this Code shall not in any manner affect matters which have
heretofore been made of record and which refer to ordinances specifically
designated by number. Any such reference shall be construed to apply to the
corresponding provisions contained within this Code.
(1999 Code)
1-1-5: EFFECT OF CODE; PAST ACTIONS AND OBLIGATIONS:
Neither the adoption of this Code nor the repeal or amendments hereby of any
ordinance or part or portion of any ordinance of the City shall in any manner
affect or impair any right which has accrued, any duty which was imposed, any
act performed, any penalty incurred or which may be applied, or any suit,
prosecution or proceeding, under previous ordinances. The provisions of all
general ordinances contained in this Code shall be deemed to be continuing
provisions and not a new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this
Chapter be deemed as discontinuing, or as effecting the liability of any
person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the City under any
ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the adoption of this
Code.
(1999 Code)
1-1-6: ORDINANCES PASSED BEFORE CODE ADOPTION:
The last ordinance included in the initial code is Ordinance 99-16, passed
March 16, 1999. Ordinances passed subsequent to Ordinance 99-16, but prior to
the adoption of this Code, are hereby adopted and made a part of this Code.
(1999 Code)
1-1-7: TECHNICAL CORRECTIONS:
Sterling Codifiers, Inc., of Coeur d'Alene, Idaho, as the compiler of this
Code, or such other editor or publisher as hereafter appointed by the Mayor, is
authorized to assign numbers and headings to titles, chapters and sections, and
to make technical corrections to this Code.
(1999 Code)
CHAPTER 2
CONSTRUCTION AND DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-2-1: Applicability Of Chapter
1-2-2: Construction Of Words
1-2-3: Definitions
1-2-4: Title, Chapter And Section Headings; Catchlines
1-2-5: Reasonable Time Or Notice
1-2-6: Computation Of Time
1-2-7: Officers, Employees; Powers Of Officers And Boards; Delegation Of
Authority By Ordinance
1-2-8: Conflicts Between Provisions
1-2-9: Accessories As Principals In Offenses
1-2-10: Applicability Within City Limits
1-2-11: Severability
1-2-12: Repeal Not To Revive
1-2-13: Effect Of Repeal On Past Actions And Obligations
1-2-1: APPLICABILITY OF CHAPTER:
In the construction of this Code and of any ordinance amendatory thereof, the
rules set out in this Chapter shall apply unless such construction would be
inconsistent with the manifest intent of the legislative body or repugnant to
the context of the ordinance.
(1999 Code)
1-2-2: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
   A.   The following general rules of construction shall apply:
      1.   The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the
singular;
      2.   Words used in the masculine gender comprehend, as well, the feminine
and neuter;
      3.   Words used in the present tense include the future.
   B.   Words and phrases are to be construed according to the context and the
approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases, and such
others as have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law, or are
defined by ordinance, are to be construed according to such peculiar and
appropriate meaning or definition.
(1999 Code)
1-2-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either
expressly or by implication.
BRIBE: Signifies any money, goods, rights in action, property, thing of value,
or advantage, present or prospective, or any promise or undertaking to give
any, asked, given, or accepted, with a corrupt intent to influence unlawfully
the person to whom it is given in his action, vote, or opinion in any public or
official capacity.
CHARTER AND CITY CHARTER: The Council-Manager Charter of Ogden City adopted
June 29, 1951 and repealed, effective January 6, 1992, at twelve o'clock (12:
00) noon.
CITY: The City of Ogden, located in the County of Weber, State of Utah.
CITY COUNCIL AND COUNCIL: Unless otherwise indicated, the City Council of Ogden
City.
CODE: The Ogden Municipal Code.
CORRUPTLY: Imports a wrongful design to acquire or cause some pecuniary or
other advantage to the person guilty of the act or omission referred to, or to
some other person.
COUNTY: The County of Weber, State of Utah.
COUNTY HEALTH DEPARTMENT: The Weber-Morgan District Health Department, or its
successor.
KNOWINGLY: Knowledge that the facts exist which bring the act or omission
within the provisions of this Code. It does not require any knowledge of the
unlawfulness of such act or omission.
LAND, REAL ESTATE AND REAL PROPERTY: Includes land, tenements, hereditaments,
water rights, possessory rights and claims.
LAW: Any of the constitutions, statutes, regulations, or court decisions of the
United States of America or the State of Utah or ordinances of Ogden City,
Utah.
MALICE AND MALICIOUSLY: Imports a wish to vex, annoy or injure another person,
or an intent to do a wrongful act, established either by proof or by
presumption of law.
MAYOR: The duly-elected or appointed Mayor of Ogden City, Utah, and shall
include any person or persons designated by the Mayor to act in the Mayor's
stead, unless the context clearly indicates that the Mayor, as an individual
person, is intended.
MONTH: A calendar month unless otherwise expressed, and the word "year", or the
abbreviation "A.D." is equivalent to the expression "year of our Lord".
NEGLECT, NEGLIGENCE, NEGLIGENT AND NEGLIGENTLY: Imports a want of such
attention to the nature or probable consequences of the act of omission as a
prudent man ordinarily bestows in acting in his own concern.
OATH: Includes "affirmation", and the word "swear" includes "affirm". Every
mode of oral statement under oath or affirmation is embraced in the term
"testify", and every written one, in the term "depose".
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with
others.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
PEACE OFFICER: Means "law enforcement officer", as defined in Utah Code
Annotated section 53-10-103, as amended.
PERSON: Means and includes individuals, bodies politic and corporate,
partnerships, associations and companies.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Means and includes every description of money, goods,
chattels, effects, evidences of rights in action, and all written instruments
by which any pecuniary obligation, right, or title to property is created,
acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged, or diminished, and
every right or interest therein.
PROPERTY: Means and includes both real and personal property.
SIGNATURE: Means and includes any name, mark or sign written with the intent to
authenticate any instrument or writing.
STATE: The State of Utah.
STREET: Includes alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public
squares, public places and sidewalks.
TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies
the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
WILFULLY: A purpose or willingness to commit the act or make the omission
referred to. It does not require any intent to violate law, or to injure
another, or to acquire an advantage.
WRITING: Means and includes printing, writing and typewriting.
(1999 Code)
1-2-4: TITLE, CHAPTER AND SECTION HEADINGS; CATCHLINES:
   A.   Title, chapter and section headings contained in this code shall not be
deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or
intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section hereof.
(1979 Code § 1.04.130)
   B.   The catchlines of several sections and subsections of this code are
intended as mere catchwords to indicate the content of the section or
subsection and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such section, nor
be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning
or intent of the provisions of any division or section hereof, nor unless
expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections or
subsections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
(1999 Code)
1-2-5: REASONABLE TIME OR NOTICE:
In all cases where any ordinance requires any act to be done in a reasonable
time or reasonable notice to be given, such reasonable time or notice shall be
deemed to mean such time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of
such duty or compliance with such notice.
(1979 Code § 1.04.140)
1-2-6: COMPUTATION OF TIME:
The time within which an act is to be done when expressed in days shall be
computed by excluding the first day and including the last; except, that if the
last day is a Saturday, a Sunday or a legal holiday, it shall be excluded, and,
when any such time is expressed in hours, the whole of Saturday, Sunday or any
legal holiday from twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight to twelve o'clock (12:00)
midnight, shall be excluded.
(1979 Code § 1.04.150; amd. Ord. 2003-52, 9-16-2003)
1-2-7: OFFICERS, EMPLOYEES; POWERS OF OFFICERS AND BOARDS; DELEGATION OF
AUTHORITY BY ORDINANCE:
   A.   Whenever reference is made in this code to a city officer or employee
by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of
Ogden City".
   B.   Words prohibiting anything being done, except in accordance with a
license or permit or authority from an officer or board, shall be construed as
giving such officer or board power to license or permit or authorize such thing
to be done.
   C.   Whenever the language of an ordinance codified in this code purports to
grant discretionary authority to any city officer, employee or board, such
person's or board's power shall be limited to determining factually whether or
not the conditions required by said ordinances exist or have been complied
with.
   D.   "Board", as used in this section, includes any board, commission,
committee or entity of the city vested by ordinance with administrative powers.
(1999 Code)
   E.   1. References in this code to the public works director or the
community services director shall be interpreted and read so as to refer to the
director of the public services department, and any reference to the public
works department or the community services department shall be interpreted and
read so as to refer to the public services department;
      2.   References in this code to the building services division or the
inspection services division shall be interpreted and read so as to refer to
the division within the community and economic development department
responsible for the enforcement of the city's building codes and other
construction related ordinances; and
      3.   References to the building services manager not revised herein shall
be interpreted and read so as to refer to the building official, unless it is
the clear intent of the provision to refer to the applicable division manager.
(Ord. 2004-39, 6-15-2004, eff. 7-1-2004)
1-2-8: CONFLICTS BETWEEN PROVISIONS:
If the provisions of different chapters of this code conflict with or
contravene each other, the provisions of each chapter shall prevail as to all
matters and questions growing out of the subject matter of such chapter. A
particular provision shall prevail over a general provision covering the same
subject matter.
(1979 Code § 1.04.160)
1-2-9: ACCESSORIES AS PRINCIPALS IN OFFENSES:
When the provisions of any ordinance prohibit the commission or omission of any
act, not only the person actually doing the prohibited thing or omitting the
directed act, but also all persons aiding or abetting therein, shall be guilty
of the offense described as principals and shall be subject to the penalty
prescribed for the offense.
(1979 Code § 1.04.170)
1-2-10: APPLICABILITY WITHIN CITY LIMITS:
Unless otherwise provided, this code shall have application within the
corporate limits of the city.
(1979 Code § 1.04.200)
1-2-11: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this code is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, invalid or
ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not
affect the validity of effectiveness of the remaining portions of this code.
The city council hereby declares that it would have passed each section,
subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof
irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections,
subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared
unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective.
(1979 Code § 1.04.210)
1-2-12: REPEAL NOT TO REVIVE:
When any ordinance repealing all or part of a former ordinance is repealed,
such repeal shall not be construed to revive such former ordinance unless it
shall be expressly so provided.
(1979 Code § 1.04.220)
1-2-13: EFFECT OF REPEAL ON PAST ACTIONS AND OBLIGATIONS:
No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance
whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense
committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty,
forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising
under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense
or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so
incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes
effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the
ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable. If
any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any provision of a
new ordinance, such provisions may be, by consent of the party affected,
applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
(1999 Code)
CHAPTER 3
AMENDMENTS TO CODE
SECTION:
1-3-1: Amendments
1-3-2: Numbering Ordinances
1-3-3: Code Alterations
1-3-1: AMENDMENTS:
   A.   The provisions of this Code shall not be amended by adding or striking
out words, but all amendments shall be made by reordaining the chapter, section
or subsection as amended.
(1979 Code § 1.04.180)
   B.   Any ordinance amending the Code shall set forth the title, chapter and
section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to
the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this Code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
duly-authorized codifiers, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared
for insertion in its proper place in each copy of this Code. Each such
replacement page shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each
individual copy of the Code.
(1999 Code)
1-3-2: NUMBERING ORDINANCES:
The City Recorder shall number all ordinances, including ordinances not
reflected in this Code, by first designating the year of adoption (using the
last 2 digits of the applicable calendar year through 1999 and using all 4
digits thereafter) and beginning with number "one" for the first ordinance
adopted in such year and continuing thereafter to consecutively number all
ordinances passed in the order of their passage during such year. Chapter and
section numbers shall be assigned in conformity with the numbering system used
in this Code.
(1999 Code)
1-3-3: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this Code in such manner that the meaning
of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may be
inserted according to the official instruction when so authorized by the City
Council. The City Recorder shall see that the replacement pages are properly
inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the City Recorder.
Any person having custody of a copy of the Code shall make every effort to
maintain said Code current as to the most recent ordinances passed. Such person
shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are
delivered or made available to such person through the office of the City
Recorder. Said books, while in actual possession of officials and other
interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the City and shall be
returned to the office of the City Recorder when directed by order of the City
Council.
(1999 Code)
CHAPTER 4
CODE VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
ARTICLE A.  GENERAL PENALTIES 1
SECTION:
1-4A-1: Penalties
1-4A-2: Liability
1-4A-3: Application Of Chapter
1-4A-4: Applicability Of State Law
1-4A-5: Prosecutions
1-4A-6: Prosecutorial Discretion To Reduce Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. Prior ordinance history: 1999 Code; Ord. 2005-27, 5-24-2005.
1-4A-1: PENALTIES:
   A.   General Penalty: Any person convicted of violating any provision of the
ordinances codified in this code, or ordinances hereafter enacted, shall be
guilty of a class B misdemeanor unless otherwise specified in such ordinance or
interpreted by the court as a class C misdemeanor or infraction, and such
violations shall be punished as follows:
      1.   For any person, other than a corporation, association, partnership,
or governmental instrumentality, convicted of an offense:
         a.   In the case of a class B misdemeanor, by a fine in any sum not
exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for a term not
longer than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment;
         b.   In the case of a class C misdemeanor, by a fine in any sum not
exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for a term not
exceeding ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment; and
         c.   In the case of an infraction, by a fine in any sum not exceeding
five hundred dollars ($500.00).
      2.   For a corporation, association, partnership, or governmental
instrumentality convicted of an offense:
         a.   For a class B misdemeanor shall be in an amount not exceeding
five thousand dollars ($5,000.00); and
         b.   For a class C misdemeanor or an infraction shall be an amount not
exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
   B.   Civil Penalties:
      1.   In addition to the penalties provided above, a court upon conviction
may sentence a person convicted of an offense, other than a violation of title
10 of this code, to a civil penalty in the following amounts:
         a.   For any violation where the city provided prior notice of such
violation and the person failed to comply with such notice, a civil penalty in
the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
         b.   For any violation of title 11, "Police Regulations", of this code
where the person was convicted of the same offense within the last two (2)
years, or where the person was convicted of a felony within the last four (4)
years, a civil penalty in the following amounts:
Class B misdemeanor   $200.00
   Class C misdemeanor/infraction   100.00
         c.   For a violation of title 13, "Animals", of this code where the
person was convicted of the same offense within the last two (2) years, a civil
penalty in the following amounts for the following violations:
            (1)   Roaming dog violation or otherwise failing to keep a dog from
running at large in violation of section
13-2-6 of this code, a civil penalty in the amount of one hundred dollars
($100.00); or
            (2)   Barking dog violation or otherwise maintaining a public
nuisance in violation of subsection 13-2-7A4 of this code, a civil penalty in
the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
            (3)   Maintaining a public nuisance determined to be a dangerous
dog or vicious animal in violation of subsection 13-2-7A6 or A7 of this code, a
civil penalty in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
         d.   For a violation of title 12, chapter 14, "Noise", of this code
where the person was convicted of the same offense within the last two (2)
years, a civil penalty in the amount of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).
      2.   In no event shall a civil penalty when combined with any fine
imposed by the court exceed the maximum fine that may be imposed for such
offense, and such civil penalty shall be reduced accordingly.
      3.   No more than one civil penalty shall be imposed under this code for
any single criminal episode, and the highest applicable civil penalty shall
apply.
      4.   Civil penalties imposed under this section may be satisfied through
the performance of community service with the city at a rate equal to the
minimum wage.
      5.   The city, at its own option, may pursue independent collection of
such civil penalties in the civil courts if not collected by the court having
jurisdiction over the criminal offense.
   C.   Costs: The court may also require a convicted defendant to pay costs as
provided in sections 77-32a-1 through 77-32a-14, Utah Code Annotated or its
successor provisions.
   D.   Restitution: The court may also require a convicted defendant to make
restitution as provided in the crime victims restitution act, chapter 38a,
title 77, Utah Code Annotated, or its successor provisions, which order may
include costs incurred by the city in abating a public nuisance related to the
offense for which the defendant is responsible.
   E.   Prosecution Of Individual Not Precluded: A prosecution of, or civil
action against, a corporation, association or partnership, as an entity, shall
not preclude prosecutions of, or civil actions against, individuals responsible
for the action of such entities and shall not preclude a separate fine, civil
penalty or imprisonment or combination thereof for those individuals, as well
as a separate fine or civil penalty for the business entity.
(Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
1-4A-2: LIABILITY:
   A.   Employers And Agents: When the provisions of this code prohibit the
commission or omission of an act, not only the person actually doing the
prohibited thing or omitting the directed act, but also the employer and all
other persons concerned or aiding or abetting therein shall be guilty of the
offense or violation described and liable for the penalties prescribed for the
offense or violation.
   B.   City Officers And Employees: No provision of this code designating the
duties of any officer or employee shall be so construed as to make such officer
or employee liable for any fine or penalty provided for a failure to perform
such duty, unless the intention of the city council to impose such fine or
penalty on such officer or employee is specifically and clearly expressed in
the section creating the duty.
(Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
1-4A-3: APPLICATION OF CHAPTER:
   A.   No Specific Penalty Declared: Whenever the doing of any act or the
omission to do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this
code and there shall be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such
breach, the provisions of this article shall apply.
   B.   Continued Violation: In all instances where the violation of this code
is a continuing violation, a separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day during or on which the offense occurs or continues.
   C.   Offense Under Different Sections: In all cases where the same offense
is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this code,
the prosecuting attorney may elect under which to proceed; but not more than
one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense;
provided, that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a
recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
(Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
1-4A-4: APPLICABILITY OF STATE LAW:
   A.   Utah Code Of Criminal Procedure: Except as otherwise provided in this
article, the procedure in all criminal cases arising under this article shall
be as prescribed in Utah Code Annotated title 77, Utah code of criminal
procedure, which is hereby incorporated and adopted herein by reference. Any
other applicable rules adopted by the Utah supreme court also are hereby
incorporated and adopted herein by reference.
   B.   Utah Criminal Code: Utah Code Annotated title 76, the Utah criminal
code, chapters 1, 2, 3 and 4, relating to principles of construction,
jurisdiction, venue, limitations of actions, multiple prosecutions, double
jeopardy, burdens of proof, definitions, principles of criminal responsibility,
punishments, and inchoate offenses apply to any criminal offense defined in
this code, except as otherwise impractical or inappropriate in view of the
context of purposes or penalties provided.
   C.   Arrest And Summons: Except as otherwise provided in this article, all
arrests of persons for any violation of this code shall be made in accordance
with Utah Code Annotated title 77, chapter 7, Utah code of criminal procedures,
and rules 6 and 7, Utah rules of criminal procedures. All summons in lieu of
warrants of arrest shall be in accordance with rule 6, Utah rules of criminal
procedures.
(Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
1-4A-5: PROSECUTIONS:
   A.   All prosecutions for violations of this code shall be in the name of
Ogden City.
   B.   Prosecutions for violations of this code shall be commenced by the
filing of an information with any court having jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
1-4A-6: PROSECUTORIAL DISCRETION TO REDUCE PENALTY:
The prosecutor shall have the authority to reduce the penalty of an offense
under the provisions of this code if the reduction in the penalty will serve
the interests of justice. In making such a determination, the prosecutor may
consider the nature of the alleged offense, the circumstances under which the
allegations arose and the resources being brought to bear in the prosecution of
the offense.
(Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
ARTICLE B.  ADMINISTRATIVE IMPOSITION OF CIVIL PENALTIES
SECTION:
1-4B-1: Purpose; Applicability Of Article
1-4B-2: Definitions
1-4B-3: Notice Of Violation
1-4B-4: Failure To Comply
1-4B-5: Daily Violations
1-4B-6: Reoccurring Violations
1-4B-7: Multiple Violations
1-4B-8: Payment
1-4B-9: Extensions Of Time
1-4B-10: Appeals
1-4B-11: Collection
1-4B-12: Collection Action Not Relief Of Correction Responsibility
1-4B-1: PURPOSE; APPLICABILITY OF ARTICLE:
The purpose of this article is to provide a standardized procedure for the
administrative imposition of certain civil penalties authorized under various
sections, articles, chapters or titles of this code and to encourage the
correction of code violation without resort to the criminal courts.
(Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
1-4B-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms shall be defined as indicated for the purposes of this
article:
CIVIL CITATION (Also Known As A CITATION): A written notice, issued by an
enforcement officer to a responsible party, that a violation of this code has
occurred and that a civil penalty has been assessed.
DATE OF NOTICE: A. The date of personal delivery of any notice or civil
citation to the responsible party; or
   B.   Five (5) days after any notice or civil citation is mailed via first
class mail, postage prepaid, to the:
      1.   Owner of the real property that is the subject of the notice or
citation at the last known address as shown on the records of the Weber County
assessor, as evidenced in the records maintained in the Weber County recorder's
office,
      2.   Occupant of the real property that is the subject of the notice or
citation at the address of the property in violation, unless another address
for such occupant is shown on the records of the Weber County assessor's
office, as evidenced in the records maintained in the Weber County recorder's
office; or
   C.   The date that a notice or civil citation is affixed to a vehicle found
in violation or mailed via first class mail, postage prepaid, to the registered
owner of such vehicle at the address as shown in the registration records of
the state of Utah.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: An officer, employee or other person authorized to issue
any notice of violation or civil citation.
HEARING OFFICER: The mayor, or any hearing officer designated by the mayor.
NOTICE OF VIOLATION (Also Known As A NOTICE, NOTICE OF CODE VIOLATION, NOTICE
AND ORDER OR WARNING NOTICE): A written notice, issued by an enforcement
officer to a responsible party, that a violation of this code has occurred.
PERSONAL DELIVERY: Hand delivery to the responsible party, or leaving it at the
responsible party's dwelling house or usual place of abode with some person of
suitable age and discretion then residing therein.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY: Any person liable for a violation or civil penalty under the
applicable provisions of this code.
WARNING PERIOD: Ten (10) days after the date of notice, unless a greater period
of time is given by the enforcement officer. If the notice of violation is
delivered by first class mail, the time for correction listed in such notice
shall include the additional five (5) days required for delivery.
(Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
1-4B-3: NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
If an enforcement officer finds that a violation exists within the city, the
enforcement officer may provide a notice of violation to the responsible party.
The notice of violation shall indicate the nature of the violation, the action
necessary to correct it, the warning period established before imposition of
civil penalties, and the civil penalty amount for failure to correct the
violation within the established warning period. The date of notice applicable
to such notice shall serve to start the warning period.
(Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
1-4B-4: FAILURE TO COMPLY:
If a violation within the city remains uncorrected after expiration of the
warning period, the responsible party shall be liable for the civil penalties
imposed under such title, chapter, article or section of this code. Such
penalty shall be assessed by issuance of a citation by the enforcement officer.
Any penalty assessed herein shall be in addition to such other penalties as may
be provided in this code.
(Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
1-4B-5: DAILY VIOLATIONS:
Each day a violation remains uncorrected after expiration of the warning period
and upon any subsequent issuance of a civil citation shall give rise to a
separate civil penalty. The city may combine any action to recover daily
penalties with any other civil penalty regarding the same property or person.
No civil citation shall issue for a daily violation that occurs in conjunction
with another criminal violation as part of a single criminal episode that will
be prosecuted in a criminal proceeding.
(Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
1-4B-6: REOCCURRING VIOLATIONS:
If a violation is corrected but reoccurs on or related to the same property
within two (2) years following the imposition of any civil penalty and the
violation is committed by the same person, any subsequent violation after
expiration of a new warning period shall subject that person to the applicable
maximum penalty.
(Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
1-4B-7: MULTIPLE VIOLATIONS:
If a notice of violation describes more than one violation on or related to the
same property, only the highest civil penalty shall be applicable for the daily
violations.
(Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
1-4B-8: PAYMENT:
Any person issued a civil citation shall within twenty (20) days of the date of
notice pay the civil penalty, unless a written request for a hearing is filed
pursuant to section
1-4B-10 of this article.
(Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
1-4B-9: EXTENSIONS OF TIME:
   A.   Upon receipt of a written application from any person who may be
subject to future civil penalties under the provisions of this article and by
agreement of such person to comply with the notice if allowed additional time,
the enforcement officer may grant an extended warning period, if the officer
determines that good cause exists for such extended warning period and the
extension will not seriously threaten the effective enforcement of the
applicable title, chapter, article or section of this code, nor pose an
imminent danger to the public health, safety or welfare. The mayor may adopt
written guidelines for the granting of extensions under this section.
   B.   The granting of an extension shall not restrict the power of the
building official to require vacation of premises, nor restrict the enforcement
of other code violations.
(Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
1-4B-10: APPEALS:
   A.   Request; Application: Any person having received a notice of violation
or a civil citation may request a hearing before a hearing officer by filing a
written application for a hearing in the city recorder's office within ten (10)
days of the date of notice. Hearings shall be conducted as provided in title 4,
chapter 4, article A of this code. All applications for hearing shall be
accompanied by a copy of the notice of violation and the fee established in
section
4-6-1 of this code.
   B.   Notification Of Enforcement Officer: Upon receipt of an application for
hearing, the city recorder shall immediately notify the enforcement officer.
   C.   Burden Of Proof: The burden to prove any defense shall be upon the
person raising such defense.
   D.   Applicable Defenses: The hearing officer may dismiss the notice and
release the person from liability, if any of the following defenses are
applicable:
      1.   Notice was not served in compliance with the provisions of this
article;
      2.   The violation was corrected within the warning period;
      3.   It is determined that no violation of the ordinance existed under
the notice or civil citation; or
      4.   At the time of the notice or civil citation, compliance would have
violated the criminal laws of the state.
   E.   Mitigating Circumstances: If the hearing officer finds that a violation
did occur but that mitigating circumstances exist, the penalty may be reduced
after the violation is corrected. Mitigating circumstances may include:
      1.   If a change in the actual ownership of the subject property was
recorded with the county recorder's office after the notice of violation was
issued and the new owner is not related by blood, marriage or common ownership
to the prior owner;
      2.   If the violation or inability to cure were caused by a force majeure
event such as war, act of nature, strike or civil disturbance;
      3.   Compliance with the notice would have presented an imminent and
irreparable injury to persons or property; or
      4.   Such other mitigating circumstances as may be approved by the city
attorney or the responsible official.
   F.   Correction After Expiration Of Warning Period Not Defense: It shall not
be a defense that the responsible party corrected the violation after
expiration of the warning period.
   G.   Agreement For Delayed Or Periodic Payments: If the hearing officer
finds that the violation occurred and no applicable defense applies, the
hearing officer may, in the interest of justice and on behalf of the city,
enter into an agreement for the delayed or periodic payment of the applicable
penalties. In the absence of an agreement for delayed or periodic payments, any
civil penalty upheld or reduced by the hearing officer shall be paid within
twenty (20) days of the date of the hearing officer's written decision.
   H.   Appeal To Board Of Building And Fire Code Appeals Or Board Of Zoning
Adjustment: Any administrative determination by the hearing officer regarding
an interpretation of the provisions of this code within the jurisdiction of
either the board of building and fire code appeals or the board of zoning
adjustment may be appealed to the applicable board.
   I.   Appeal To District Court: Any person adversely affected by the decision
of the hearing officer may petition the district court for review of the
administrative determination pursuant to section 10-3-703.7(5), Utah Code
Annotated, or its successor provision.
(Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
1-4B-11: COLLECTION:
If a civil penalty imposed pursuant to this article remains unpaid, the city
may use such lawful means as are available to collect such penalty, including
costs and attorney fees.
(Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
1-4B-12: COLLECTION ACTION NOT RELIEF OF CORRECTION RESPONSIBILITY:
Commencement of any collection action shall not relieve the responsibility of
any person to cure any violation, if still uncorrected.
(Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
ARTICLE C.  PUBLIC NUISANCE ABATEMENT LAW
SECTION:
1-4C-1: Legislative Declarations
1-4C-2: Short Title
1-4C-3: Definitions
1-4C-4: Public Nuisance; Right Of Action To Abate
1-4C-5: Civil Abatement
1-4C-6: Permanent Injunction
1-4C-7: Preliminary Injunctions; Temporary Restraining Orders
1-4C-8: Temporary Restraining Order; Defendant's Remedies
1-4C-9: Temporary Receiver
1-4C-10: Civil Penalties
1-4C-11: Assistance Of Ogden Police Department
1-4C-12: Prohibited Acts
1-4C-13: Article Not Exclusive Remedy
1-4C-1: LEGISLATIVE DECLARATIONS:
The council of Ogden City finds that public nuisances exist in the city in the
operation of certain commercial establishments and the use, alteration,
maintenance or operation of residential, commercial and industrial properties,
in flagrant violation of the ordinances of the city or the laws of the state of
Utah. All of these interfere with the interest of the public in property
values, public health, safety, and welfare, and the quality of life and
community environment. The council further finds that the continued occurrence
of such activities and violations is detrimental to the health, safety and
welfare of the people of the city and of the businesses thereof. It is the
purpose of the council to create one standardized procedure for securing legal
and equitable remedies in the civil courts relating to the subject matter
encompassed by this law, without prejudice to the use of other remedies or
procedures available under existing and subsequently enacted statutes or
ordinances, and to strengthen existing laws on the subject.
(Ord. 2005-12, 3-15-2005; amd. Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
1-4C-2: SHORT TITLE:
This article shall be known as the PUBLIC NUISANCE ABATEMENT LAW.
(Ord. 2005-12, 3-15-2005; amd. Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
1-4C-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms, as used in this article, shall mean as follows:
ABATE, ABATEMENT: To repair, replace, rehabilitate, remove, destroy, demolish,
correct or otherwise remedy a condition that constitutes a public nuisance.
ADVERSE IMPACT: Includes, but is not limited to, the following: any search
warrants served on the premises or property where controlled substances and/or
weapons were seized; investigative purchases of controlled substances on or
near the property by law enforcement agencies or their agents; arrests for
violations of controlled substance law and/or possession of weapons; loitering
for the purposes of engaging in illegal activity; an increase in the volume of
traffic associated with property; complaints made to law enforcement officials
of illegal activity associated with the property; finding of illegal weapons,
as provided in part 5, chapter 10, title 76, Utah code, or controlled
substances, as defined in the Utah controlled substances act of the Utah code,
on or near property by law enforcement officials and their agents.
CLOSING, CLOSING ORDER: A court order prohibiting use or occupancy of premises
or property, except as reasonably necessary for the performance of maintenance
or abatement work in accordance with city ordinances.
CONVICTION: The entry of a plea of guilty or no contest to, or a verdict of
guilty, upon an indictment or information in a criminal action.
HABITUAL NUISANCE: Any premises or property located within the city:
   A.   Where there have occurred two (2) or more convictions of a public
nuisance related offense on the part of the lessees, owners, operators or
occupants within the period of one year prior to the commencement of an action
under this article;
   B.   Where there have occurred three (3) or more violations of a public
nuisance related offense on the part of the lessees, owners, operators or
occupants within the period of one year prior to the commencement of an action
under this article; or
   C.   For which there has been presented a preponderance of evidence of
repeated criminal activity that has an adverse impact on such premises or
property, or the surrounding neighborhood, within the period of one year prior
to the commencement of an action under this article.
NOTICE TO ABATE: A written notice to abate or otherwise correct a public
nuisance as defined herein, which notice is provided either by personal
service, or by first class mail or certified mail, postage prepaid, to the
address of the premises or property, or to such other address as provided in
the records of the Weber County assessor.
PREMISES: A building or structure, or the premises on which a building or
structure is located, or undeveloped land.
PROPERTY: A lot, parcel or plot of ground, whether occupied or not.
UTAH CODE: Utah Code Annotated, 1953, as amended.
VIOLATION: Conduct or evidence of conduct prohibited under this article. A
violation does not require criminal prosecution and conviction but only a
preponderance of evidence that the prohibited conduct is occurring or has
occurred. Evidence of prohibited conduct may include, but is not limited to,
police reports, investigative reports, execution of search warrants, results of
police surveillance, arrest and/or conviction of local and state and federal
laws, activities associated with trafficking of controlled substances, finding
of weapons and/or controlled substances on or near the property, increased
volume of traffic associated with the premises or property.
(Ord. 2005-12, 3-15-2005; amd. Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
1-4C-4: PUBLIC NUISANCE; RIGHT OF ACTION TO ABATE:
   A.   Every premises or property within the city is a public nuisance and
subject to abatement under the provisions of this article where:
      1.   There occurs, or has occurred, the unlawful sale, manufacture,
service, storage, distribution, dispensing, or acquisition of any controlled
substance, precursor, or analog specified in the Utah controlled substances
act, title 58, chapter 37, Utah code;
      2.   Gambling is, or has been, permitted to be played, conducted, or
dealt upon as prohibited in title 76, chapter 10, part 11 of the Utah code;
      3.   Criminal activity is, or has been, committed in concert with two (2)
or more persons as provided in section 76-3-203.1, Utah code;
      4.   Parties occur frequently that create the conditions of a nuisance as
defined in subsection 78-38-1(1);
      5.   Prostitution or promotion of prostitution is, or has been allowed to
be, regularly carried on by one or more persons as provided in title 76,
chapter 10, part 13, Utah code;
      6.   Used for the purpose of, or to aid in, the commission of a violation
of title 76, chapter 10, part 5 (weapons) of the Utah code;
      7.   There is, or has occurred, a criminal nuisance as defined in
sections 76-10-801, 802, 803, 804, or 805 of the Utah code;
      8.   Used for the purposes of pornographic performances and/or promotion
of pornographic material as defined and prohibited in title 76, chapter 10,
part 12 of the Utah code;
      9.   Used for purpose of a business, activity or enterprise that is not
licensed as required by federal, state or the provisions of title 5 of this
code, exclusive of any license required only for revenue purposes;
      10.   There exists, or has been allowed to exist, alcoholic beverages or
products possessed, kept, used, offered for sale, sold, given, furnished,
supplied, received, purchased, stored, warehoused, manufactured, adulterated,
shipped, carried, transported, or distributed in violation of title 5, chapter
3 of this code or in violation of alcohol beverage control act, title 32A of
the Utah code, which alcoholic products, packages, equipment, or other property
kept or used in maintaining the public nuisance on such premises or property
shall also be considered to be a public nuisance;
      11.   There is, or has occurred, a violation of the provisions of
sections 76-6-408 (receiving stolen property), 41-1a-1313 (possession without
identification number), 41-1a-1316 (receiving or transferring stolen vehicle),
41-1a-1317 (selling or buying without identification numbers), 41-1a-1318
(fraudulent alteration of identification number) of the Utah code;
      12.   Used for the purpose of animal fighting as prohibited under title
76, chapter 9, part 3 of the Utah code, or section
13-3-1 of this code; or
      13.   There is occurring:
         a.   A violation of the property maintenance regulations described in
title 12, chapter 4 of this code,
         b.   A nuisance as described in section
12-8-1 of this code,
         c.   A violation of the zoning ordinances of Ogden City, Utah, title
15 of this code,
         d.   A violation of the international property maintenance code as
adopted pursuant to title 16 of this code,
         e.   A violation of this code for the abatement of dangerous
buildings, title 16, chapter 8 of this code, or failure to comply with an order
issued pursuant to that chapter,
         f.   A violation of the storm water pollution prevention ordinance of
Ogden City, title 9, chapter 7 of this code, or
         g.   A violation of title 12, chapter 18 of this code.
   B.   Premises or property determined to be a "habitual nuisance" as defined
herein shall be deemed to be a public nuisance subject to abatement under the
provisions of this article, and a cause of irreparable harm to the city and the
interests of the public sought to be protected under this article.
(Ord. 2005-12, 3-15-2005; amd. Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005; Ord. 2006-45, 7-25-
2006; Ord. 2007-14, 5-1-2007)
1-4C-5: CIVIL ABATEMENT:
   A.   Whenever there is reason to believe that a public nuisance, as defined
in section
1-4C-4 of this article, is kept, maintained, or exists in the city, the city
attorney may maintain a civil proceeding:
      1.   To abate or enjoin the public nuisance, through the issuance of one
or more of the following:
         a.   Temporary restraining order, including, but not limited to, the
issuance of a closing order or vacation order pursuant to section
1-4C-7 of this article,
         b.   Preliminary injunction, including, but not limited to, the
issuance of a closing order or vacation order pursuant to section
1-4C-7 of this article,
         c.   Permanent injunction, including, but not limited to, the issuance
of a closing order pursuant to subsection 1-4C-6D of this article or a vacation
order pursuant to subsection
1-4C-6C of this article;
      2.   For damages for causing or maintaining the public nuisance,
including, but not limited to:
         a.   The cost, if any, of abating the public nuisance, or
         b.   The actual costs, expenses and disbursements of the city in
investigating, bringing and maintaining the action, including reasonable
attorney fees;
      3.   To abate any public nuisance defined under subsections
1-4C-4A1 through A6 of this article and obtain an order for the automatic
eviction of the tenant of the premises or property harboring the public
nuisance, pursuant to sections 78-38-10 through 78-38-16 of the Utah code;
      4.   For the imposition of civil penalties as provided in section
1-4C-10 of this article; and/or
      5.   Any other equitable relief determined by the court to be appropriate
or necessary for the abatement of such public nuisance.
   B.   The action shall be brought in the second district judicial court of
the state of Utah, or any other court of competent jurisdiction, and shall be
in the form prescribed by the rules of civil procedure of the state of Utah for
injunctions, but the city attorney shall not be required to execute a bond with
respect to the action. The civil action may be brought pursuant to this article
or pursuant to state law.
   C.   In any action to abate or enjoin any public nuisance, the court need
not find that the property involved was being unlawfully used at the time of
the hearing.
   D.   If the action is instituted to abate the distribution or exhibition of
material alleged to offend public decency, no restraining order or injunction
shall issue except upon notice to the person sought to be enjoined, and that
person shall be entitled to a trial of the issues commencing within three (3)
days after filing of an answer to the complaint and a decision shall be
rendered by the court within two (2) days after the conclusion of the trial. As
used in this subsection, "distribute", "exhibit", and "material" mean the same
as provided in section 76-10-1201, Utah code.
(Ord. 2005-12, 3-15-2005; amd. Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
1-4C-6: PERMANENT INJUNCTION:
   A.   Personal Property: A judgment awarding a permanent injunction may
direct the sheriff to seize and remove from the premises or property all
material, equipment and instrumentalities used in the creation and maintenance
of the public nuisance and shall direct the sale by the sheriff of such
property in the manner provided for the sale of personal property under
execution pursuant to the provisions of the rules of civil procedure of the
state of Utah.
   B.   Removal And Correction Of Construction And Structural Alterations: A
judgment awarding a permanent injunction may authorize officers, employees,
contractors, or agents of the city to forthwith remove or correct construction
and structural alterations in violation of title 15 or 16 of this code.
   C.   Vacation Order: If the premises or property are in such condition as to
make it immediately dangerous to the life, limb, health, property or safety of
the public or its occupants, a judgment awarding a permanent injunction shall
order that the premises or property be vacated until such condition is abated,
in addition to any other order of the court. A vacation order shall not
prohibit abatement work performed pursuant to city ordinances.
   D.   Closing Order: A judgment awarding a permanent injunction may direct
the closing of premises or property by the sheriff, to the extent reasonably
necessary to abate the nuisance, which order shall direct the sheriff to post a
copy of the judgment and a printed notice of such closing conforming to the
requirements of subsection F of this section. The closing directed by the court
shall be for such period as the court may direct, but in no event shall the
closing be for a period of more than one year.
   E.   Surety In Lieu Of Closure: If the owner, lessee, tenant or occupant
gives a bond with sufficient surety approved by the court in the value of the
premises or property ordered to be closed, under subsection D of this section,
and submits proof to the court that the public nuisance has been abated and
will not be created, maintained or permitted for such period of time as the
premises or property has been directed to be closed in the judgment pursuant to
subsection D of this section, the court may vacate the provisions of the
judgment that directs the closing of the premises or property.
   F.   Posting: Upon issuance of a permanent injunction directing the closure
or vacation of the premises or property, the officer shall post a copy thereof
in a conspicuous place or upon one or more of the principal doors at entrances
of such premises where the public nuisance is being conducted, maintained or
permitted. In addition, where a permanent injunction has been granted
prohibiting or restricting specific activity upon the premises or property, the
officers shall affix, in a conspicuous place or upon one or more of the
principal doors at entrances of such premises, a printed notice that shall
state that certain described activity is prohibited by court order. Where an
order of closure or vacation has been issued, the notice shall contain the
legend "Closed by Court Order" in block lettering of sufficient size to be
observed by anyone intending or likely to enter the premises, the date of the
order, the court from which issued and the name of the office or agency posting
the notice, and that it is a class B misdemeanor to occupy or use the premises
or to mutilate or remove this notice. A notice for an order of vacation shall
also state that the building is "unsafe to occupy".
   G.   Costs: A judgment awarding a permanent injunction pursuant to this
article shall provide, in addition to the costs and disbursements allowed by
the rules of civil procedure of the state of Utah, upon satisfactory proof by
affidavit or such other evidence as may be submitted, the actual costs,
expenses and disbursements of the city in investigating, bringing and
maintaining the action, including reasonable attorney fees.
   H.   Closing Or Vacation Not Possession Or Ownership: A closing order or
order of vacation pursuant to this section shall not constitute an act of
possession, ownership or control by the sheriff or the city of the closed
property or premises. Nor shall such orders relieve the owner or lessee from
any duty to comply with laws and ordinances affecting the premises or property.
   I.   Not Exclusive Remedy: The provisions of this section are not intended
to preclude other equitable remedies that may be imposed by the court.
(Ord. 2005-12, 3-15-2005; amd. Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
1-4C-7: PRELIMINARY INJUNCTIONS; TEMPORARY RESTRAINING ORDERS:
   A.   General: Pending an action for a permanent injunction, the court may
grant a temporary restraining order or preliminary injunction enjoining a
public nuisance within the scope of this article and the person or persons
conducting, maintaining or permitting the public nuisance from further
conducting, maintaining or permitting the public nuisance. A temporary
restraining order or preliminary injunction shall include a temporary or
preliminary vacation order where the premises or property are in such condition
as to make it immediately dangerous to the life, limb, health, property or
safety of the public or its occupants. A temporary restraining order or
preliminary injunction shall include a temporary or preliminary closing order
where reasonably necessary to prevent the further conducting, maintaining or
permitting of a public nuisance on the premises or property. Where a
preliminary injunction has been granted, the court shall render a decision with
respect to a permanent injunction at its earliest convenience after conclusion
of the trial. The procedure and grounds for entry of a preliminary injunction
or temporary restraining order shall be as prescribed by the rules of civil
procedure of the state of Utah. The city attorney shall not be required to
execute a bond or provide other security with respect to the action.
   B.   Temporary Restraining Order And Preliminary Injunction: A temporary
restraining order or preliminary injunction entered pursuant to this article
shall restrain the defendants and all persons from further conducting,
maintaining or permitting the public nuisance and, if applicable, from removing
or transferring off the premises or property or in any manner interfering with
fixtures or movable property used in conducting, maintaining or permitting the
public nuisance. Furthermore, the court may order all other temporary or
preliminary relief it deems appropriate.
   C.   Vacation Order For Dangerous Premises: A temporary or preliminary
vacation order shall order that the premises or property be vacated until the
conditions creating immediate danger to the life, limb, health, property or
safety of the public or its occupants are abated. A vacation order shall not
prohibit abatement work performed pursuant to city ordinances.
   D.   Closing Order: A temporary or preliminary closing order shall order the
closing of those portions of the premises or property wherein the public
nuisance is being, or has been, conducted, maintained or permitted until
further order of the court.
   E.   Issuance Of Both Temporary Restraining Order And/Or Temporary Closing
Order Or Vacation Order: If the city attorney submits evidence warranting both
a temporary or preliminary closing order or vacation order, the court shall
grant both orders.
   F.   Closing Of Premises Pursuant To Temporary Closing Order: The officers
serving a temporary restraining order imposing a temporary or preliminary
closing order or vacation order of the premises or property shall, upon service
of the order, command all persons present in the premises or property to vacate
the premises forthwith. Upon the premises or property being vacated, the
premises shall be securely locked and all keys delivered to the officers
serving the order who thereafter shall deliver the keys to the fee owner,
lessor or lessee of the premises involved. If the fee owner, lessor or lessee
is not at the premises or property when the order is being executed, the
officers shall securely padlock the premises and retain the keys until the fee
owner, lessor or lessee of the building is ascertained, at which time, the
officers shall deliver the keys to such owner, lessor or lessee, if such
individual resides within Weber County.
   G.   Posting: Upon issuance of a temporary or preliminary closing order or
vacation order, the officer shall post a copy thereof in a conspicuous place or
upon one or more of the principal doors at entrances of such premises where the
public nuisance is being conducted, maintained or permitted. In addition, where
a temporary restraining order or preliminary injunction has been granted
prohibiting or restricting activity upon the premises or property, the officers
shall affix, in a conspicuous place or upon one or more of the principal doors
at entrances of such premises, a printed notice that shall state that certain
described activity is prohibited by court order. Where a closing order or
vacation order has been issued, the notice shall contain the legend "Closed by
Court Order" in block lettering of sufficient size to be observed by anyone
intending or likely to enter the premises, the date of the order, the court
from which issued and the name of the office or agency posting the notice, and
that it is a class B misdemeanor to occupy or use the premises or to mutilate
or remove this notice. A notice for an order of vacation shall also state that
the building is "unsafe to occupy".
   H.   Inventory Of Personal Property: If a temporary restraining order or
preliminary injunction restrains the defendants and all persons from removing
or transferring off the premises or property or in any manner interfering with
the fixtures and movable property used in conducting, maintaining or permitting
the public nuisance, the officers serving a temporary restraining order or
preliminary injunction shall forthwith make and return to the court an
inventory of personal property situated in and used in conducting, maintaining
or permitting a public nuisance within the scope of this article and shall
enter upon the premises or property for such purpose. Such inventory shall be
taken in any manner that is deemed likely to evidence a true and accurate
representation of the personal property subject to such inventory including,
but not limited to, photographing such personal property.
   I.   Closing Or Vacation Not Possession Or Ownership: A closing order or
vacation order entered pursuant to this section shall not constitute an act of
possession, ownership or control by the sheriff or the city of the closed
property or premises. Nor shall such order relieve the owner or lessee from any
duty to comply with laws and ordinances affecting the premises or property.
   J.   Not Exclusive Remedy: The provisions of this section are not intended
to preclude other equitable remedies that may be imposed by the court.
(Ord. 2005-12, 3-15-2005; amd. Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
1-4C-8: TEMPORARY RESTRAINING ORDER; DEFENDANT'S REMEDIES:
   A.   A temporary restraining order shall be vacated by the court, upon
notice to the city attorney, if the defendant shows by affidavit and such other
proof as may be submitted that the public nuisance has been abated and will not
be resumed during the pendency of the action. An order vacating a closing
order, vacation order, or other temporary restraining order shall include a
provision authorizing officers or employees of the city to inspect the premises
or property, which is the subject of an action pursuant to this article,
periodically without notice, during the pendency of the action, for the purpose
of ascertaining whether or not the public nuisance has been resumed.
   B.   A temporary restraining order may be vacated by the court, upon notice
to the city attorney, when the defendant gives an undertaking and the court is
satisfied that the public health, safety or welfare will be protected
adequately during the pendency of the action. The undertaking shall be in an
amount equal to the assessed valuation of the premises or property where the
public nuisance is being conducted, maintained or permitted or in such other
amount as may be fixed by the court.
(Ord. 2005-12, 3-15-2005; amd. Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
1-4C-9: TEMPORARY RECEIVER:
   A.   General: In any action wherein the complaint alleges that the public
nuisance is being conducted or maintained in the residential portions of any
premises or portion thereof, which are occupied in whole, or in part, as the
home, residence or sleeping place of one or more human beings, the court may,
upon motion on notice by the city, appoint a temporary receiver to manage and
operate the premises or property during the pendency of the action, in lieu of
a temporary closing order. A temporary receivership shall not continue after
final judgment unless otherwise directed by the court. Upon the motion of any
party, including the temporary receiver, or on its own initiative, the
appointing court may remove a temporary receiver at any time.
   B.   Powers And Duties: The temporary receiver shall have such powers and
duties as the court shall direct, including, but not limited to, collecting and
holding all rents due from all tenants, leasing or renting portions of the
premises, making or authorizing other persons to make necessary repairs or to
maintain the premises or property, hiring security or other personnel necessary
for the safe and proper operation of a dwelling, prosecuting or defending suits
flowing from his or her management of the premises or property and retaining
counsel therefor, and expending funds from the collected rents in furtherance
of the foregoing powers.
   C.   Oath: A temporary receiver, before entering upon his or her duties,
shall be sworn or shall affirm faithfully and fairly to discharge the trust
committed to such receiver. The oath or affirmation may be waived upon consent
of all parties.
   D.   Undertaking: A temporary receiver shall give an undertaking in an
amount to be fixed by the court making the appointment, that such receiver will
faithfully discharge his or her duties.
   E.   Accounts: A temporary receiver shall keep written accounts itemizing
receipts and expenditures, and describing the premises or property and naming
the depository of receivership funds, which shall be open to inspection by any
person having an apparent interest in the premises or property. Upon motion of
the temporary receiver, or of any person having an apparent interest in the
premises or property, the court may require the keeping of particular records,
or direct or limit inspection or require presentation of a temporary receiver's
accounts shall be served upon the sureties on the temporary receiver's
undertaking as well as upon each party.
(Ord. 2005-12, 3-15-2005; amd. Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
1-4C-10: CIVIL PENALTIES:
A defendant lessee, owner, operator or occupant of any premises or property
determined to be a public nuisance shall be subject to a civil penalty in the
amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each day it is found that the
defendant conducted, maintained or permitted the public nuisance after a notice
to abate was given to the defendant by the city. Such civil penalty may also be
imposed by the court for each day a defendant is in violation of any closing
order, vacation order, or other temporary restraining order, preliminary
injunction or permanent injunction. Such penalties shall be in addition to any
other civil penalty imposed under this code.
(Ord. 2005-12, 3-15-2005; amd. Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
1-4C-11: ASSISTANCE OF OGDEN POLICE DEPARTMENT:
The Ogden City police department shall, upon the request of the city attorney's
office or upon the direction of the mayor, assist in the enforcement of any
order issued pursuant to this article.
(Ord. 2005-12, 3-15-2005; amd. Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
1-4C-12: PROHIBITED ACTS:
In addition to any other punishment prescribed by law, the following acts are
punishable, on conviction, as a class B misdemeanor:
   A.   Mutilation or removal of a closing order, vacation order, or other
temporary restraining order, preliminary injunction or permanent injunction,
posted in accordance with this article while it remains in force.
   B.   Intentional disobedience of, or resistance to, a closing order,
vacation order, or other temporary restraining order, preliminary injunction or
permanent injunction, issued pursuant to the provisions of this article.
   C.   Intentional disobedience of, or resistance to, an inspection provision
of an order vacating a temporary restraining order under section
1-4C-8 of this article.
(Ord. 2005-12, 3-15-2005; amd. Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
1-4C-13: ARTICLE NOT EXCLUSIVE REMEDY:
This article shall not be construed to exclude any other remedy provided by
law.
(Ord. 2005-12, 3-15-2005; amd. Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
CHAPTER 5
OFFICIAL AND CORPORATE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
1-5-1: City Boundaries
1-5-2: City Seal
1-5-3: Transition Provisions
1-5-4: Reserved
1-5-5: Incorporation
1-5-6: City Logo; Use On Signs And Vehicles
1-5-1: CITY BOUNDARIES:
A copy of the current plat and the description of the boundaries of the city
shall be kept by the city recorder. The city recorder shall notify the city
engineer upon the recordation of any plan or map effectuating an annexation. A
reproducible copy will be kept in the office of the city engineer and shall be
available for public view and inspection during usual business hours of the
city.
(Ord. 2016-52, 9-20-2016)
1-5-2: CITY SEAL:
The seal of the city shall be as follows: one and five-eighths inches (15/8")
in diameter, the impression of which represents a beehive on a stand in the
center, with a rose on either side of the beehive, with bees surrounding the
hive, and an inscription around the outer edge thereof, "Ogden City, Utah,
Corporate Seal". The corporate seal is more specifically depicted as follows:
The city council and mayor may use a representation of the city seal for
official business. The words "Corporate Seal" are replaced by "Incorporated 6th
February 1851". The seal representation is more specifically depicted as
follows:
(Ord. 2016-52, 9-20-2016)
1-5-3: TRANSITION PROVISIONS:
The repeal of the charter shall not affect any act done, any duty imposed, any
right accrued, any penalty incurred, any suit, prosecution or proceeding
pending or the tenure of office of any person holding office at the time of
repeal, except as to tenure of office in any office eliminated by repeal of the
charter. All ordinances of the city in effect at the time of repeal of the
charter shall continue in force and effect until such time as they are amended
or repealed by subsequent councils.
(Ord. 2016-52, 9-20-2016)
1-5-4: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2016-52, 9-20-2016)
1-5-5: INCORPORATION:
Ogden City was incorporated February 6, 1851, by ordinance of the general
assembly of the state of Deseret, which laws of the provisional government of
the state of Deseret were declared to be legal and in full force and virtue by
the legislative assembly of the territory of Utah, on October 4, 1851 (laws of
Utah, 1852, p.222).
(Ord. 2016-52, 9-20-2016)
1-5-6: CITY LOGO; USE ON SIGNS AND VEHICLES:
   A.   Official City Logo: The official city logo shall include the stylized
word "Ogden". This font is meant to reflect a signature: a personal stamp that
identifies the unique spirit and energy of those who call Ogden home. The
city's signature is the primary graphic and "Utah" is added to indicate to
consumers everywhere, its location.
The Ogden tagline "Still Untamed" is a hand drawn font style that promotes the
independence and innovation of this brand. The tagline is not a permanent
component of the logo and use of this is subjective based on general context
and intended audience. The tagline may also be replaced by the name of a
particular city department, division, or facility that the logo is being used
to identify.
The standard version of the "Ogden" signature is navy, with the reverse color
version being white. The text for "Utah" is the same color as the signature in
each version. When in use, the standard version of the tagline is aqua colored,
and in the reverse version it is sunrise yellow. The logo may be used in
alternative colors in accordance with the style guide, adopted per joint
resolution 2016-12.
The logo is more specifically depicted as follows:
   B.   Street Name Signs: Except as provided in subsection C of this section,
all street name signs erected or replaced within the city, whether for public
or private streets, shall contain a designation identifying the governmental
jurisdiction, which designation shall be a symbol designation using the
official city logo described and depicted in subsection A of this section. Such
designations need not be in color and shall be displayed in a manner conforming
to the requirements of the "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices".
   C.   Historic Districts; Business Depot Ogden:
      1.   Street name signs erected in historic districts, designated pursuant
to title 17 of this code, shall contain the symbolic designation of the Ogden
City landmarks commission, positioned in the location otherwise allowed for the
identification of the governmental jurisdiction under the "Manual On Uniform
Traffic Control Devices".
      2.   Street name signs erected in business depot Ogden, the commercial
and industrial park established on the former Defense Depot Ogden, Utah, shall
contain the symbolic designation adopted for the park, positioned in the
location otherwise allowed for the identification of the governmental
jurisdiction under the "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices".
   D.   City Vehicles: If motor vehicles owned or leased by the city are
identified as city vehicles, the only pictorial or symbolic logos that may be
depicted on such vehicles are:
      1.   The official city logo described in and depicted in subsection A of
this section;
      2.   The Olympic logo for venue cities;
      3.   The logo promoting recycling, a depiction of which is attached as
exhibit A to the ordinance codified herein and incorporated herein by
reference. A copy of such exhibit shall remain on file in the city recorder's
office;
      4.   The logo of a donor included as part of the city's expression of
gratitude for the donation of the vehicle by the donor, which logo shall only
be placed on the rear side panel of the vehicle and shall not cover an area in
excess of one hundred twenty (120) square inches;
      5.   The logos for use on police department vehicles, depictions of which
are represented in exhibit B attached to the ordinance codified herein and
incorporated herein by reference. A copy of such exhibit shall remain on file
in the city recorder's office; and
      6.   The logos for use on fire department vehicles, which shall be
consistent with industry standards.
   E.   Building Signs: When identification, information, or directional signs
are posted outdoors around or on city buildings, the only pictorial or symbolic
logo that may be depicted on such signs is the official city logo described and
depicted in subsection A of this section, which logo may or may not be in
color. For purposes of this subsection, "city buildings" shall refer to the
municipal building, the public safety building, the community services
building, the animal services building, and the public works building.
   F.   Applicability: It is not the intention of this section to require the
replacement of signs or depictions of other logos already existing on or before
September 20, 2016.
(Ord. 2016-52, 9-20-2016)
CHAPTER 6
ANNEXATION PROCEDURES
SECTION:
1-6-1: General Requirements
1-6-2: Annexation Procedures Upon Petition
1-6-3: Filing Of Protests
1-6-4: Action Upon Decision Of Boundary Commission
1-6-5: Required Filings
1-6-6: Annexation By City Without Petition
1-6-7: Planning Commission Review
1-6-8: Purpose Of Chapter; Compliance With State Law
1-6-1: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
In order to assure orderly growth and development of the community, to protect
the general interest of the taxpaying public as well as the rights of the
individual property owners who wish to annex to the city, and to meet the
requirements of state law, each annexation shall be reviewed, approved or
denied in the manner described in this chapter.
(1979 Code § 2.80.010; Ord. 98-32, 4-28-1998)
1-6-2: ANNEXATION PROCEDURES UPON PETITION:
   A.   Submission Of Petition; Information Required: When annexation is
initiated by petition, the property owner or owners shall submit to the city
recorder a petition for annexation. The petition shall comply with all of the
following requirements:
      1.   Contain the names and signatures of:
         a.   The owners of private real property that:
            (1)   Is located within the area proposed for annexation,
            (2)   Subject to subsection A1a(3) of this section, covers a
majority of the private land area within the area proposed for annexation,
            (3)   Covers one hundred percent (100%) of the private land area
within the area proposed for annexation, if the area is within an agriculture
protection area created under title 4, chapter 7, "Agriculture Protection
Area", of this code, and
            (4)   Is equal in value to at least one-third (1/3) of the value of
all private real property within the area proposed for annexation; or
         b.   If all the real property within the area proposed for annexation
is owned by a public entity other than the federal government, the owners of
all the publicly owned real property.
      2.   Be accompanied by an accurate and recordable map of the property to
be annexed, prepared by a licensed surveyor and intended to meet the
requirements of section 17-23-17 Utah Code Annotated, as amended, accurately
describing the existing city boundaries and providing an accurate legal
description of the property to be annexed and the number of acres to be
annexed.
      3.   Designate at least one of the signers of the petition as the contact
sponsor, and indicate the mailing address and telephone number of the contact
sponsor.
      4.   Be accompanied by the annexation fee covering the costs of
processing an annexation petition.
      5.   Be accompanied by a recommendation from the Ogden City planning
commission.
   B.   Complete Petition; Referral And Recommendation: If the petition appears
to comply with the requirements of subsections A1 through A5 of this section,
the city recorder shall refer the petition, and a copy of the map, to the Ogden
City planning commission for review and recommendation, in accordance with
section
1-6-7 of this chapter, as to whether the petition should be denied or accepted
for further consideration. Upon the city recorder's receipt of the
recommendation of the planning commission, the filing of the petition shall be
considered complete and the city recorder shall immediately refer the petition
to the city council, who may:
      1.   Deny the petition; or
      2.   Accept the petition for further consideration.
   C.   Failure To Deny: The city council's failure to deny the petition within
fourteen (14) days after the city recorder's receipt of the recommendation from
the planning commission shall be considered to be an acceptance of the petition
for further consideration.
   D.   Denial By City Council; Notice: If the city council denies the
petition, the city recorder shall, within five (5) days of the denial, mail
written notice of the denial to the contact sponsor and the Weber County clerk.
   E.   Acceptance By City Council: If the petition is accepted for further
consideration, the city recorder shall within thirty (30) days of that
acceptance determine, with the assistance of the city attorney, and the clerk,
surveyor and recorder of Weber County, whether the petition meets the
requirements of Utah Code Annotated subsections 10-2-403(2), (3) and (4), as
amended.
   F.   Certification: If the city recorder determines that the petition meets
the requirements of state law, the city recorder shall:
      1.   Certify the petition and notify in writing the city council and the
contact sponsor of the certification; and
      2.   Provide notice of certification as required under Utah Code
Annotated section 10-2-406, as amended.
   G.   Failure To Meet State Requirements: If the city recorder determines
that the petition fails to meet any of the requirements of state law, the city
recorder shall reject the petition and notify in writing the city council, the
contact sponsor, and the Weber County commission of the rejection and the
reasons for the rejection. The petition may be modified by the petitioners to
correct the deficiencies and be refiled as a newly filed petition, except that
an additional filing fee shall not be required.
(1979 Code § 2.80.020; Ord. 98-32, 4-28-1998; amd. Ord. 2001-61, 10-23-2001;
Ord. 2006-24, 5-16-2006)
1-6-3: FILING OF PROTESTS:
   A.   If a protest to the annexation is filed within thirty (30) days, as
required under Utah Code Annotated section 10-2-407, as amended, the city
council may, at its next regular meeting after expiration of the deadline for
the filing of protests, deny the annexation petition, or, if not denied, take
no further action on the annexation petition until receipt of notice of the
decision of the Weber County boundary commission.
   B.   If no timely protest is filed, the city council may grant the petition,
and by ordinance, annex the area that is the subject of the annexation petition
after:
      1.   Holding a public hearing; and
      2.   At least seven (7) days before the public hearing, publishing notice
of the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the city and the
area proposed for annexation.
(1979 Code § 2.80.030; Ord. 98-32, 4-28-1998; amd. Ord. 2001-61, 10-23-2001;
Ord. 2003-59, 10-28-2003; Ord. 2006-24, 5-16-2006)
1-6-4: ACTION UPON DECISION OF BOUNDARY COMMISSION:
After receipt of the Weber County boundary commission's decision on a protest,
the city council may:
   A.   Deny the annexation petition; or
   B.   If the commission approves the annexation, grant the annexation
petition and, by ordinance and consistent with the boundary commission's
decision, annex the area that is the subject of the annexation petition.
(1979 Code § 2.80.040; Ord. 98-32, 4-28-1998)
1-6-5: REQUIRED FILINGS:
Within thirty (30) days after enacting an ordinance annexing an unincorporated
area, the city recorder shall:
   A.   Send notice of the enactment to each affected entity;
   B.   File with the lieutenant governor:
      1.   Written notice meeting the requirements of section 10-1-116, Utah
Code Annotated;
      2.   A certified copy of the ordinance approving the annexation, together
with a plat or map prepared by a licensed surveyor, approved by the city
council, and filed with the county surveyor in accordance with section 17-23-
17, Utah Code Annotated showing the new boundaries of the affected area; and
      3.   Amended articles of incorporation reflecting the annexation as
provided in section 10-1-117, Utah Code Annotated.
(1979 Code § 2.80.050; Ord. 98-32, 4-28-1998; amd. Ord. 2001-61, 10-23-2001;
Ord. 2006-24, 5-16-2006)
1-6-6: ANNEXATION BY CITY WITHOUT PETITION:
The city may initiate an annexation without petition by the property owners, in
accordance with the requirements of Utah Code Annotated section 10-2-418, as
amended.
(1979 Code § 2.80.060; Ord. 98-32, 4-28-1998)
1-6-7: PLANNING COMMISSION REVIEW:
Upon referral of an annexation petition by the city recorder, the planning
commission shall:
   A.   Recommend to the city council the appropriate zoning for the area
proposed for annexation, in accordance with the Ogden City general plan;
   B.   Review the annexation policy plan adopted as part of the Ogden City
general plan to determine whether the area proposed for annexation is within
the expansion area and whether the petition meets the goals and policies of the
plan;
   C.   Evaluate the city's ability to deliver municipal services, with the
assistance of the fire department, the police department, and the public works
department; and
   D.   Evaluate the petition's compliance with the standards for annexation
under state law, including the requirements of subsection 10-2-403(5), Utah
Code Annotated.
(1979 Code § 2.80.070; Ord. 98-32, 4-28-1998; amd. Ord. 2001-61, 10-23-2001)
1-6-8: PURPOSE OF CHAPTER; COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW:
It is the purpose of this chapter to comply with the requirements of section
10-3-1219.5, Utah Code Annotated or its successor provision, and to implement
requirements of state law regarding the filing, review and approval of
annexation petitions. All annexations of property shall comply with the
requirements of part 4, chapter 2, title 10, Utah Code Annotated, as amended,
1953, or its successor provisions.
(Ord. 2001-61, 10-23-2001)
CHAPTER 7
ELECTIONS; DISTRICTS
SECTION:
1-7-1: Elections
1-7-2: Municipal Districts
1-7-1: ELECTIONS:
   A.   Municipal Elections: Municipal elections held in the City shall be
classified as primary nominating elections, general Municipal elections or
special Municipal elections. All elections shall be conducted in accordance
with the procedures prescribed in the pertinent provisions of the Election Code
of the State 1 .
   B.   Filing Fee: Individuals filing as candidates for the City Council or
for Mayor shall pay a twenty five dollar ($25.00) fee at the time of filing
their candidacy with the City Recorder. This filing fee shall be refundable
only if it is determined that the person filing is not qualified to be a
candidate, or who is found to have improperly filed.
(1979 Code §§ 1.17.010, 1.17.030; amd. Ord. 91-39, 9-19-1991; Ord. 95-54, 7-25-
1995, eff. 1-1-1996)
 
Notes
1 1. UCA tit. 20A.
1-7-2: MUNICIPAL DISTRICTS:
   A.   Established: The boundaries of the Municipal districts within the City,
as said districts have heretofore been changed by ordinances 73-5, 81-33, 91-
39, 92-41, 93-19, 97-13, and 2002-56 and as last amended under ordinance 2012-
47, are hereby established using voting precinct boundaries as established and
determined by Weber County, so that the City is divided into four (4) Municipal
districts for the purpose of election of City Council members:
      1.   Municipal District No. 1: Municipal District no. 1 includes the
following present voting precincts in the City: 15, 20, 21, 27, 30, 31, 32, 34.
      2.   Municipal District No. 2: Municipal District no. 2 includes the
following present voting precincts in the City: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 18,
19.
      3.   Municipal District No. 3: Municipal District no. 3 includes the
following present voting precincts in the City: 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 16, 17, 22,
23, 24, 26.
      4.   Municipal District No. 4: Municipal District no. 4 includes the
following present voting precincts in the City: 25, 28, 29, 33, 35, 36, 37, 38,
39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45.
   B.   Map Adopted: The official map of Municipal district boundaries for the
City of Ogden, Weber County, Utah, attached to ordinance 2012-47 and
incorporated by reference, shall be adopted as part of this section.
(Ord. 2017-49, 12-5-2017)
CHAPTER 8
CAMPAIGN FINANCING DISCLOSURE
SECTION:
1-8-1: Definitions
1-8-2: Personal Campaign Committee
1-8-3: Contributions To Candidates
1-8-4: Financial Statements
1-8-5: City Recorder Duties
1-8-6: Failure To File; Inaccurate Or Incomplete
1-8-7: Unlawful Acts Designated
1-8-8: Penalty
1-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings as
defined in this section:
ADDRESS: An address of a person shall include: a) the physical street address
at which the person resides or does business, or at which its chief
administrative or financial officer resides or does business, or b) the mailing
address of the person at which the person commonly receives its mail. Any
address reported pursuant to this chapter shall be a complete address, with
sufficient information required by the U.S. postal service to accomplish mail
delivery to the address.
CANDIDATE: Any person who:
   A.   Files a declaration of candidacy for an elected office of the city; or
   B.   Receives contributions or makes expenditures or consents to another
person receiving contributions or making expenditures with a view to bringing
about such person's nomination or election to such office; or
   C.   Causes on his or her behalf, any written material or advertisement to
be printed, published, broadcast, distributed or disseminated which indicates
an intention to seek such office.
CONTRIBUTIONS: A. Contributions shall include:
      1.   A gift, subscription, donation, unpaid or partially unpaid loan,
advance, or deposit of money or anything of value;
      2.   A contract to make a contribution;
      3.   A transfer of funds from a political action committee, a party
committee, another candidate, an office holder, or a personal campaign
committee to a candidate or a candidate's personal campaign committee;
      4.   A payment for the personal services of another person by a person
other than the candidate's personal campaign committee for services rendered to
the candidate or such candidate's personal campaign committee; and
      5.   Goods or services provided at less than fair market value to or for
the benefit of a candidate or a candidate's personal campaign committee.
   B.   Contributions shall not include:
      1.   Personal services provided without compensation by individuals
volunteering their time on behalf of a candidate or such candidate's personal
campaign committee; or
      2.   A loan of money by a national or state bank or financial institution
made in accordance with the applicable banking laws and regulations and in the
ordinary course of business.
ELECTION: A general or primary election conducted by the city.
ELECTION CYCLE: An election cycle shall include:
   A.   With respect to a general election or a primary election for a city
elective position, the four (4) year period that ends thirty (30) days
immediately following the general election for such elective position; and
   B.   With respect to a city election to fill an unexpired term of office,
the period that begins on the earlier of: 1) the day the vacancy occurs, or 2)
the day the impending vacancy is publicly announced, and ends thirty (30) days
immediately following the general election for such elective position.
EXPENDITURE: An expenditure shall include:
   A.   A purchase, payment, donation, distribution, loan, advance, deposit,
gift of money or anything of value made for the purpose of influencing the
nomination or election of any candidate;
   B.   A contract to make any expenditure;
   C.   A transfer of funds by a candidate or a personal campaign committee to
another candidate, another candidate's personal campaign committee or a
political action committee;
   D.   Goods or services provided to or for the benefit of another candidate,
another candidate's personal campaign committee, or a political action
committee for political purposes at less than fair market value.
NAME: The name of a person required to be reported shall include:
   A.   In the case of a natural person, the first and last name of the person.
   B.   In the case of an organization, the legal name of the organization or
the common name by which the organization is known to the general public or its
clients.
PERSON: Both natural and legal persons, including, but not limited to, business
organizations, personal campaign committees, party committees, labor unions,
labor organizations and any other organized group of individuals.
PERSONAL CAMPAIGN COMMITTEE: The political committee appointed by a particular
candidate to act for such candidate as hereinafter provided.
POLITICAL ACTION COMMITTEE: An entity, or any group of individuals or entities
that constitute a political action committee as defined by Utah Code Annotated
section 20A-11-101(27) (2009), as amended. That subsection defines a political
action committee as follows:
   A.   Political action committee means an entity, or any group of individuals
or entities within or outside this state, that solicits or receives
contributions from any other person, group, or entity or makes expenditures:
      1.   For political purposes; or
      2.   With the intent or in a way to influence or tend to influence,
directly or indirectly, any person to refrain from voting or to vote for or
against any candidate for a municipal or county office.
   B.   Political action committee includes groups affiliated with a registered
political party but not authorized or organized by the governing board of the
registered political party that receive contributions or make expenditures for
political purposes.
   C.   Political action committee does not mean:
      1.   A party committee;
      2.   Any entity that provides goods or services to a candidate or
committee in the regular course of its business at the same price that would be
provided to the general public;
      3.   An individual;
      4.   Individuals who are related and who make contributions from a joint
checking account;
      5.   A corporation; or
      6.   A personal campaign committee.
POLITICAL PURPOSE: An act done with intent or in such way as to influence or
tend to influence, directly or indirectly, the election of a candidate at a
municipal election.
PRIMARY ELECTION: Any primary election held pursuant to Utah Code Annotated
title 20A, or its successor, and/or any election held prior to the general
election as provided by Utah Code Annotated title 20A, or its successor.
REPORTING DATE: A. Ten (10) days before the election, for a campaign finance
statement required to be filed not later than seven (7) days before a primary
or general election conducted by the city;
   B.   Three (3) days before the filing date, for any other campaign finance
statement required to be filed pursuant to this chapter.
REPORTING PERIOD: The period beginning from the date of either the first
contribution or the first expenditure in an election cycle, or since the
reporting date of the last filed financial statement, if any, and the reporting
date of a financial statement to be filed.
(Ord. 2009-39, 6-9-2009)
1-8-2: PERSONAL CAMPAIGN COMMITTEE:
   A.   Required: No person or persons shall receive any contributions on
behalf of a candidate for elected office of the city or make any expenditures
for political purposes for the candidate either directly or indirectly other
than through a personal campaign committee, whose authority to act shall be
filed as provided by this chapter.
   B.   Appointment: A candidate shall appoint no more than one personal
campaign committee to consist of one or more persons, or the candidate
individually who may constitute the committee.
   C.   Contributions; Secretary: No candidate shall solicit contributions or
authorize expenditures in furtherance of his or her candidacy except through
such candidate's personal campaign committee. If the personal campaign
committee consists of only one person, such person is deemed the secretary. If
the candidate acts as personal campaign committee, the candidate is deemed the
secretary.
   D.   Registration: Before the personal campaign committee makes any
expenditure for political purposes on behalf of the candidate, or incurs any
obligation, express or implied, to make an expenditure in the candidate's
behalf, the candidate or committee shall register the committee by filing with
the city recorder a written statement, signed by the candidate setting forth
that the candidate's personal campaign committee has been appointed or elected,
and giving the name and address of each member and the secretary of the
committee.
   E.   Changes; Withdrawal: Any candidate may revoke the selection of any
member of such candidate's personal campaign committee by a revocation in
writing filed with the city recorder. Any individual may voluntarily withdraw
from a committee by filing a written notice with the city recorder. The date of
withdrawal is the date the notice is received by the city recorder. A candidate
may fill any vacancy. A candidate shall be deemed the secretary until a
replacement is appointed.
   F.   Endurance Of Committees: A personal campaign committee registered by a
candidate after June 2, 2009, shall be deemed to endure in existence, and shall
remain subject to the requirements of this chapter, until it permanently ceases
operations and files a termination report. Any personal campaign committee
registered before June 2, 2009, shall for purposes of this chapter be deemed to
have terminated on or before June 2, 2009, without the necessity of filing a
termination report.
(Ord. 2009-39, 6-9-2009)
1-8-3: CONTRIBUTIONS TO CANDIDATES:
   A.   Cash Limitation: No person shall make cash contributions during any one
reporting period as set forth in this chapter, to any candidate or his or her
authorized personal campaign committee with respect to any election for city
office, which exceeds fifty dollars ($50.00); however, except as provided in
subsection B of this section, there shall be no limit as to the amount
contributed by a person to a personal campaign committee or a political action
committee if that contribution is made in the form of a personal or certified
check or bank draft, or by means of a money order, debit card, credit card,
PayPal or similar electronic financial transaction.
   B.   Contribution Limitation: No person shall make contributions during any
election cycle, as set forth in this chapter, to any candidate or his or her
personal campaign committee with respect to any election for city office, that,
in the aggregate, exceed the following amounts:
 
Office       Amount
Mayor        $5,000.00
City council 1,500.00
 
   C.   Anonymous: The acceptance of anonymous contributions is prohibited. Any
anonymous contributions received by a candidate or personal campaign committee
shall be transmitted to the city treasurer for deposit in the general fund.
   D.   Candidate Contributions: The limitations imposed by subsections A
through C of this section shall not apply to contributions by a candidate of
the candidate's own resources to the candidate's own campaign.
   E.   In Name Of Another: No person shall make a contribution in the name of
another person or make a contribution with another person's funds in his or her
own name, and no candidate, member of a personal campaign committee, or
political action committee shall knowingly accept a contribution made by one
person in the name of another person or made by one person with the funds of
another person.
   F.   Advertisement Disclosures: Every advertisement or communication made
for a political purpose by a personal campaign committee which is broadcast or
published by means of television, radio, newspaper, commercial billboards,
direct mailings, mass e-mails, automatic telephone equipment, paid
telephonists, leaflets, websites or fliers, shall contain a disclosure of the
name of the personal campaign committee responsible for its broadcast or
publication; except, this requirement shall not apply to campaign yard and
street signs, bumper stickers and pins.
   G.   Permitted Uses Of Campaign Funds: The candidate or the candidate's
personal campaign committee may use the monies in campaign accounts only as
follows:
      1.   For political purposes;
      2.   For expenses incurred in connection with duties of the individual as
a holder of a city office;
      3.   For charitable contributions defined in section 170(c) of the
internal revenue code of 1986 (26 USCS section 170(c));
      4.   For transfers to a national, state or local committee of a political
party;
      5.   For donations to federal, state or local candidates; or
      6.   For any other lawful purpose unless prohibited by subsection H of
this section.
   H.   Personal Use; Prohibition: A contribution shall not be converted by any
person to personal use. For purposes of this subsection, a contribution or
donation shall be considered to be converted to personal use if the
contribution or donation is used in a manner that would cause the candidate or
former candidate to recognize the monies as taxable income under federal tax
law.
(Ord. 2009-39, 6-9-2009)
1-8-4: FINANCIAL STATEMENTS:
   A.   Forms: Forms for all statements required by this chapter shall be
prepared by the city recorder and copies thereof, together with a copy of this
chapter, shall be furnished by the city recorder to the secretary of every
committee and to every candidate without charge.
   B.   Filing; Dates: Each candidate or personal campaign committee shall file
with the city recorder a verified financial statement containing the
information required in this chapter, by five o'clock (5:00) P.M., on the
following dates:
      1.   Seven (7) days before the date of the primary election, if the
candidate is involved in the primary election;
      2.   Twenty (20) days after the date of the primary election;
      3.   Seven (7) days before the general election; and
      4.   No later than thirty (30) days after the date of the general
election.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subsection B, the personal
campaign committee for a candidate shall be required to file a campaign finance
statement on the dates specified in this subsection only during an election
year in which the elective office that such candidate seeks is open for
election.
   C.   Seven Day Period: During the seven (7) day period before any election,
each personal campaign committee or candidate shall file with the city recorder
a campaign finance statement disclosing each contribution over seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00) within twenty four (24) hours after receipt of each
such contribution. Such statement shall contain the information required by
subsection E2 of this section.
   D.   Candidates Eliminated: Candidates for elective office who are
eliminated at a primary election shall file a campaign financial statement,
signed and verified by the candidate, containing the information required by
this section not later than twenty (20) days after the primary election.
   E.   Contents; Reporting Date: The statement shall contain all expenditures
and contributions within the reporting period that are received before the
close of the reporting date. Each financial statement shall contain:
      1.   The sum totals of contributions, expenditures, loans and debts
reported in previously filed financial statements within the election cycle;
      2.   A list of each contribution in excess of fifty dollars ($50.00)
received by the committee, the amount of the contribution, the name and address
of each contributor, and the date on which each such contribution was received;
      3.   An aggregate total of all contributions of fifty dollars ($50.00) or
less received by the committee; and
      4.   A list of all expenditures made and obligations incurred but not
paid during the reporting period, the name and address of every recipient to
whom disbursement was made, and the purposes of the expenditure made or
obligation incurred.
   F.   Multiple Election Cycles; Committee Disclosures: A personal campaign
committee that endures beyond an election cycle and whose candidate files a
declaration of candidacy in a new election cycle, shall include within its
initial campaign finance statement required in the new election cycle a report
of all of its campaign contributions, expenditures, loans and debts that have
occurred since the reporting date of the last previously filed campaign finance
statement of the committee or candidate.
   G.   Termination Report: In the event a personal campaign committee has
permanently ceased operations, the candidate or committee shall file a
termination report with the city recorder certifying that the personal campaign
committee has permanently ceased operations. The termination report shall
include a final campaign finance statement setting forth all campaign
contributions, expenditures, loans and debts that have occurred since the
reporting date of the last previously filed campaign finance statement of the
candidate or committee. The campaign finance statement shall state the amount
of any surplus funds and the name and address of any recipient of such surplus
funds, and shall identify any debt which was paid or compromised and the name
and address of any person to whom any debt was paid or compromised.
   H.   Certification: Each statement shall be certified by the secretary or by
the candidate to the effect that all contributions and expenditures not
heretofore reported have been reported and that there are no bills or
obligations outstanding and unpaid except as set forth in the report.
   I.   No Contributions Or Expenditures: In the event the committee had no
contributions or expenditures during the reporting period, the statement shall
state that no contributions have been received nor any expenditures made.
   J.   Political Action Committees: Political action committees are required
to register and file verified financial statements with the lieutenant
governor's office pursuant to Utah Code Annotated sections 20A-11-601 to 20A-
11-603 (2009), as amended.
(Ord. 2009-39, 6-9-2009)
1-8-5: CITY RECORDER DUTIES:
   A.   Notice To Candidates: The city recorder shall, at the time the
candidate for municipal office files a declaration of candidacy, and again
fourteen (14) days before each municipal general election, notify the candidate
in writing of:
      1.   The provisions of statute or municipal ordinance governing the
disclosure of campaign contributions and expenditures;
      2.   The dates when the candidate's campaign finance statements are
required to be filed; and
      3.   The penalties that apply for failure to file a timely campaign
finance statement, including the statutory and ordinance provisions that
require removal of the candidate's name from the ballot for failure to file the
required campaign finance statements when required.
   B.   Records Availability: Notwithstanding any provision of the government
records access and management act, title 63G, chapter 2, Utah Code Annotated,
the city recorder shall:
      1.   Make each campaign finance statement filed by a candidate available
for public inspection and copying no later than one business day after the
statement is filed; and
      2.   Make the campaign finance statement filed by a candidate available
for public inspection by:
         a.   (1) Posting an electronic copy or the contents of the statement
on the municipality's website no later than seven (7) business days after the
statement is filed; and
            (2)   Verifying that the address of the municipality's website has
been provided to the lieutenant governor in order to meet the requirements of
subsection 20A-11-103(5), Utah Code Annotated; or
         b.   Submitting a copy of the statement to the lieutenant governor for
posting on the website established by the lieutenant governor under section
20A-11-103, Utah Code Annotated, no later than two (2) business days after the
statement is filed.
(Ord. 2009-39, 6-9-2009)
1-8-6: FAILURE TO FILE; INACCURATE OR INCOMPLETE:
   A.   Failure To File: If a candidate or the candidate's personal campaign
committee fails to file a campaign finance statement due seven (7) days before
the general election, the city recorder shall inform the appropriate election
official who:
      1.   Shall:
         a.   If practicable, remove the candidate's name from the ballot by
blacking out the candidate's name before the ballots are delivered to voters;
or
         b.   If removing the candidate's name from the ballot is not
practicable, inform the voters by any practicable method that the candidate has
been disqualified and that votes cast for the candidate will not be counted;
and
      2.   May not count any votes for that candidate.
   B.   Inadvertent And Insignificant Errors: Notwithstanding subsection A of
this section, a candidate who files a campaign finance statement seven (7) days
before a general election is not disqualified if:
      1.   The statement details accurately and completely the information
required under section
1-8-4 of this chapter, except for inadvertent omissions or insignificant errors
or inaccuracies; and
      2.   The omissions, errors, or inaccuracies are corrected in an amended
report or in the next scheduled report.
   C.   Inspection; Written Notice: The city recorder shall inspect all
financial statements within one day after the same are filed. If it appears
that any candidate or personal campaign committee has failed to file a
statement as required by law or if it appears that the statement does not
conform to law, or upon complaint in writing by a candidate or by a voter
demonstrating that a statement filed does not conform to law, the city recorder
shall notify the delinquent personal campaign committee or candidate, in
writing, requesting compliance with this chapter. Written notice as required
herein may be given in the following manner:
      1.   Delivery, in person, to the candidate or the secretary of the
personal campaign committee;
      2.   Delivery to a person of suitable age and discretion at the address
of the candidate or the address of the secretary of the personal campaign
committee, as indicated in the registration form for the personal campaign
committee as required under subsection 1-8-2D of this chapter; or
      3.   By certified mail, mailed to the candidate or the secretary of the
personal campaign committee at the address as indicated in the registration
form for the personal campaign committee as required under subsection 1-8-2D of
this chapter.
   D.   Examination Of Books And Records: Upon the failure of any personal
campaign committee or candidate to file a statement, within two (2) days after
first receiving written notice under subsection C of this section, or, if in
the exercise of reasonable discretion, the city recorder questions the accuracy
or completeness of such statement, the city recorder may request an examination
of all books and records of such committee or person. Such books and records
shall be produced by the candidate or personal campaign committee for
inspection by the city recorder within one day after request for examination is
received.
   E.   Violation; Notification To City Attorney: If a personal campaign
committee or candidate fails to file or correct a statement within two (2) days
after receiving notice under subsection C of this section, or, if any statement
filed discloses a violation of this chapter, or, if the inspection of records
discloses a violation of this chapter, the city recorder shall notify the city
attorney and shall furnish the city attorney copies of all papers and other
information in the city recorder's possession relating thereto.
   F.   Filing Corrected Financial Statement: The filing of a corrected
financial statement by a candidate or personal campaign committee within two
(2) days after receiving notice pursuant to subsection C of this section shall
be deemed to cure any inadvertent or insignificant omission, error or
inaccuracy in a previously filed statement that is so corrected, but shall not
be deemed to cure a wilful or knowing falsification or omission.
(Ord. 2009-39, 6-9-2009)
1-8-7: UNLAWFUL ACTS DESIGNATED:
   A.   Oath Of Office Prior To Filing Statement: It is unlawful to administer
the oath of office, or to issue a certificate of election to any candidate for
the offices of mayor or council member until the candidate's personal campaign
committee has filed the financial disclosure statements as required by this
chapter, or its successor, which statements shall be complete upon their face
and show compliance to the provisions of this chapter, and no person shall
enter upon the duties of the office until the personal campaign committee has
filed the required statements, nor shall any salary or fees be received by that
person for a period prior to filing of the statements.
(Ord. 2009-39, 6-9-2009)
1-8-8: PENALTY:
   A.   It shall be an infraction, punishable as provided by section
1-4A-1 of this title, or its successor, for any person to violate any provision
of this chapter or to fail to file when due any required campaign finance
statement or report specified in this chapter or to knowingly or wilfully
falsify or omit any information required by any of the provisions of this
chapter.
   B.   A private party in interest may bring a civil action in district court
to enforce the provisions of this chapter. In accordance with section 10-3-208,
Utah Code Annotated, in such a civil action, the court may award costs and
attorney fees to the prevailing party.
(Ord. 2009-39, 6-9-2009)
TITLE 2
GOVERNMENT ORGANIZATION, OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
CHAPTER 1
FORM OF GOVERNMENT
SECTION:
2-1-1: Form Of Government
2-1-1: FORM OF GOVERNMENT:
The Municipal government of Ogden City shall be the Council-Mayor form of
government as provided under the Optional Forms of Municipal Government Act,
Utah Code Annotated title 10, chapter 3, part 12, as amended. The City
government is vested in two (2) separate, independent and equal branches of
Municipal government: the executive branch consisting of a Mayor, a Chief
Administrative Officer and the administrative departments and officers; and the
legislative branch consisting of a Municipal Council having seven (7) members.
(1979 Code § 1.05.010; Ord. 91-39, 9-19-1991, eff. 1-6-1992; amd. 1999 Code)
CHAPTER 2
MAYOR
SECTION:
2-2-1: Qualifications; Terms
2-2-2: Appointment Of Chief Administrative Officer
2-2-3: Compensation
2-2-4: Administrative Rules And Policies
2-2-1: QUALIFICATIONS; TERMS:
The mayor shall be the chief executive and administrative officer of the city
and shall have the powers and duties as prescribed under state law and the
ordinances of the city. The mayor shall be a registered voter of the city and
shall have resided within the city for a period of twelve (12) consecutive
months immediately preceding the date of election and remain a resident during
the term of office. The mayor shall be elected at large for a term of four (4)
years with the term commencing at twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on the first
Monday of January following the election of officers, unless such Monday shall
be a legal holiday. The mayor shall hold office for the term for which elected,
unless sooner removed as provided by law, and until a successor is elected and
has qualified.
(1979 Code § 1.07.010; amd. Ord. 91-39, 9-19-1991, eff. 1-6-1992; 1999 Code)
2-2-2: APPOINTMENT OF CHIEF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER:
The mayor shall, with the advice and consent of the city council, appoint a
chief administrative officer to exercise such powers of administration and
perform such duties as the mayor shall prescribe. The chief administrative
officer shall be appointed on the basis of ability and prior experience in the
field of public administration, together with such other qualifications as may
be prescribed.
(1979 Code § 1.07.020; amd. Ord. 91-39, 9-19-1991, eff. 1-6-1992)
2-2-3: COMPENSATION:
The annual salary of the mayor shall be one hundred eight thousand eight
hundred fifty seven dollars ($108,857.00), effective January 3, 2012. Beginning
in fiscal year 2016, the mayor's salary shall be adjusted by the percentage or
percentages approved by the city council as cost of living and performance
adjustments for nonmerit special employees in the annual pay plan adoption.
Subject to approval by the council, the mayor's salary may be modified through
the annual budget process, as necessary, based on total compensation
benchmarking of other Utah cities. In addition, the mayor shall also be
provided with a monthly vehicle allowance in a net amount of four hundred
dollars ($400.00) after payment of the employee share of social security and
medicaid taxes and those employee benefits generally provided to other
employees of the city.
(Ord. 2015-1, 1-13-2015)
2-2-4: ADMINISTRATIVE RULES AND POLICIES:
   A.   Authority Of Mayor: The mayor may adopt administrative rules and
policies controlling the business and personnel of the city, which rules shall
not be inconsistent with law or these ordinances.
   B.   When Effective: An administrative rule or policy shall take effect when
it is signed by the mayor and a copy thereof is deposited with the city
recorder.
   C.   Policy Title: The administrative rules and policies adopted by the
mayor shall be known as the administrative rules and policies of Ogden City.
(1979 Code § 3.20.010; amd. Ord. 94-12, 3-8-1994)
CHAPTER 3
CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
2-3-1: Legislative Body
2-3-2: Council Member Qualifications
2-3-3: Membership; Terms
2-3-4: Meetings
2-3-5: Election Of Council Chair; Term
2-3-6: Compensation
2-3-7: Rules Of Procedure
2-3-8: Public Access To Records
2-3-1: LEGISLATIVE BODY:
The legislative body of the City is the City Council. The City Council shall
consist of seven (7) members. Of those, one shall be elected from each of four
(4) Municipal districts and three (3) shall be elected from the City at large.
(Ord. 2017-49, 12-5-2017)
2-3-2: COUNCIL MEMBER QUALIFICATIONS:
Each member of the City Council shall be a registered voter and shall have
resided within the City for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months
immediately preceding the date of election and remain a resident during the
term of office. The members elected from each of the Municipal districts shall
have been an actual and bona fide resident of the district from which the
Council member is elected at least sixty (60) days prior to the election and
shall continue as such resident during the term of office. If a Council member
shall cease to possess any of these qualifications, his office shall
immediately become vacant. Council members while in office shall hold no other
compensated employment with the City.
(Ord. 2017-49, 12-5-2017)
2-3-3: MEMBERSHIP; TERMS:
   A.   Municipal Districts; At Large Election: The City Council shall consist
of seven (7) members. Of these, one shall be elected from each of the four (4)
Municipal districts, as provided in title 1, chapter 7 of this Code, and three
(3) shall be elected from the City at large. Each Council member shall be
elected for a term of four (4) years with the term commencing at twelve o'clock
(12:00) noon on the first Monday of January following the election of officers.
Council members shall hold office for the term for which elected, unless sooner
removed as provided by law, and until a successor is elected and has qualified.
   B.   Nomination; Election By Petition: The nomination and election of the
three (3) at large offices shall be by Citywide petition and election. The
nomination and election of each Municipal district Council member shall be by
districtwide petition and election, with only the qualified electors of each
Municipal district authorized to sign the nominating petitions and to vote in
the election of the Council member from that district.
   C.   Two Vacant Offices:
      1.   Whenever two (2) at large City Council offices are vacant in a
Municipal election, the positions shall be designated "Council member at large
A" and "Council member at large B" and all candidates for such at large offices
shall designate candidacy for only one of the positions.
      2.   No persons may file a declaration of candidacy for, be a candidate
for, or be elected to two (2) Council offices in any election.
   D.   Induction Into Office: The first meeting of each newly elected Council,
for induction into office, shall be held at twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on the
first Monday of January following the election of officers, unless such Monday
shall be a legal holiday.
(Ord. 2017-49, 12-5-2017)
2-3-4: MEETINGS:
Regular meetings of the Council shall be held the first, third and fourth
Tuesday of each month in the City Council Chambers, third floor, Municipal
Building, 2549 Washington Boulevard, at six o'clock (6:00) P.M. Change in the
time or place of any regular meeting or the holding of special meetings shall
be in accordance with the rules of procedure adopted by the City Council. All
meetings of the City Council shall be held in compliance with the provisions of
Utah Code Annotated title 52, chapter 4, relating to open and public meetings.
(1979 Code § 1.06.050A; amd. Ord. 91-39, 9-19-1991, eff. 1-6-1992; Ord. 92-5,
1-9-1992; 1999 Code; Ord. 2001-30, 5-1-2001; Ord. 2006-9, 4-4-2006)
2-3-5: ELECTION OF COUNCIL CHAIR; TERM:
The City Council shall, by a majority vote of its members, elect a Council
Chair who shall preside at all meetings of the City Council and shall be
recognized as the head of the City Council for all legal and ceremonial
purposes. The City Council shall also elect a Vice Chair who shall act as the
Chair during the absence or disability of the Chair and, if a vacancy shall
occur, shall become the Chair for the completion of the unexpired term. The
Chair and Vice Chair shall be elected for a term of one year.
(1979 Code § 1.06.060; amd. Ord. 91-39, 9-19-1991, eff. 1-6-1992; Ord. 91-40,
10-10-1991, eff. 1-6-1992)
2-3-6: COMPENSATION:
Beginning in fiscal year 2019, Council members' annual salary is established at
seventeen thousand three hundred ninety four dollars ($17,394.00) which shall
be adjusted annually by the percentage or percentages approved by the City
Council as cost of living and performance adjustments for nonmerit special
employees in the annual pay plan adoption. Council members' salaries may also
be modified through the annual budget process, as necessary, based on total
compensation benchmarking of other Utah cities. The resulting salary, including
all adjustments and benchmarking modifications, shall become the base salary
for the next fiscal year. Council members shall also be provided with those
employee benefits generally provided to other employees of the City. In
addition to the base salary, the Council Chair shall receive a pay differential
of twelve percent (12%) per year and the Council Vice Chair shall receive a pay
differential of six percent (6%) per year. The Council Chair, Vice Chair and
members of the City Council shall be reimbursed for real and actual
expenditures they may make relating to official duties conducted outside of the
City, in addition to the above compensation. Reimbursement for out of town
expenditures, except for per diem, shall be paid upon submission of
documentation and claims.
(Ord. 2018-26, 8-14-2018)
2-3-7: RULES OF PROCEDURE:
The City Council shall determine its own rules for the government of the City
Council, the preservation of order and the transaction of the business of the
City Council as may be necessary. The rules of procedure shall be in writing
and filed with the City Recorder.
(1979 Code § 1.06.080; amd. Ord. 91-39, 9-19-1991, eff. 1-6-1992)
2-3-8: PUBLIC ACCESS TO RECORDS:
The books, records and accounts of the Council shall be kept at the Office of
the City Recorder. Individual citizens or citizen groups may have access to all
public records which have not been classified as "private", "controlled" or
"protected" as defined in title 4, chapter 5 of this Code.
(1979 Code § 1.06.050B; amd. Ord. 91-39, 9-19-1991, eff. 1-6-1992; 1999 Code)
CHAPTER 4
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
SECTION:
2-4-1: Purpose
2-4-2: Government Organization
2-4-3: Mayor; Function And Duties
2-4-4: Authority Of Mayor To Appoint And Remove Officers
2-4-5: Chief Administrative Officer
2-4-6: Assignment Of Duties By Mayor
2-4-7: Executive Committees And Miscellaneous Boards
2-4-8: Administrative Organization
2-4-9: Department Directors; Duties And Powers
2-4-10: Reserved
2-4-11: Office Of City Recorder
2-4-12: Office Of City Attorney
2-4-13: Department Of Community And Economic Development
2-4-14: Department Of Public Services
2-4-15: Department Of Management Services
2-4-16: Reserved
2-4-17: Fire Department
2-4-18: Police Department
2-4-1: PURPOSE:
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to establish and to clarify the
organization and operation of city offices or departments and to provide for an
orderly means of conducting the administration of city government. Pursuant to
Utah Code Annotated title 10, chapter 3, this chapter provides for the division
of executive and administrative operations into departments, divisions and
offices and the definition of the duties and functions of each. This chapter
constitutes the administrative code of the city.
(1979 Code § 2.06.010; Ord. 93-14, 3-30-1993)
2-4-2: GOVERNMENT ORGANIZATION:
   A.   Executive And Legislative Branches: The municipal government of the
city is divided into separate, independent and equal branches of government:
      1.   The executive branch, which consists of the elected mayor of the
city as the chief executive officer and a mandatory chief administrative
officer, with the attendant executive and administrative offices, departments
and divisions of the city, together with department directors, division
managers, officers and employees; and
      2.   The legislative branch, which consists of the city council and its
staff.
   B.   Mayor: The mayor shall be elected at large by the voters of the city
and shall exercise the executive powers of the government. The mayor shall
appoint a chief administrative officer who may administer, under the executive
prerogative of the mayor, the departments of the city government as outlined in
these ordinances.
(1979 Code § 2.06.020; Ord. 93-14, 3-30-1993)
2-4-3: MAYOR; FUNCTION AND DUTIES:
The mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the city and its official
head for ceremonial purposes. The mayor's powers and duties include, but are
not limited to, the following:
   A.   Supervise Administration: Supervising the administration and
enforcement of all laws and ordinances of the city;
   B.   Administer Departments, Divisions And Offices: Administering and
exercising control of all departments, divisions and offices within the city;
   C.   Execute Policies: Executing the policies adopted by the city council as
reflected by council resolutions or by city ordinances which are consistent
with state law;
   D.   Supervise And Coordinate Administrative Functions: Supervising or
coordinating the administrative functions of those authorities and agencies
which are related to or affect city operations, such as redevelopment, to the
extent requested or delegated by the officers or bodies having primary
responsibility for the operation of such authorities or agencies;
   E.   Authorize Executive Orders: Authorizing the issuance of such executive
orders or administrative rules and regulations for the general operations of
the City which are not in conflict with the laws of the State or City
ordinances;
   F.   Recommend Legislation: Recommending to the City Council for adoption
such measures as may be deemed necessary or proper for the efficient and proper
operation of the City;
   G.   Attend City Council Meetings: Attending all meetings of the City
Council; provided however, that the Mayor may designate a representative when
the Mayor is unable to attend;
   H.   Annual Budget And Report: Preparing and submitting to the City Council:
      1.   An annual budget; and
      2.   An annual report of the City's financial affairs, within one hundred
eighty (180) days following the close of the City's fiscal year;
   I.   Report Financial Condition To City Council: Keeping the City Council
informed as to the financial condition of the City on a quarterly basis or at
such other time interval as the City Council shall require by ordinance;
   J.   Appoint Budget Officer: Appointing a Budget Officer to serve in place
of the Mayor for the purpose of conforming with the requirements of the Uniform
Municipal Fiscal Procedures Act and in all other respects fulfill the
requirements of that Act;
   K.   Supervise Purchases; Authorize Expenditures: Subject to the
requirements of statutes and ordinances now or hereafter lawfully enacted,
supervising the purchase of materials or services and otherwise authorizing
expenditures of funds on behalf of the City;
   L.   Make Appointments To Advisory Bodies: Making appointments to City
committees, boards, commissions and other advisory bodies in the City, after
having received the advice and consent of the City Council on each separate
prospective appointment, as provided or required in State law, and removing the
same;
   M.   Make Appointments To Directors, Officers And Agents: Except as
otherwise provided in this Chapter, hiring and making all appointments
regarding department directors, officers and agents, subject to the advice and
consent of the City Council where required by State law, and disciplining or
terminating the same;
   N.   Execute Agreements: Executing agreements within certified budget
appropriations on behalf of the City, or delegating by written executive order
the power to execute such agreements to executive officials, subject to the
requirements of State law and City ordinance;
   O.   Declare Local Emergencies: Declaring local emergencies and exercising
those powers and duties necessary to protect life and property as provided in
Utah Code Annotated title 63, chapter 5a, or any successor provisions;
   P.   Perform Other Prescribed Duties: Performing such other duties as may be
prescribed or permitted by law, including: issuing proclamations; vetoing
ordinances, tax levies and appropriations, subject to City Council veto
override as provided by State law; and performing such other duties as may be
prescribed by State law or may be required by ordinance not inconsistent with
law.
(1979 Code § 2.06.030; Ord. 93-14, 3-30-1993)
2-4-4: AUTHORITY OF MAYOR TO APPOINT AND REMOVE OFFICERS:
Subject to the limitations and requirements of applicable budget
appropriations, the Mayor shall have the authority to appoint and remove
assistants and officers who shall perform such functions and duties as may be
assigned to them by the Mayor. In order to provide proper staff and management
services to the City and its departments, the Mayor is authorized to establish
within the office of the Mayor such divisions as may seem necessary or proper
for the purposes aforesaid. The office of the Mayor shall be considered to be a
department for budgetary purposes.
(1979 Code § 2.06.040; Ord. 93-14, 3-30-1993)
2-4-5: CHIEF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER:
   A.   Appointment By Mayor: The Mayor shall appoint, with the advice and
consent of the City Council, a Chief Administrative Officer to exercise such
duties as the Mayor shall prescribe which are consistent with State law. The
Chief Administrative Officer shall be appointed on the basis of ability and
prior experience in the field of public administration, together with such
other qualifications as may be prescribed. The Chief Administrative Officer may
be removed at the sole discretion of the Mayor.
   B.   Powers And Duties: The Chief Administrative Officer's powers and duties
may include, but are not limited to, the following:
      1.   Supervise Administration: Supervising the administration and
enforcement of all laws and ordinances of the City as they affect the City
departments;
      2.   Execute Policies: Executing the policies affecting City departments
that are adopted by the City Council;
      3.   Develop Policy Alternatives: Development of policy alternatives and
recommendations for the City Council;
      4.   Administrative Responsibility For Budgets: Major administrative
responsibility for the preparation and administration of the operating and
capital improvement budgets;
      5.   Serve As Budget Officer: Serving as the Budget Officer in place of
the Mayor for the purpose of conforming with the requirements of the Uniform
Municipal Fiscal Procedures Act at such times as the Mayor is unavailable,
unless another City official has been so appointed by the Mayor;
      6.   Recommend Hiring, Discipline Or Termination: Recommending to the
Mayor the hiring, disciplining or termination of department directors appointed
by the Mayor;
      7.   Administer Departments: Administering and exercising control of all
departments of the City and such City offices as provided in this Chapter;
      8.   Appoint Division Managers: Appointing division managers upon
recommendation of the department director;
      9.   Act As Hearing Officer: Acting as hearing officer for the
disciplining or terminating of employees in accordance with the City personnel
rules and regulations;
      10.   Perform Other Prescribed Duties: Performing such other duties as
may be prescribed by the Mayor or permitted by law or City ordinance.
(1979 Code § 2.06.050; Ord. 93-14, 3-30-1993)
2-4-6: ASSIGNMENT OF DUTIES BY MAYOR:
From time to time the Mayor may:
   A.   Establish Duties And Services: Establish, change or reorganize or
transfer functions, duties and services within existing budgetary restraints;
   B.   Assign Or Reassign Personnel: Assign or reassign personnel between any
division or the office of the Mayor; and
   C.   Transfer Functions, Duties And Services: Within existing budgetary
restraints, transfer functions, duties, services and assign or reassign
personnel from, to or between the Mayor's office and between and among any of
such departments and divisions of the administrative organization of the City;
provided however, that the Mayor shall inform the City Council of any transfer
to another department of functions or duties which are assigned to a different
department under the provisions of this Administrative Code within sixty (60)
days of said transfer.
(1979 Code § 2.06.060; Ord. 93-14, 3-30-1993)
2-4-7: EXECUTIVE COMMITTEES AND MISCELLANEOUS BOARDS:
   A.   Mayor Establish: The Mayor may administratively establish, from City
personnel and private individuals, committees to assist and provide counsel.
   B.   Coordinate With Mayor: Various boards, committees and commissions
established by City ordinance, other than legislative committees, shall report
to and coordinate with or have liaison with the Mayor or the Mayor's designee
unless otherwise stipulated by State Code.
   C.   Specific Organizations: Various boards, committees and other
organizations of or from the community, not otherwise provided for in these
administrative ordinances, shall coordinate with or have City liaison with the
executive branch of City government through the Mayor or the Mayor's designee.
These organizations include, but are not limited to, the governing board of the
County Health Department, the Wasatch Front Regional Council, and the Weber
Area Council of Governments.
(1979 Code § 2.06.070; Ord. 93-14, 3-30-1993; amd. 1999 Code)
2-4-8: ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION:
Subject to the limitations and requirements of applicable budget and
appropriations, the City's administrative organization shall consist of
departments, divisions and offices. Each department or office shall be
identified and have the duties, functions and responsibilities as hereinafter
generally designated and as assigned by the Mayor. Each department shall be
organized into such divisions as designated herein or as may be determined by
the Mayor to be appropriate to carry out its functions. Each department shall
be headed by a department director who shall be a qualified person appointed by
the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council. Each division
within a department shall be supervised and managed by a division manager who
shall be a qualified person appointed by the Chief Administrative Officer upon
recommendation of the department director, unless another appointment process
is provided herein. Division managers may be removed from office by the
department director, with the consent of the Chief Administrative Officer.
(1979 Code § 2.06.080; Ord. 93-14, 3-30-1993)
2-4-9: DEPARTMENT DIRECTORS; DUTIES AND POWERS:
Each department director shall be responsible for the supervision, coordination
and management of their department. Each department director shall have the
power, subject to such review as required by the Chief Administrative Officer,
to prescribe rules and regulations for the operation of their department, which
are not inconsistent with general law, City ordinance, or the rules,
regulations and policies established by the Mayor or the Chief Administrative
Officer.
(1979 Code § 2.06.090; Ord. 93-14, 3-30-1993)
2-4-10: RESERVED:
(1979 Code § 2.06.100; Ord. 93-14, 3-30-1993; amd. Ord. 2000-21, 4-11-2000,
eff. 7-1-2000)
2-4-11: OFFICE OF CITY RECORDER:
   A.   Appointment; Deputies: The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the
City Council, shall appoint a qualified person to the office of City Recorder,
who shall have such duties as are now or may hereafter be provided by law or
ordinance. The City Recorder may appoint an ad hoc deputy or deputies as is
required from among the existing employees of the office of the City Recorder
as are necessary to assist in the Recorder's public duties. Such ad hoc
appointment shall not affect the existing job status or salary of the deputy.
The office of City Recorder shall be a division within the Department of
Management Services.
   B.   Duties And Powers:
      1.   Corporate Seal; Legal Documents: The City Recorder shall keep the
Corporate Seal and shall attest all legal documents of the City.
      2.   Attend Meetings; Record Proceedings: The City Recorder or deputy
shall attend the meetings and keep the record of the proceedings of the City
Council.
      3.   Notice Of Meetings: The City Recorder shall give notice of all City
Council meetings as required by general law, ordinance or the City Council
rules of procedure.
      4.   Publish Notices: The City Recorder shall publish as required by
general law all notices of public hearings on proposed ordinances, and all
notices of ordinances finally adopted.
      5.   Municipal Elections: The City Recorder shall organize, supervise and
conduct all Municipal elections as provided by general law or ordinance and
shall prepare and record abstracts of Municipal election returns.
      6.   Contracts: The City Recorder shall countersign or attest all formal
contracts made on behalf of the City; and the Recorder shall maintain a
properly indexed record of all such contracts.
      7.   Records Of Ordinances And Resolutions: The City Recorder shall
record, in order of date passed, all ordinances and resolutions adopted by the
City Council in a book or books to be kept for that purpose and shall keep a
separate book for minutes of the proceedings of the City Council, which record
shall at all times be open to public inspection.
      8.   Preserve And Index Files: The City Recorder shall preserve all
papers, documents, books and other matters filed in the office of the City
Recorder, indexing the same so that they are readily accessible.
      9.   Papers And Transcripts; Admissible In Court: Copies of all papers
filed in the office of the City Recorder and transcripts from all records of
the City Council, when certified by the Recorder under the Corporate Seal, are
admissible in all courts as originals.
      10.   Perform Other Duties: The City Recorder shall perform those other
duties prescribed by State law or by ordinance.
   C.   Access To Records By City Council: The City Council shall have equal
and independent access for services with respect to recording or retrieval of
records for legislative functions.
(1979 Code § 2.06.110; Ord. 93-14, 3-30-1993)
2-4-12: OFFICE OF CITY ATTORNEY:
   A.   Appointment By Mayor: The office of City Attorney shall be under the
supervision of the City Attorney, who shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the
advice and consent of the City Council. The office of City Attorney shall be
considered to be a department for budgetary purposes.
   B.   Duties And Responsibilities: The City Attorney shall be the chief legal
officer of the City and shall be responsible to the Mayor and City Council for
the proper administration of the legal affairs of the executive and legislative
branches of City government. The City Attorney, and the duly appointed
assistants of the City Attorney, shall have the following responsibilities:
      1.   Prosecute Violators: Prosecution of all charges of violations of
City ordinances and regulations in the courts or administrative tribunals;
      2.   Prosecute And Defend Actions And Appeals: Prosecution and defense of
all actions and appeals involving the City in all courts and before all boards,
commissions and administrative agencies;
      3.   Furnish Legal Advice And Assistance: To furnish legal advice,
counsel and assistance to the Mayor, the City Council and all other officers,
offices, departments, boards, commissions and agencies, in relation to their
duties and the business of the City;
      4.   Prepare And/Or Approve Legislation: To prepare as requested or
approve as to legal form all ordinances and resolutions presented to the Mayor
or City Council;
      5.   Approve Contracts: To approve as to legal form all contracts entered
into by the City;
      6.   Make Affidavits And Verifications: To make the necessary affidavits
and verifications on behalf of the City in any and all proceedings;
      7.   Assist In Property Acquisition: To assist in property acquisition
and disposition as directed by the administration;
      8.   Legal Documents: Prepare legal documents for the City.
   C.   Conflicts; Assignment Of Special Counsel: The foregoing
notwithstanding, the City Attorney shall not in any instance, either
personally, or by his or her assistants, act as both prosecutor or advocate
before and at the same time advisor to any board, commission, agency, officer,
official or body of the City. In cases where such conflict shall arise, special
counsel may be employed who shall not be subject to the control or direction of
the City Attorney in such matter, and who shall provide the legal service to
such board, commission, agency, officer, official or body. The provision of
such special counsel shall be coordinated by and through the Chief
Administrative Officer.
   D.   Separate Counsel: Nothing in this Section shall be construed to
prohibit either the City Council or Mayor from retaining separate counsel from
appropriated funds, as either may from time to time deem appropriate.
   E.   Licensing Requirements: The City Attorney and the assistant City
attorneys shall be attorneys at law licensed to practice law in the State.
Assistants to the City Attorney may perform any act which may be performed by
the City Attorney and may act in their own names and on their own authority and
need not act in the name of the City Attorney; provided however, that they
shall be subject to the supervision and direction of the City Attorney.
   F.   Special Legal Services: The Mayor may from time to time, when in the
Mayor's opinion the best interests of the City will be served thereby, retain
special legal counsel to perform such special legal services for the City as
the Mayor may determine and may fix by agreement with such special legal
counsel the compensation for such services. Any special legal counsel thus
appointed shall be subject to the supervision and direction of the City
Attorney.
(1979 Code § 2.06.120; amd. Ord. 93-14, 3-30-1993)
2-4-13: DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT:
   A.   Functions: The Department of Community and Economic Development shall
be responsible for:
      1.   Development Of General Plan: The development of Ogden City's General
Plan;
      2.   Administration Of Specific Ordinances: The development,
administration and enforcement of the zoning ordinances, subdivision
ordinances, landmarks preservation ordinances, and sign ordinances;
      3.   Businesses: The enforcement of business license regulations in
coordination with the Department of Management Services;
      4.   Housing And Neighborhood Development Programs: The housing and
neighborhood development programs of the City;
      5.   Administration Of Funds: Administration of community development
block grant funds;
      6.   Provide Staff Assistance: Providing staff assistance to the Ogden
redevelopment agency, the Planning Commission, the Board of Zoning Adjustment,
the Board of Building and Fire Code Appeals, the Landmarks Commission, the
Ogden City Arts Advisory Committee and such other committees as assigned;
      7.   Business And Economic Development: Being responsible for:
         a.   Tax Base; Employment: The location, development, relocation and
improvement of industries, businesses and related activities to increase the
tax base and employment opportunities within the City;
         b.   Economic Development Programs: The development of economic
development programs for the City;
         c.   Coordinate With Agencies On Economic Development: Providing for
the coordination with Federal, State and other local governmental agencies on
economic development matters as assigned; and
         d.   Coordinate With Private Industry: Providing coordination with
private industry, the Ogden Industrial Development Council, the Chamber-Ogden/
Weber, and other private or quasi- public organizations;
      8.   Airport; Enforcement Of Regulations: The operation, maintenance,
administration and management of the airport and the enforcement of the
attendant regulations;
      9.   Public Art Program: The administration of the Public Art Program as
described in title 3, chapter 16 and in title 4, chapter 1, article C of this
Code, including recommending to the Mayor the adoption of policies and
procedures for selecting public art, and maintaining information files on
artists and public arts projects;
      10.   Building Codes: The administration and enforcement of all
provisions of this Code relating to the construction, alteration, repair,
moving, demolition and occupancy of buildings including, but not limited to,
the following ordinances:
         a.   International Building Code and all other technical Codes, other
than the International Fire Code, adopted under title 16, chapter 2 of this
Code; and
         b.   All ordinances pertaining to dangerous buildings and their
abatement;
      11.   Union Station: The supervision and maintenance of Union Station to
the extent of the City's responsibilities; and
      12.   Other Duties: Such duties as prescribed by ordinance or as
otherwise assigned.
   B.   Building Official: There shall be appointed within the department a
building official who shall be the duly appointed building official of the City
and shall perform the duties of the building official as provided in this Code
under the administrative direction of the Director. The building official may
designate or authorize qualified employees within the department to act as
deputy or assistant building officials.
(Ord. 2017-39, 8-22-2017)
2-4-14: DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SERVICES:
   A.   Functions: The Department of Public Services shall have charge of and
be responsible for:
      1.   Parks: The general supervision, maintenance, planning, upkeep and
control of the City's parks, playgrounds, athletic fields, golf courses, pools
and other recreational areas and facilities;
      2.   Cemeteries: The City's cemeteries;
      3.   Recreation: Recreational activities and programs;
      4.   Urban Forest: Administration of ordinances and regulations relating
to the maintenance and upkeep of the City's urban forest and other plantings in
the public ways of the City;
      5.   Committees: Providing staff assistance to the Parks and Recreation
Advisory Committee, the Marshall N. White Center Advisory Committee, and the
Urban Forestry Advisory Committee;
      6.   Operation And Maintenance Of Public Ways: The operation and
maintenance of streets, curbs, gutters, parkways exclusive of trees and other
vegetation, sidewalks, and other public ways and public facilities within
public ways;
      7.   Traffic Control Devices: Operation and maintenance of traffic
control devices and street lighting;
      8.   Collection And Disposal Of Wastewaters: The collection and disposal
of all wastewater (sanitary sewage), stormwater and floodwater generated within
the City, including maintenance of the facilities necessary therefor;
      9.   Maintenance Of Waterways: Enforcement of ordinances relating to the
maintenance of natural waterways, ditches, and canals, except for the
floodplain overlay ordinance, title 15, chapter 26 of this Code;
      10.   Collection And Disposal Of Solid Waste: Sanitation, including the
collection and disposal of all solid waste generated within the City as
prescribed for by City ordinances;
      11.   Potable Water: The acquisition, transportation, storage, treatment
and distribution of all potable water for the City and its customers within the
designated service areas, including, but not limited to:
         a.   Monitoring and controlling watershed lands to protect the water
supply for the City;
         b.   Operating and maintaining all water sources from which the
domestic supply is or may be taken;
         c.   Operating and maintaining all reservoirs, pump stations, water
mains, City fire hydrants and appurtenant equipment and properties;
         d.   Keeping records of all the water rights owned by the City;
      12.   Engineering: Engineering functions, including responsibility for:
         a.   The supervision of the design and construction of the public
works of the City;
         b.   The supervision and coordination of all construction work or
alterations carried out within the public ways of the City;
         c.   Review of all private engineering designs of developers and
utilities including subdivisions, commercial developments, planned residential
unit developments and residential construction;
         d.   Traffic engineering, design, construction and maintenance;
         e.   Review of contracts and technical specifications for all City
construction projects, including the survey and inspection of such projects for
purposes of contract compliance; and
         f.   The administration and management of all capital improvement
projects approved under the Capital Improvements Fund in the City's annual
budget, including capital improvement projects approved within any Enterprise
Fund; and
      13.   Other Duties: Such other duties as assigned.
   B.   Sexton Of Cemetery: Either the Director of Public Services, or a
Division Manager designated by the Director, shall fulfill the duties and
responsibilities and exercise the powers of the Sexton of the Cemetery,
pursuant to title 6, chapter 3 of this Code.
   C.   Enterprise Funds: Athletics, golf courses, and the water, refuse and
sewer utilities, respectively, shall be separate Enterprise Funds. The
collection, accounting and expenditure of each Enterprise Fund shall be in
accordance with existing fiscal policies of the City. Until July 1, 2014, storm
sewer and flood control shall be part of and financed by the Sewer Enterprise
Fund. Storm sewer and flood control shall be a separate Enterprise Fund
beginning July 1, 2014.
   D.   City Engineer: The position of City Engineer shall be assigned to the
Department of Public Services, under the administrative direction of the
Director. The City Engineer shall be a registered professional engineer of the
State and shall be responsible for the review and acceptance of all engineering
and architectural design and construction work required by or for the City,
except as assigned in this Code to other departments, divisions or offices of
the City; the maintenance of records of public improvements as prescribed by
State Statute; and such other duties as prescribed under the provisions of this
Code. The City Engineer shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and
consent of the City Council. The City Engineer may or may not be appointed as
the Manager of the division responsible for engineering.
(Ord. 2017-39, 8-22-2017)
2-4-15: DEPARTMENT OF MANAGEMENT SERVICES:
   A.   Functions: The Department of Management Services shall be responsible
for central support and financial services required by City operations. These
services shall include:
      1.   Personnel;
      2.   Employee benefits, health and safety programs and training and
development;
      3.   Purchasing;
      4.   Data processing;
      5.   Risk management;
      6.   Payroll;
      7.   Budget;
      8.   Cash management and investment;
      9.   Accounting;
      10.   Financial reporting;
      11.   Revenue collections and disbursements;
      12.   Inventory control;
      13.   City Recorder functions and recording all public documents of the
City, not statutorily given to the City Engineer; and
      14.   Fleet management including:
         a.   The management and coordination of all City vehicle service
centers;
         b.   The maintenance of records that would indicate the performance
and costs of all equipment assigned to fleet management;
         c.   The management and dispensing of all fuel for City use;
      15.   Maintenance of radios and dispatch equipment; and
      16.   Such other duties as assigned.
   B.   Finance Officer: The Mayor shall designate, within the Department of
Management Services, a Finance Officer who shall perform the financial duties
and responsibilities of the Finance Director/City Auditor as outlined in the
Uniform Fiscal Procedures Act 1  of the State, excepting those duties
specifically outlined for the Budget Officer. The Finance Officer shall be a
qualified person appointed and removed in accordance with the requirements of
State law and may not assume the duties of the City Treasurer.
   C.   City Treasurer: The functions of City Treasurer shall be assigned to
the department under the administrative direction of the Director of Management
Services. The City Treasurer shall be a qualified person appointed by the
Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council, and shall:
      1.   Supervise the collection of all taxes, assessments, fines,
forfeitures, service charges, intergovernmental revenue, licenses, fees and
other revenues of the city as provided for by applicable laws and ordinances;
      2.   Be responsible for the disposition of city revenues;
      3.   Provide for the investment of idle cash;
      4.   Make all disbursements of funds of the city, subject to budget
appropriations;
      5.   Keep an accurate and detailed accounting of all transactions,
receipts, disbursements and other matters within the treasurer's charge as
provided in the uniform fiscal procedures act and as the city may by ordinance
or resolution direct;
      6.   Maintain legally required balances in sinking fund accounts, and
special improvement district guarantees funds account;
      7.   Record the bond of the city recorder as required by Utah Code
Annotated section 10-3-825;
      8.   Execute all checks of the city consistent with state law;
      9.   Collect all special improvement assessments and foreclose all
delinquencies therein; and
      10.   Those other matters prescribed by state law.
   D.   Personnel: In fulfilling the personnel function, the department shall
provide for and administer the programs relating to the personnel of the city,
including employment, recruiting, examination, selection, employee evaluation,
promotion, transfer and orderly separation of personnel, classification and pay
plans, compensation, compliance with state and federal law, employee files,
administration of state mandated career service and civil service plans. It
shall administer the rules and regulations concerning the conduct, discipline,
appeals, and grievances of employees. It shall maintain complete records of all
matters pertaining to the functions of the division.
   E.   Special Duties: The director of management services shall function as
the EEO officer, ADA coordinator and purchasing agent of the city. The director
may assign any and all of these duties to appropriate staff as needed.
   F.   Ogden City Justice Court: The director of management services shall be
responsible for city administration of personnel, budget and other
administrative issues applicable to the Ogden City justice court as established
pursuant to chapter 9 of this title.
   G.   Business License Coordinator: There shall be appointed within the
department a business license coordinator who shall exercise such powers and
fulfill those duties as provided in title 5 of this code, under the
administrative direction of the director of management services.
(1979 Code § 2.06.150; amd. Ord. 93-14, 3-30-1993; Ord. 2003-67, 12-2-2003,
eff. 12-2-2003; Ord. 2005-59, 12-6-2005; Ord. 2006-30, 5-30-2006; Ord. 2008-55,
10-14-2008)
 
Notes
1 1. UCA tit. 10, ch. 6.
2-4-16: RESERVED:
(1979 Code § 2.06.160; amd. Ord. 93-14, 3-30-1993; Ord. 2000-21, 4-11-2000,
eff. 7-1-2000; Ord. 2003-32, 6-17-2003, eff. 7-1-2003; Ord. 2003-67, 12-2-2003,
eff. 12-2-2003; Ord. 2004-39, 6-15-2004, eff. 7-1-2004)
2-4-17: FIRE DEPARTMENT:
   A.   Functions: The fire department shall be responsible throughout the city
for the protection of life and property from damage or loss due to fire,
disaster or medical emergency through measures, including, but not limited to:
      1.   The development and administration of public education and fire
prevention programs;
      2.   Fire and life safety inspection of buildings and approval of
proposed building plans;
      3.   Enforcement of the fire code as adopted under title 16, chapter 2 of
this code;
      4.   Fire suppression;
      5.   Emergency medical services including first responder basic life
support, paramedic advanced life support and ambulance transport services;
      6.   Investigation of all fires and determination of cause and origin;
      7.   Hazardous materials code inspections and hazardous materials release
response; and
      8.   Such other duties as assigned.
   B.   Chief; Duties: The chief of the fire department shall be the appointing
power and have command over all officers, members and employees of the
department. It shall be the duty of the chief of the fire department, subject
to the approval of the mayor, to make and adopt such rules and regulations for
the administration and operation of the department as, in the chief's judgment,
shall be necessary for the good of the service. Within existing budgetary
limitations, the chief may appoint deputy chiefs, with the approval of the
chief administrative officer.
   C.   Fire Prevention Division: A fire prevention division is established
within the fire department under the direction of the chief, which shall
consist of such fire department personnel as may be assigned thereto by the
chief.
      1.   The function of this division shall be to assist the chief in the
administration and enforcement of the provisions of the fire code as adopted
under title 16, chapter 2 of this code.
      2.   The chief may designate a member of the fire department to exercise
the powers and perform the duties of the fire marshal. The city fire marshal
shall be the chief's duly authorized representative to administer the fire
code. The city fire marshal shall make recommendations to the city council with
regard to the adoption of ordinances to prohibit or limit the use of open
flames, open fires, and the ignition of fireworks within the city limits when
hazardous environmental conditions exist.
      3.   The chief of the fire department may designate such number of
inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary. The fire marshal and all
designated inspectors within the fire prevention division shall operate under
the management and direction of the fire chief.
(Ord. 2013-28, 6-18-2013)
2-4-18: POLICE DEPARTMENT:
   A.   Functions: The police department by and through its sworn officers
shall be responsible for preserving the public peace, preventing crime,
detecting and arresting criminal offenders, suppressing riots, protecting
persons and property, regulating and controlling vehicular and pedestrian
traffic, enforcing state laws and city ordinances, training sworn personnel,
providing and maintaining police records and performing such other duties as
assigned.
   B.   Chief; Duties: The chief of the police department shall be the
appointing power and have command over all officers, members and employees in
the department. It shall be the duty of the chief, subject to the approval of
the mayor, to make and adopt such rules and regulations for the operation and
administration of the department as, in the chief's judgment, shall be
necessary for the good of the service. Within existing budgetary limitations,
the chief may appoint deputy chiefs, with the approval of the chief
administrative officer.
   C.   Animal Services: The animal services functions of the city shall be
located within the support services division of the police department. An
employee may be designated to serve as the animal services coordinator who
shall supervise the animal services officers and other animal services staff.
(Ord. 2013-44, 10-15-2013)
CHAPTER 5
OATHS AND BONDS
SECTION:
2-5-1: Oath Of Office
2-5-2: Bonds
2-5-1: OATH OF OFFICE:
The following elected and appointed officers, before entering upon the duties
of their respective offices shall take and subscribe the constitutional oath of
office, which shall be filed with the City Recorder:
   A.   Mayor;
   B.   City Councilmembers;
   C.   Chief Administrative Officer;
   D.   City Attorney and Assistant City Attorneys;
   E.   Department directors;
   F.   City Treasurer;
   G.   City Engineer;
   H.   City Recorder;
   I.   Finance Officer;
   J.   Peace officers;
   K.   Firefighters;
   L.   Such other officers or employees designated by the Mayor by executive
order who hold positions of trust or unique responsibility.
(1979 Code § 3.40.010; Ord. 94-9, 3-8-1994)
2-5-2: BONDS:
   A.   Officers Specified: Each of the following elected and appointed
officers and employees shall execute a bond with good and sufficient sureties
in an amount to be approved by the Mayor, made payable to the City in the penal
sum thus specified, conditioned on the faithful performance of the duties of
the respective officers and employees and the payment of all money received by
such officer in accordance with the laws of the State and City ordinances:
      1.   City Councilmembers;
      2.   Mayor;
      3.   Chief Administrative Officer;
      4.   City Attorney;
      5.   Assistant City Attorneys;
      6.   Department directors;
      7.   City Recorder;
      8.   City Treasurer;
      9.   Purchasing Agent;
      10.   Business License Coordinator;
      11.   Finance Officer;
      12.   All other City officers and employees into whose hands any public
funds may come in the regular discharge of the duties of their employment;
      13.   Executive Director of the City Council.
   B.   Amounts: The amounts of the bonds for each person listed above, except
for Councilmembers, the Mayor, the City Treasurer and the Finance Officer,
shall not be less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), and may be in such
greater amount as the Mayor may require by executive order. The Mayor and City
Councilmembers shall be bonded in the amount of ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00). The bond of the Finance Officer shall be in a minimum amount of
twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) and the bond of the City Treasurer shall
not be less than that required by the State Money Management Council, as
provided in Utah Code Annotated section 10-3-821, or any successor statute. The
bonds of the Finance Officer and Treasurer may be in any greater amount as the
Mayor may establish by executive order.
   C.   Blanket Bonds: In lieu of individual bonds, the Mayor may cover all
such officers and employees, except the City Treasurer, with a blanket bond.
The blanket bond shall not be less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) and
may be in such greater amount as the Mayor may require.
   D.   File With City Recorder; Exception: All bonds given by officers or
employees of the City, except as otherwise provided by law, shall be filed with
the City Recorder, except the bond of the City Recorder, which shall be filed
with the City Treasurer.
   E.   Premium Paid By City: The premium charge by a corporate surety for any
bond required by this Chapter shall be paid by the City.
(1979 Code § 3.40.020; Ord. 94-9, 3-8-1994)
CHAPTER 6
PERSONNEL; RULES AND REGULATIONS
SECTION:
2-6-1: Procedure For Adoption
2-6-2: Classified Civil Service Established
2-6-3: Merit And Nonmerit Services
2-6-4: Sworn Public Safety And Merit Services; Appointment
2-6-5: Employment Relationships; Rights Of City
2-6-6: Equal Employment Opportunity
2-6-7: Prohibition Against Certain Discharges And Transfers
2-6-8: Volunteer Program
2-6-9: Classification And Pay Plans
2-6-10: Vehicle Allowances
2-6-11: Staffing Document Adopted
2-6-12: Employee Insurance Plans
2-6-13: Political Activity
2-6-14: Political Coercion
2-6-15: Hiring Of Relatives
2-6-16: Acts Prohibited
2-6-1: PROCEDURE FOR ADOPTION:
Personnel rules and regulations adopted by the mayor shall take effect when
signed by the mayor and a copy thereof deposited in the city recorder's office.
The city council may adopt personnel rules and regulations applicable to city
council staff.
(1979 Code § 3.44.110; amd. Ord. 94-53, 10-25-1994)
2-6-2: CLASSIFIED CIVIL SERVICE ESTABLISHED:
There shall be a classified civil service consisting of all places of
employment in or under the police and fire departments, as may be required
under state law, not including the chief of police, the fire chief, and any
assistant or deputy chiefs appointed within the respective departments.
(1979 Code § 3.44.010; amd. Ord. 94-53, 10-25-1994)
2-6-3: MERIT AND NONMERIT SERVICES:
   A.   Established: There shall be a merit service which shall consist of all
employees of the city except for members of the classified civil service and
members of the nonmerit service. The merit service shall be comprised of either
full time employees or qualified, part time employees. Members of the nonmerit
service shall include the following:
      1.   The mayor, members of the city council;
      2.   The chief administrative officer, department directors, including
the fire chief and the police chief, deputy department directors, division
managers, deputy division managers, city treasurer, city recorder, finance
officer, city engineer, court administrator, city attorney, deputy or assistant
city attorneys and prosecutors, and assistant or deputy chiefs within the
police and fire departments;
      3.   Anyone serving on the mayor's personal staff, including any
assistants, secretaries, or other support staff;
      4.   The executive director, policy analysts serving the city council
staff, or any assistants or other support staff of the city council;
      5.   Assistants or secretaries to the chief administrative officer;
      6.   Employment of a casual or seasonal nature in which the annual season
of employment does not exceed ten (10) months in any calendar year;
      7.   "Part time employees", which is defined as employees who are
regularly scheduled to work twenty (20) hours or less per week, or twenty eight
(28) hours or less per week in the case of fire protection personnel;
      8.   Introductory employees whose performance is being evaluated to
determine whether further employment in a specific position with the city is
appropriate; and
      9.   Seasonal or temporary employees who are hired as interim
replacements to temporarily supplement the workforce or to assist in the
completion of a specific project and whose employment is of limited duration.
   B.   Terms Defined: The following terms as used in this chapter, and any
classification or pay plan adopted pursuant to this chapter, shall have the
designated meanings:
   FULL TIME EMPLOYEE: Those employees who are regularly scheduled to work the
city's full time work schedule and who are not classified as qualified, part
time, part time, casual or seasonal, introductory or temporary employees.
   QUALIFIED, PART TIME EMPLOYEE: Those employees who are regularly scheduled
to work more than twenty (20) hours but less than thirty five (35) hours per
week, or more than twenty eight (28) hours but less than forty nine (49) hours
per week in the case of fire protection personnel, and who are not classified
as part time, casual or seasonal, introductory or temporary employees.
(Ord. 2012-32, 6-19-2012)
2-6-4: SWORN PUBLIC SAFETY AND MERIT SERVICES; APPOINTMENT:
Appointments to any position within the sworn public safety and the merit
service shall be based on the relative merit, fitness and ability of the
persons examined to discharge the essential duties and responsibilities of the
job classification to which they seek appointment. All applicants for
employment in the sworn public safety service shall be subject to competitive
examination. Examinations shall be held at such times and places as the
administration shall from time to time determine, and shall be for the purpose
of determining the qualifications of applicants for positions. Examinations
shall be practical and shall fairly test the fitness in every respect of the
persons examined to discharge the duties of the positions to which they seek to
be appointed.
(Ord. 2017-1, 1-24-2017)
2-6-5: EMPLOYMENT RELATIONSHIPS; RIGHTS OF CITY:
   A.   Classified Civil Service; Merit Service: The employment relationship
between the city and members of the classified civil service and the merit
service shall be without term. Members of the classified civil service and the
merit service may be demoted or discharged in accordance with rules and
regulations adopted by the mayor, or for financial necessity, management
efficiency or reductions in the levels of service being provided by the city.
   B.   Nonmerit Service: Unless otherwise provided by law or express, written
contract, the employment relationship between the city and members of the
nonmerit service shall be without term and may be terminated for any reason at
any time by either the city or the employee.
   C.   Rights Of City: Notwithstanding the above provisions, the city may:
      1.   Direct, assign, transfer, lay off or take disciplinary action in
relation to any officer or employee;
      2.   Determine appropriate staffing levels and work performance
standards; the content of the workday, including workload factors, the quality
and quantity of services to be offered to the public and the means and methods
of offering those services;
      3.   Determine whatever actions may be necessary to carry out
responsibilities in situations of bona fide emergency.
   D.   Appeals And Grievances: The mayor shall provide a formal procedure for
processing the appeals and grievances of members of the classified civil
service and the merit service in a manner consistent with the requirements of
state law.
(1979 Code § 3.44.040; amd. Ord. 94-53, 10-25-1994)
2-6-6: EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY:
It is the policy of the city to provide for equal employment opportunity by
ensuring that all personnel actions including hire, tenure or term, and
condition or privilege of employment be based on the ability to perform the
duties and responsibilities assigned to a particular position without regard to
race, creed or religion, color, handicap, sex, pregnancy, childbirth or
pregnancy related conditions, age, if the individual is forty (40) years of age
or older, national origin, ancestry or political affiliation.
(1979 Code § 3.44.050; amd. Ord. 94-53, 10-25-1994; 1999 Code)
2-6-7: PROHIBITION AGAINST CERTAIN DISCHARGES AND TRANSFERS:
No employee covered by Utah Code Annotated section 10-3-1105 shall be
discharged, suspended without pay, or involuntarily transferred to a position
with less remuneration because of such employee's politics or religious belief,
or incident to, or through changes, either in the elective officers, governing
body or heads of departments.
(1979 Code § 3.44.060; amd. Ord. 94-53, 10-25-1994; Ord. 2004-81, 12-7-2004)
2-6-8: VOLUNTEER PROGRAM:
   A.   Policies And Procedures: The city may operate a volunteer program and
establish policies and procedures for its operation and management. The city
may provide workers' compensation medical benefits as part of said program.
   B.   Terms, Appointment And Removal: Provisions regarding terms, appointment
and removal of members of the various boards, committees and commissions of the
city are provided in this code.
(1979 Code § 3.44.070; amd. Ord. 94-53, 10-25-1994)
2-6-9: CLASSIFICATION AND PAY PLANS:
   A.   General: Classification and pay plans shall be established by ordinance
of the city council and are subject to modification at any time at the
discretion of the city council.
   B.   Classification Plan: The classification plan shall provide for the
general classification of employees according to similarity of authority,
duties and responsibilities. The adopted classification plan shall also provide
general rules for the administration of the plan.
   C.   Pay Plan: The compensation of all officers and employees of the city
shall be established by the pay plan as adopted or amended in the annual
budget. Salary ranges shall be established by the pay plan for each class of
position in the classified and merit services and for nonelected members of the
nonmerit service. The mayor may propose changes to the adopted pay plan, which
changes may be approved by the city council by ordinance.
   D.   Pay Standards: The following standards shall apply to full time
employees who are members of the classified and merit services:
      1.   Minimum Rate Of Pay: The minimum rate of pay for a class shall be
paid a new employee on the employee's original appointment to a position except
when, as determined by the department director and the mayor or the mayor's
designee, there has been demonstrated an inability to recruit at the minimum
rate of pay or the new employee possesses qualifications warranting employment
at a higher rate in the pay range. The mayor, mayor's designee, or a department
director may increase an employee's pay rate within range in addition to annual
pay increases provided in this section, as necessary to retain an employee that
might otherwise leave city employment, provided the employee possesses unique
skills, qualifications or abilities that warrant retention and has demonstrated
superior work performance.
      2.   Annual Advancement: Notwithstanding subsection D3b of this section,
subject to budgetary restraints, sworn police and fire personnel shall be
advanced annually, or such other period of time as designated in the pay plan,
one step in the salary range for the class in which employed based on years of
service as long as performance standards are met.
      3.   Establishment Of Pay For Performance System:
         a.   The department of management services, through the division of
human resources, shall modify and adopt employee policies and procedures as
necessary to implement a performance appraisal system which, to the maximum
extent feasible, permits the accurate evaluation of job performance based on
fair and nondiscriminatory standards related to each position (which may
include certain citywide values).
         b.   Subject to budgetary restraints, beginning July 1, 2009, and
thereafter at the beginning of each fiscal year, annual pay increases shall be
based on performance, provided, however, that no employee shall be eligible for
an increase whose overall annual evaluation rating under the performance
appraisal system does not meet expectations.
         c.   Subject to budgetary restraints, beginning July 1, 2009, and
thereafter at the beginning of each fiscal year, salary ranges in each job
classification shall be modified, as necessary, based on benchmarking of other
Utah cities, and employees below the minimum in their range shall be advanced
to the minimum rate of pay in the modified range. Employees whose rate of pay
is above the maximum salary range for their position shall have their rate of
pay frozen until such time as the range for that position is increased based on
benchmarking. Such employees whose overall annual evaluation rating exceeds
expectations as determined by the department director are eligible for an
annual bonus based on performance.
   E.   Biweekly: All salaries, wages and benefits shall be paid biweekly.
   F.   Severance Pay:
      1.   Eligible Employees: Unless otherwise prohibited in this subsection,
the chief administrative officer, department directors, deputy department
directors, division managers, deputy and assistant city attorneys unless
principally assigned to prosecution activities, and all appointed nonmerit,
full time employees in the mayor's office and city council's office ("eligible
employees") are entitled to severance pay as provided herein, in the event
their employment with the city is involuntarily terminated.
      2.   Amount: Severance pay shall be in an amount equivalent to one
month's pay for each consecutive year of employment with the city, not to
exceed six (6) months. The monthly payment amount shall be based on the
employee's monthly salary on the date of termination. Payment is to be made in
a lump sum within thirty (30) days of the effective date of the termination.
This payment will be in addition to any other benefits to be received on
termination, as authorized under the pay plan. Notwithstanding the above, the
amount of severance pay may exceed the amount authorized herein for the chief
administrative officer, the executive director of the city council, or a
department director, if authorized under a contract of employment entered into
after December 20, 2005, if:
         a.   Such contract is in writing and on file in the city recorder's
office and was entered into prior to the date of appointment; and
         b.   Such contract was publicly disclosed to the city council as part
of the appointment approval process.
      3.   Prohibition: Severance pay shall not be paid to an otherwise
eligible employee who:
         a.   Has been terminated or requested to resign under bona fide
charges of nonfeasance, misfeasance or malfeasance in office; or
         b.   Has been terminated or requested to resign upon being convicted,
indicted, charged or is under criminal investigation concerning a public
offense involving a felony or offense of moral turpitude; or
         c.   Voluntarily resigns or terminates employment with the city under
circumstances not defined herein as an "involuntary termination"; or
         d.   Fails to sign a severance agreement approved by the city attorney
that includes at a minimum the following terms as further set forth in the
agreement: a release of all claims against the city related to such termination
and employment, a requirement that such employee provide reasonable consulting
services upon request for a time period commensurate with the duration of the
severance pay.
      4.   Rehiring Restrictions: No employee receiving severance pay may be
rehired with the city within one year of the effective date of termination,
whether as an employee, contractor, or as a principal of an independent
contractor providing employment or other professional services. "Principal"
shall include any officer, director, partner or owner holding thirty percent
(30%) or more of the entity acting as the independent contractor. This
prohibition may be waived if severance pay is repaid upon a rehire within the
period of limitation.
      5.   Definitions: The following terms as used in this section shall have
the designated meanings:
         INVOLUNTARY TERMINATION: a. Termination of employment contrary to the
will or desire of the employee;
         b.   Resignation of employment by employee upon the request or
suggestion of the mayor or other officer or body with termination authority; or
         c.   Resignation of employment upon a demotion or a reduction in pay
not generally applicable to other similar nonmerit employees.
         SEVERANCE PAY: A sum of money that an employee is eligible to receive
upon involuntary termination of employment, based on the length of employment
or, if so provided by contract or other agreement, an unfinished term of
employment. It shall not refer to salary or wages applicable during the term of
employment, compensation for unused leave authorized under the pay plan, early
retirement incentives, back wages, or other damage payments not in the form of
severance pay.
      6.   Employment Agreement With Different Severance Terms: If an
employment agreement with different severance terms was entered into prior to
December 20, 2005, then the eligible employee will be entitled to the benefit
of the more advantageous terms.
      7.   Restriction Not Intention: It is not the intention of this section
to restrict the granting of severance pay to other employees of the city, not
defined as an eligible employee herein, as part of a settlement agreement
related to either an involuntary termination or a settlement of claims related
to employment, but in no event shall severance pay under such agreement exceed
the amount that would otherwise be allowed under subsection F2 of this section,
if the employee were an eligible employee.
   G.   Total Remuneration: Any salary or salary range established for a
position or classification of employment shall represent the total remuneration
that may be paid for employment for that position or classification, but shall
not be considered as including reimbursement for official travel or other
official expenses. No employee shall receive pay from the city in addition to
the salary or salary range authorized under the pay plan as approved by the
city council for services rendered by him or her, either in the discharge of
his or her ordinary duties or of any additional duties that may be assigned or
that he or she may undertake or volunteer to perform. This section shall not be
interpreted to prevent the payment to or for the benefit of employees of funds
for retirement benefits, medical insurance or any other benefit approved by the
city council; nor shall this section be interpreted to prohibit annual bonuses
based on performance, or a temporary salary increase for an employee serving in
an acting position that has a salary range higher than that of the employee's
regular position.
(Ord. 2010-18, 6-22-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. Ord. 2014-6, 2-18-2014; Ord.
2015-50, 12-8-2015, eff. 1-16-2016)
2-6-10: VEHICLE ALLOWANCES:
   A.   Nonmerit Employees: Within existing budgetary restraints, the following
nonmerit employees may be paid vehicle allowances in the following amounts:
      1.   Department directors and the executive director of the city council,
a maximum of three hundred seventy five dollars ($375.00) net per month.
      2.   Division managers and other officers as defined under subsection 2-
6-3A of this chapter, two hundred dollars ($200.00) net per month.
      3.   Chief administrative officer, in an amount as determined by contract
but not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) net per month.
   B.   Net Amount Defined: The "net amount" for purposes of the vehicle
allowance shall mean the authorized amount after payment of the employee's
share of employment taxes (i.e., social security and Medicare).
   C.   Mileage Beyond Fifty Mile Radius: All travel within a fifty (50) mile
radius of the jurisdictional limit of the city shall be considered to be
covered by any vehicle allowance paid by the city. Only miles traveled beyond
the fifty (50) mile radius will be otherwise compensated at the rate authorized
by the internal revenue code for calculating mileage deductions for business
travel.
   D.   Exceptions; Annual Review: Except for those vehicle allowances
authorized under subsection A of this section, no other city employee shall
receive a vehicle allowance; provided however, that the mayor may continue a
vehicle allowance, in effect on June 1, 1995, to the extent that such allowance
is calculated to compensate such employee for the average miles traveled in the
employee's personal vehicle for city business. Any such vehicle allowance
allowed to continue, as provided herein, shall be reviewed on an annual basis
to determine if the allowance amount continues to fairly reflect such average
amount of miles traveled in the employee's personal vehicle for city business.
Employees not receiving vehicle allowances shall be compensated for use of
their personal vehicles for city business at the rate authorized by the
internal revenue code for calculating mileage deductions for business travel.
(1979 Code § 3.44.085; Ord. 95-34, 6-20-1995; amd. Ord. 2005-40, 6-14-2005,
eff. 7-1-2005)
2-6-11: STAFFING DOCUMENT ADOPTED:
   A.   Number Of Employees: An employment staffing document shall be adopted
as an element of the city's annual budget, or otherwise, as the city council
may require. Without the express approval of the city council, the number of
full time employees on the authorized payroll of the city shall not exceed the
total number of positions approved in the employment staffing document.
   B.   Exception: Notwithstanding the above, the mayor, or the mayor's
designee, may approve the hiring of temporary employees, under subsection 2-6-
3A9 of this chapter, within existing budgetary restraints.
(1979 Code § 3.44.090; Ord. 94-53, 10-25-1994)
2-6-12: EMPLOYEE INSURANCE PLANS:
Employees of the city may participate in a hospital, medical- surgical, or
insurance plan or plans under such contract or contracts as may be recommended
by the chief administrative officer and approved by the mayor within the
budgeted appropriations. No officer or employee shall acquire any vested rights
in any plan for such benefits. The extent of the city's contributions to the
cost of such plans shall be as prescribed in the pay plan.
(1979 Code § 3.44.100; Ord. 94-53, 10-25-1994)
2-6-13: POLITICAL ACTIVITY:
   A.   Definitions: For purposes of this section:
   CONTRIBUTION: A gift, subscription, donation, unpaid or partially unpaid
loan, advance, or deposit of money or anything of value to a candidate, a
candidate's personal campaign committee, an office holder, or a party
committee; compensation paid for personal services rendered without charge to a
candidate, the candidate's personal campaign committee, or an office holder; or
goods or services provided at less than fair market value to or for the benefit
of a candidate, the candidate's personal campaign committee, or an office
holder.
   FULL TIME ELECTIVE OFFICE: The office of United States representative or
senator, governor, attorney general, lieutenant governor, state auditor, state
treasurer, county commissioner, county attorney, county recorder, county clerk,
county sheriff, county treasurer, county auditor, county assessor, or mayor
under the optional council-mayor form of government.
   WORKING HOURS: Occurring at any time when an officer or employee is:
      A.   Acting within the course and scope of employment; or
      B.   Is scheduled for work, unless the officer or employee is off on any
type of approved leave;
"Working hours" shall not include a lunch break afforded to the officer or
employee, when taken away from the officer's or employee's place of employment.
   B.   Purpose: It is the intent of this provision to regulate certain
political activity of city officers and employees in order to promote the
efficiency and effectiveness of the city government, the avoidance of conflicts
of interest and the unreasonable disruption of city operations, the maintenance
of good working relationships, the undivided loyalty of officers and employees,
and the integrity of public service. Nothing contained in this section shall be
construed to restrict the right of an employee to hold membership in, and
support, a political party, to vote as he or she chooses, to express his or her
personal opinions on all political subjects and candidates, to make voluntary
contributions to a party or candidate, to actively participate in a political
campaign, to maintain political neutrality and to attend political meetings
after working hours.
   C.   Restricted Activities: No officer or employee of the city shall:
      1.   Engage in any political activity during working hours, or while in a
city uniform or city vehicle; or while at his or her place of employment within
the city;
      2.   Use, or allow to be used, any city equipment while engaged in any
political activity;
      3.   Directly or indirectly coerce, command, or advise another municipal
officer or employee to pay, lend, or contribute part of the officer's or
employee's salary or compensation, or anything else of value to a political
party, committee, organization, agency, or person for political purposes;
      4.   Attempt to make another officer's or employee's personnel status
dependent on the officer's or employee's support or lack of support of a
political party, affiliation, opinion, committee, organization, agency, or
person engaged in political activity.
   D.   Supervisory And Management Positions: No officer or employee who is in
a supervisory or management position shall solicit, or be in any manner
concerned in soliciting, any assessment, subscription or contribution or
political service, whether voluntary or involuntary, related to any political
purpose whatsoever, from any city officer or employee who is directly
supervised by the requesting officer or employee.
   E.   Nonelective Not To Hold Elective Office: No nonelective officer or
employee of the city shall hold full-time elective office during his or her
employment or hold other full-time appointive office during his or her
employment except as an assigned part of that employment. No nonelective
officer or employee of the city shall hold a city-elected office.
   F.   Declarations Of Candidacy For City-Elected Office: Neither the filing
of a declaration of candidacy nor a leave of absence approved under subsection
G of this section, may be used as the basis for an adverse employment action,
including discipline or termination, against the officer or employee.
   G.   Leaves Of Absence:
      1.   A nonelective officer or employee who has filed a declaration of
candidacy may be given a leave of absence, with or without pay, for the period
of time between the primary election and the general election. Such requests
for leave shall be approved or denied in accordance with the city's adopted
personnel policies and procedures. If a leave of absence is approved, the
officer or employee shall use any available vacation leave.
      2.   If a nonelective officer or employee is elected to a public office,
other than a full-time elective office or a city- elected office, the officer
or employee may be given a leave of absence, with or without pay, for the time
during which the employee receives compensation for service in the public
office. Such requests for leave shall be approved or denied in accordance with
the city's adopted personnel policies and procedures. If a leave of absence is
approved, the officer or employee shall use any available vacation leave.
   H.   Applicability Of State Or Federal Law: No provision of this section
shall be construed to permit conduct prohibited by state or federal law.
(1979 Code § 3.44.120; Ord. 94-18, 4-5-1994; amd. Ord. 94-53, 10-25-1994; Ord.
96-14, 3-19-1996; Ord. 2001-58, 9-25-2001, eff. 10-18-2001)
2-6-14: POLITICAL COERCION:
   A.   Coercing Contributions: It is unlawful for any elected official, or any
representative of an elected official, of the city to in any manner intimidate
or coerce any officer or employee of the city to make, or refrain from making,
any contribution in money or in services to any candidate for political office,
city or otherwise, or to any political party.
(1979 Code § 3.48.010; Ord. 94-55, 11-1-1994)
   B.   Deduction Of Wages: It is unlawful for any officer or employee of the
city to require or authorize the deduction from his or her wages or salary of
any sum to be turned over to any other person or organization or political
party to be used for political purposes.
(1979 Code § 3.48.020; Ord. 94-55, 11-1-1994)
   C.   Coercing Political Activity Or Inactivity: It is unlawful for any
elected official, or any representative of any elected official, of the city,
to in any manner intimidate or coerce an officer or employee of the city to
engage, or refrain from engaging in any political activity on behalf of such
official, or any other official, or on behalf of any political party.
(1979 Code § 3.48.030; Ord. 94-55, 11-1-1994)
   D.   Ordinances Prohibiting Political Activity: Enforcement of duly-adopted
ordinances or policies of the city regarding prohibitions against political
activity by officers or employees of the city shall not be unlawful under the
provisions of this section.
(1979 Code § 3.48.040; Ord. 94-55, 11-1-1994)
2-6-15: HIRING OF RELATIVES:
   A.   Definition: "Relative", for purposes of the additional prohibitions
imposed for appointment to city employment under the provisions of this
section, means a father, mother, husband, wife, son, daughter, sister, brother,
uncle, aunt, nephew, niece, first cousin, mother-in-law, father-in-law,
brother-in-law, sister-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, grandparent,
grandchildren, half-brother, or half-sister to the prospective officer or
employee. The above prohibitions shall not apply to volunteers or uncompensated
members of city boards, commissions or committees.
   B.   Prohibited: In addition to the prohibition contained in Utah Code
Annotated title 52, chapter 3, or its successor, regarding the employment of
relatives, it is unlawful, from and after the effective date hereof, for the
mayor, chief administrative officer, or a department director to knowingly
appoint any prospective officer or employee, who is a relative of the mayor or
chief administrative officer, to a position of employment within the city, or
for a department director to knowingly appoint any prospective officer or
employee who is a relative of the department director to a position of
employment within the director's department. It shall also be unlawful for the
mayor, chief administrative officer, or a department director to knowingly
appoint any prospective officer or employee to a position of employment within
the city when the officer or employee will be directly supervised by a
relative.
   C.   Disclosure In Application: The application for employment shall call
for the relationship of the applicant to any employee of the city, and it shall
be grounds for immediate discharge if such applicant wilfully withholds or
gives false information. Any officer or supervisor who knowingly violates this
section is subject to immediate termination. Persons employed by the city prior
to the effective date hereof shall be subject to the restrictions relating to
employment of relatives in effect on the date of their hire unless their
employment would have been permitted under the provisions of this chapter.
(1979 Code § 3.44.130; Ord. 94-53, 10-25-1994; amd. Ord. 94-57, 11-15-1994)
2-6-16: ACTS PROHIBITED:
   A.   False Statements: No person shall wilfully make any false statement,
certificate, mark, rating or report in regard to an employee's application,
test, certification, evaluation or appointment held or made under the personnel
system established, or in any manner commit any fraud or other act for the
purpose of preventing a proper or impartial execution of the personnel system.
   B.   Give, Pay, Accept Or Receive Advantages: No person seeking employment
or promotion shall give or pay any money or any other thing of value, or render
services to any other person for, or on account of, or in connection with his
or her test, appointment, proposed appointment, promotion, proposed promotion,
or for any other advantage in relation to a position of employment with the
city. No officer or employee of the city shall accept or receive any money or
any other thing of value for, or on account of, or in connection with any test,
appointment, proposed appointment, promotion, proposed promotion, or for any
other advantage in relation to a position of employment with the city.
(1979 Code § 3.44.140; Ord. 94-53, 10-25-1994)
CHAPTER 7
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
SECTION:
2-7-1: Purpose
2-7-2: Definitions
2-7-3: Prohibited Acts Designated
2-7-4: Gifts Prohibited; Exceptions
2-7-5: Disclosure Of Interest In Business
2-7-6: Receiving Compensation For Assistance
2-7-7: Public Contracts
2-7-8: Inducement To Violate Prohibited
2-7-9: Complaints; Filing And Investigation; Appeals
2-7-10: Transaction Or Contract Voidable
2-7-11: Penalty
2-7-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish guidelines for ethical standards of
conduct for all appointed and elected officers of the City, including all
private citizens appointed to special, regular or full-time boards, committees,
commissions, authorities or agencies of the City, by setting forth those acts
or actions that are incompatible with the best interests of the City and by
directing disclosure by such individuals of their private financial or other
interests in matters affecting the City.
(1979 Code § 3.50.010; Ord. 94-56, 11-1-1994)
2-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context,
certain words and phrases used in this Chapter are defined as follows:
APPOINTED OFFICER: Any person appointed to any statutory office or position or
any other person appointed to any position of employment with the City.
"Appointed officers" include, but are not limited to, persons serving on
special, regular or full-time committees, agencies or boards, whether or not
such persons are compensated for their services. The use of the word "officer"
in this part is not intended to make appointed persons or employees "officers"
of the City.
ASSIST: To act, or offer, or agree to act, in such a way as to help, represent,
aid, advise, furnish information to, or otherwise provide assistance to a
person or business entity, believing that such action is of help, aid, advice
or assistance to such person or business entity and with the intent to so
assist such person or business entity.
BUSINESS ENTITY: A sole proprietorship, partnership, association, joint
venture, corporation, firm, trust, foundation or other organization or entity
used in carrying on a business.
CITY-REGULATED BUSINESS ENTITY: Any business entity for which the City issues
or requires a regulatory license, pursuant to any City ordinance.
COMPENSATION: Anything of economic value, however designated, which is paid,
loaned, granted, given, donated or transferred to any person or business entity
by anyone other than the City for or in consideration of personal services,
materials, property or any other thing whatsoever.
ECONOMIC BENEFIT TANTAMOUNT TO A GIFT: A loan at an interest rate that is
substantially lower than the commercial rate then currently prevalent for
similar loans and compensation received for private services rendered at a rate
substantially exceeding the fair market value of the services.
ELECTED OFFICER: Any person elected or appointed to the office of Mayor or City
Council member.
EMPLOYEE: A person who is not an elected or appointed officer who is employed
on a full- or part-time basis by the City.
IMPROPER DISCLOSURE: Disclosure of private, confidential or protected
information to any person who does not have both the right and the need to
receive the information.
PRIVATE, CONTROLLED OR PROTECTED INFORMATION: Information classified as
private, controlled or protected under Utah Code Annotated title 63, chapter 2,
Government Records Access and Management Act or other applicable provision of
law.
SUBSTANTIAL INTEREST: The ownership, either legally or equitably, by an
individual, or the individual's spouse or minor children, of at least ten
percent (10%) of the outstanding shares of a corporation or ten percent (10%)
interest in any other business entity.
(1979 Code § 3.50.020; Ord. 94-56, 11-1-1994; amd. Ord. 97-82, 10-30-1997)
2-7-3: PROHIBITED ACTS DESIGNATED:
No appointed or elected officer or employee shall:
   A.   Improper Disclosure: Improperly disclose private, controlled or
protected information acquired by reason of the officer's official position or
in the course of official duties in order to further substantially the
officer's or employee's personal economic interest or improperly use such
information to secure special privileges or exemptions for the officer or
others.
   B.   Use Position For Privileges: Use or attempt to use the officer's
official position to further substantially the officer's or employee's personal
economic interest or secure special privileges for the officer or others.
(1979 Code § 3.50.030; Ord. 94-56, 11-1-1994; amd. Ord. 97-82, 10-30-1997)
2-7-4: GIFTS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   No appointed or elected officer or employee shall knowingly receive,
accept, take, seek or solicit, directly or indirectly, any gift or loan for
himself/herself or another of substantial value or a substantial economic
benefit tantamount to a gift that:
      1.   Would tend improperly to influence a reasonable person in the
person's position to depart from the faithful and impartial discharge of the
person's public duties; or
      2.   The person knows that a reasonable person in that position should
know under the circumstances is primarily for the purpose of rewarding the
person for official action taken.
   B.   This Section does not apply to:
      1.   An occasional nonpecuniary gift having a value of less than fifty
dollars ($50.00); or
      2.   An award publicly presented in recognition of public service; or
      3.   Any bona fide loan made in the ordinary course of business; or
      4.   Political campaign contributions actually used in political
campaign.
(1979 Code § 3.50.040; Ord. 94-56, 11-1-1994; amd. Ord. 97-82, 10-30-1997)
2-7-5: DISCLOSURE OF INTEREST IN BUSINESS:
   A.   Doing Business With City:
      1.   Required: Every appointed and elected officer or employee of the
City who is an officer, director, agent, employee of or an owner of a
substantial interest in any business entity which does or anticipates doing
business with the City, shall publicly disclose to the members of the body of
which the officer or employee is a member or by which the officer or employee
is employed immediately prior to any discussion by such body concerning matters
relating to such business entity, the nature of the officer's or employee's
interest in that business entity.
      2.   Statement Entered In Minutes: The disclosure statement shall be
entered in the minutes of the meeting.
      3.   Exception: Disclosure by an employee under this Section is satisfied
if the employee makes the disclosure in the manner required by Section
2-7-6 of this Chapter.
(1979 Code § 3.50.050; Ord. 94-56, 11-1-1994)
   B.   Business Regulated By City:
      1.   Required: Every appointed and elected officer or employee of the
City who is an officer, director, agent, employee or owner of any business or
the owner of a substantial interest in any business entity which is subject to
regulation by the City shall disclose the position held and the nature and
value of the interest upon first becoming appointed, elected or employed by the
City, and again at any time thereafter if the elected or appointed officer's or
employee's position in the business entity has changed significantly or if the
value of the interest in the entity has increased significantly since the last
disclosure.
      2.   Sworn Statement Filed With Mayor: The disclosure shall be made in a
sworn statement filed with the Mayor. The Mayor shall report the substance of
all such disclosure statements to the members of the City Council, or may
provide to the members of the City Council copies of the disclosure statement
within thirty (30) days after the statement is received by the Mayor.
      3.   Exception: This Section does not apply to instances where the value
of the interest does not exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Life
insurance policies and annuities shall not be considered in determining the
value of any such interest.
(1979 Code § 3.50.060; Ord. 94-56, 11-1-1994)
2-7-6: RECEIVING COMPENSATION FOR ASSISTANCE:
   A.   Members Of Public Body: An elected officer, or appointed officer, who
is a member of a public body, may not receive or agree to receive compensation
for assisting any person or business entity in any transaction involving the
City unless he/she files with the Mayor a sworn written statement giving the
information required by this Section and discloses the same information in open
meeting to the members of the body of which he/she is a member immediately
prior to the discussion. "Public body", as used in this Section, means any City
board, commission, committee, or other public group organized by the City to
make public policy decisions or to advise persons who make public policy
decisions.
   B.   Nonmembers Of Public Body: An appointed officer, who is not a member of
a public body, or an employee of the City, may not receive or agree to receive
compensation for assisting any person or business entity in any transaction
involving the City unless he/she:
      1.   Files with the Mayor a sworn statement giving the information
required by this Section; and
      2.   Discloses the same information to his/her immediate supervisor and
any other City officer or employee who may rely upon the officer's or
employee's representations in evaluating or approving the transaction.
   C.   Contents Of Statements And Disclosures: The statements and disclosures
required herein shall contain:
      1.   The name and address of the appointed or elected officer or employee
involved;
      2.   The name and address of the person or business entity being or to be
assisted, or in which the appointed or elected official has a substantial
business interest; and
      3.   A brief description of the transaction as to which service is
rendered or is to be rendered and of the nature of the service performed or to
be performed.
   D.   Statement Filed; Time Limitation: The statement required to be filed by
this Section shall be filed within ten (10) days before the date of any
agreement between the officer and the person or business entity being assisted
or the receipt of compensation by the officer or employee, whichever is
earlier. Notwithstanding the above, no service or transaction so contemplated
by this Section, shall be rendered or performed prior to the filing of the
disclosure statement required by this Section. The statement is public
information and shall be available for examination by the public. This Section
shall not be construed to allow actions which are otherwise prohibited by City
ordinances or State law.
(1979 Code § 3.50.070; Ord. 94-56, 11-1-1994)
2-7-7: PUBLIC CONTRACTS:
No appointed or elected officer or employee shall participate in making,
recommending, approving or preparing any contract on behalf of the City, in
which the officer or employee or any member of his/her immediate family has any
private pecuniary interest, either direct or indirect, or perform in regard to
such contract some function requiring the exercise of discretion on the part of
the officer. "Immediate family", for purposes of this Section, shall include
the spouse, children, brothers, sisters and parents of the officer or employee.
(1979 Code § 3.50.080; Ord. 94-56, 11-1-1994)
2-7-8: INDUCEMENT TO VIOLATE PROHIBITED:
No person shall induce or seek to induce any appointed or elected officer to
violate any of the provisions of this Chapter.
(1979 Code § 3.50.100; Ord. 94-56, 11-1-1994)
2-7-9: COMPLAINTS; FILING AND INVESTIGATION; APPEALS:
   A.   Filing; Report Of Findings: Complaints concerning the violation of any
provision of this Chapter by an appointed or elected officer shall be filed
with the Mayor, and shall be investigated by appropriate City personnel or
private citizens, as determined by the Mayor. The appointed or elected officer
shall be given the opportunity to be heard and respond to the complaint. A
written report of the findings, together with the recommendations of the
investigating personnel or citizens, shall be filed with the office of the
Mayor. The Mayor, unless otherwise required by law, upon finding that the
officer has violated this Chapter, may dismiss, suspend or take such other
action as may be appropriate in the circumstances with respect to such officer.
   B.   Appeal: Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, an
appointed officer under the Merit or Civil Service System, who is found to have
violated any of the provisions of this Chapter, may appeal such determination
in accordance with the grievance procedures of such system.
   C.   Violation By Mayor: Complaints alleging violations of this Chapter by
the Mayor shall be filed with and investigated by the City Council.
(1979 Code § 3.50.110; Ord. 94-56, 11-1-1994)
2-7-10: TRANSACTION OR CONTRACT VOIDABLE:
Any contract or transaction which was the subject of governmental action by the
City in which there is an interest prohibited by this Chapter or which involved
the violation of a provision of this Chapter, shall be voidable, at the option
of the City.
(1979 Code § 3.50.120; Ord. 94-56, 11-1-1994)
2-7-11: PENALTY:
Any person who knowingly and intentionally violates the provisions of this
Chapter may be subject to the criminal penalties provided under State law. A
violation of any provision of this Chapter, which is prosecuted by the City or
which is not a criminal violation under Utah Code Annotated section 10-3-1310,
is a Class B misdemeanor, punishable as set forth in Title 1, Chapter 4 of this
Code. Any officer or employee who knowingly and intentionally violates this
Chapter may be dismissed from employment or removed from office, as provided by
law.
(1979 Code § 3.50.130; Ord. 94-56, 11-1-1994; amd. 1999 Code)
CHAPTER 8
VETO AUTHORITY OF MAYOR
SECTION:
2-8-1: Definitions
2-8-2: Ordinance Adoption; Powers Of The Mayor
2-8-3: Duty Of City Recorder
2-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this Section, the following terms or phrases shall have the
meanings indicated:
AGENDA PREPARATION DAY: The Tuesday immediately prior to the Tuesday on which a
regular City Council meeting is scheduled to be held.
DELIVERY OR DELIVER: Personal delivery to the stated individual or:
   A.   For purposes of the Mayor, delivery to the administrative assistant of
the Mayor in the office of the Mayor during regular business hours;
   B.   For purposes of the City Recorder, delivery to a deputy of the City
Recorder during regular business hours;
   C.   For purposes of the City Council, personal delivery to the Chair of the
City Council or the Executive Director of the City Council, or delivery to the
executive assistant of the City Council during regular business hours.
NEXT MEETING: The next regularly schedule meeting of the City Council occurring
after the first agenda preparation day at which the disapproved ordinance was
available for City Council reconsideration.
PRESENTED TO THE MAYOR: Delivery by the City Recorder of the ordinance signed
by the Chair of the City Council, to the office of the Mayor.
RECONSIDERATION OR RECONSIDER THE ORDINANCE: To vote on a motion to approve an
ordinance previously vetoed, by the Mayor. It shall not refer to
"reconsideration" or "a motion for reconsideration" as provided under the rules
and procedures of the City Council.
RETURN OR RETURNED: A. If approved, delivery of the approved ordinance or tax
levy to the City Recorder.
   B.   If disapproved, delivery of the disapproved ordinance or tax levy and
the statement of the Mayor's objection to the City Recorder.
(Ord. 2000-14, 3-7-2000)
2-8-2: ORDINANCE ADOPTION; POWERS OF THE MAYOR:
Every ordinance or tax levy passed by the City Council shall be presented to
the Mayor for the Mayor's approval or disapproval. If the Mayor approves the
ordinance or tax levy, the Mayor shall sign it and it shall be recorded and
thereafter shall be in force. If the ordinance is an appropriation ordinance,
the Mayor may approve or disapprove all or any part of the appropriation. If
the Mayor disapproves an ordinance, tax levy, or appropriation, the Mayor shall
return it with a statement of the Mayor's objection, to the City Council within
fifteen (15) days and the City Council shall, at its next meeting, reconsider
the ordinance, tax levy or appropriation item. If after reconsideration it
again passes by a vote of at least two-thirds (2/3) of all City Council
members, it shall be recorded and thereafter be in force. If any ordinance, tax
levy or appropriation item is not returned within fifteen (15) days after
presentation to the Mayor, it shall be recorded and thereafter shall be in
force.
(Ord. 2000-14, 3-7-2000)
2-8-3: DUTY OF CITY RECORDER:
Upon receipt of an ordinance disapproved by the Mayor, the City Recorder shall
immediately deliver a copy of the disapproved ordinance or tax levy and the
statement of the Mayor's objection to the City Council.
(Ord. 2000-14, 3-7-2000)
CHAPTER 9
OGDEN CITY JUSTICE COURT 1
SECTION:
2-9-1: Establishment Of Justice Court
2-9-2: Judgeships
2-9-3: Jurisdiction And Authority
 
Notes
1 1. Prior ordinance history: Ord. 2005-59, 12-6-2005.
2-9-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF JUSTICE COURT:
There is hereby established within the government of Ogden City a class I
municipal court, which shall be known as the "Ogden City justice court".
Judicial operations within such court are intended to commence on July 1, 2006.
(Ord. 2006-30, 5-30-2006)
2-9-2: JUDGESHIPS:
   A.   There is hereby created within the Ogden City justice court up to two
(2) offices of municipal justice court judges.
   B.   A judge of the justice court shall be appointed by the mayor and shall
be confirmed by the city council in accordance with section 78-5-134 Utah Code
Annotated, or its successor provision. The term of office of a judge of the
justice court shall be four (4) years, as provided by section 78-5-132 Utah
Code Annotated, or its successor provision.
   C.   A judge of the Ogden City justice court shall, in addition to meeting
all the qualifications as set forth in section 78-5-137 Utah Code Annotated, or
its successor provision, be a member in good standing of the Utah State Bar
Association at the time of appointment and at all times while serving said
office.
   D.   The compensation of a judge of the justice court shall be in accordance
with the pay plan of the city; however, a judge shall not receive a salary
greater than eighty five percent (85%) of the salary of a district court judge,
or such other percentage or limitation as prescribed by section 78-5-128 Utah
Code Annotated, or its successor provision.
(Ord. 2006-30, 5-30-2006)
2-9-3: JURISDICTION AND AUTHORITY:
The Ogden City justice court shall have jurisdiction over all matters as
provided by law and state statute, including, but not limited to, jurisdiction
and authority provided under Utah Code Annotated sections 78-5-104, 78-5-105,
and 78-5-106, or their successor provisions. In accordance with said
jurisdiction, the justice court may hear civil violations of this code,
including, but not limited to, those civil violations which have been
designated as civil penalties unless city ordinances provide for a different
procedure for handling such violations. Civil penalty matters shall be managed
in accordance with simplified rules of procedures and evidence applicable to
small claims courts.
(Ord. 2006-30, 5-30-2006)
CHAPTER 10
INTERIM APPOINTMENTS AND ACTING DESIGNATIONS
SECTION:
2-10-1: Definitions
2-10-2: Interim Appointments; Duration
2-10-3: Acting Positions
2-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms, as used in this chapter, shall have the designated
meanings:
ACTING DESIGNATION: The temporary delegation by an appointed officer of that
officer's duties and powers during a period of absence to either a subordinate
or another officer or employee of the city.
APPOINTED OFFICER: Chief administrative officer, department directors, division
managers, city attorney, city recorder, city treasurer, city engineer, building
official, or any other officer of the city having certain powers and duties
prescribed under the provisions of this code or the provisions of state law.
INTERIM APPOINTMENT: A mayoral appointment of an existing city officer or
employee to temporarily fill a vacancy in office, requiring advice and consent
of the city council, pending the completion of the selection and appointment
process as required under state law. An interim appointment does not include an
acting designation.
(Ord. 2005-74, 12-20-2005)
2-10-2: INTERIM APPOINTMENTS; DURATION:
In the event of vacancy in any position within the city requiring the advice
and consent of the city council, the mayor may appoint a qualified and existing
officer or employee of the city to fill such vacant position on an interim
basis pending completion of the selection and appointment process. No interim
appointment, or combination of interim appointments for the same position
during the same period of time, may extend beyond three (3) months; provided
that an interim appointment may be extended an additional three (3) months with
the consent of the city council.
(Ord. 2005-74, 12-20-2005)
2-10-3: ACTING POSITIONS:
An appointed officer may designate another officer or employee of the city to
exercise that officer's powers and duties during a temporary absence not
amounting to a vacancy in office. During the period of time when such acting
designation is in effect, the officer or employee so designated may exercise
all of the powers and authority of the designating officer.
(Ord. 2005-74, 12-20-2005)
CHAPTER 11
EMPLOYEE COST SAVINGS PROGRAM
SECTION:
2-11-1: Employee Cost Savings Program Established
2-11-2: Employee Eligibility
2-11-3: Suggestion Eligibility
2-11-4: Employee Cost Savings Program Review Committee
2-11-5: Amount And Payment Of Award
2-11-6: Reconsideration
2-11-7: Report
2-11-1: EMPLOYEE COST SAVINGS PROGRAM ESTABLISHED:
Ogden City shall develop an employee cost savings program, the purpose of which
is to provide a cash incentive for city employees to submit suggestions for
improved government services, cost reductions through increased efficiencies,
or other savings in the operation of the city. The mayor shall adopt rules
necessary for the administration of this program.
(Ord. 2009-26, 3-3-2009)
2-11-2: EMPLOYEE ELIGIBILITY:
Any full time or part time employee, or a team of eligible employees, may
participate in the program. Elected officials, the chief administrative
officer, the executive director of the city council, and department directors,
are not eligible for an award under this program. Employees are ineligible to
receive monetary awards for suggestions that fall within the employee's normal
job duties, responsibilities, and assigned tasks.
(Ord. 2009-26, 3-3-2009)
2-11-3: SUGGESTION ELIGIBILITY:
A suggestion must result in realized cost savings or net revenue to the city to
be eligible for a cash award. The mayor shall establish further guidelines for
establishing eligibility and making cash awards.
(Ord. 2009-26, 3-3-2009)
2-11-4: EMPLOYEE COST SAVINGS PROGRAM REVIEW COMMITTEE:
An employee cost savings program review committee shall be established, the
members of which are to be appointed by the chief administrative officer, and
shall, at a minimum, include the following individuals: the management services
director, or his or her designee, who shall serve as chair; the comptroller, or
his or her designee; and the department director, or his or her designee, of
the department through which the proposed suggestion is most likely to be
implemented. The city attorney, or his or her designee, shall attend meetings
and provide counsel to the review committee. The review committee shall: a)
determine the eligibility of a suggestion; b) determine whether a suggestion
should be recommended to the administration for implementation; c) verify the
cost savings or net revenue to the city of any suggestion chosen for
implementation; and d) determine the amount of the cash award to the suggester.
Decisions of the review committee are discretionary. All suggestions approved
for implementation become the property of Ogden City.
(Ord. 2009-26, 3-3-2009)
2-11-5: AMOUNT AND PAYMENT OF AWARD:
The maximum dollar award shall be twenty percent (20%) of the first year
realized cost savings or net revenue and ten percent (10%) of the second year
realized cost savings or net revenue. Where a cash award is applicable, such
award shall be made after the suggestion has been successfully implemented and
savings realized or revenue gained. Suggestions that do not result in realized
cost savings or net revenue within two (2) years from the time the suggestion
becomes fully operational, and suggestions that are not implemented within two
(2) years of being recommended by the review committee for implementation, are
not eligible for a cash award. Award funds shall be drawn from the existing
appropriation of the department benefiting from the employee's suggestion. If
the suggestion reduces costs from a nondepartmental fund, an award may be paid
from the benefiting fund or account. Net cost savings or net revenue not paid
to the suggester pursuant to this section shall be allocated to a designated
account as authorized by the city council that can be used to help fund future
employee salary increases through the city's pay for performance program. An
award under this program does not change the base pay of the suggester, and
shall not be prohibited by other ordinances. The suggester must be employed by
Ogden City at the time of payment of the award to be eligible to receive the
award.
(Ord. 2010-14, 4-27-2010)
2-11-6: RECONSIDERATION:
A suggester may request that the chief administrative officer reconsider a
decision of the review committee. The decision of the chief administrative
officer is a management prerogative and is final. The use or nonuse of employee
suggestions by the city shall not be the basis of further claims of any kind by
the suggester or the suggester's heirs or assigns.
(Ord. 2009-26, 3-3-2009)
2-11-7: REPORT:
On or before November 1 of each year, the management services director shall
prepare and file a report with the city council. The report shall include the
number, types and sources of suggestions; cost savings and improvements
realized; number and amount of awards; and may include recommendations for
adjustments or revisions to the program.
(Ord. 2009-26, 3-3-2009)
TITLE 3
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, COMMITTEES AND AGENCIES
CHAPTER 1
INDEX OF BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, COMMITTEES AND AGENCIES
SECTION:
3-1-1: Boards, Commissions, Committees And Agencies
3-1-1: BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, COMMITTEES AND AGENCIES:
The City has created the following permanent boards, commissions, councils,
agencies and foundations:
   Airport Advisory Committee 1
   Board of Building and Fire Code Appeals
   Board of Zoning Adjustment
   Christmas Village Committee
   Community and Economic Development Citizens Advisory Committee
   Competitive Sports Board
   Crossroads of the West Historic District Advisory Committee
   Golden Hours Advisory Committee
   Housing Authority
   Landmarks Commission 2
   Marshall N. White Center Advisory Committee
   Multicultural Advisory Committee
   Ogden City Arts Advisory Committee
   Ogden Diversity Commission
   Ogden Natural Resources and Sustainability Stewardship Committee
   Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee
   Planning Commission
   Public Safety Employee Appeal Board
   Records Committee 1
   Records Review Board 2
   Redevelopment Agency
   Special Events Advisory Committee
   Trails Network Committee
   Urban Forestry Advisory Committee
   Willard L. and Ruth P. Eccles Horticultural Education Visitors Center
Advisory Committee
(1979 Code § 2.10.010; amd. Ord. 93-40, 10-12-1993; Ord. 93-67, 12-21-1993;
1999 Code; Ord. 2000-18, 4-11-2000; Ord. 2000-19, 4-11-2000; Ord. 2000-20, 4-
11-2000; Ord. 2001-12, 2-20-2001; Ord. 2002-31, 5-7-2002; Ord. 2002-36, 5-28-
2002; Ord. 2004-11, 2-17-2004; Ord. 2004-76, 11-2-2004; Ord. 2005-23, 4-26-
2005; Ord. 2007-55, 7-17-2007; per correspondence dated 9-23-2008; Ord. 2010-
10, 3-16-2010; per correspondence dated 8-15-2011; Ord. 2015-41, 9-1-2015; Ord.
2016-33, 6-14-2016; Ord. 2016-50, 9-13-2016; Ord. 2017-1, 1-24-2017; Ord. 2018-
35, 11-20-2018)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 8 of this Code.
2 2. See title 17 of this Code.
1 1. See section
  4-5-16 of this Code.
2 2. See section
  4-5-24 of this Code.
CHAPTER 2
GENERAL RULES
SECTION:
3-2-1: Regulations And Requirements
3-2-2: Legislative Committees
3-2-3: Executive Committees
3-2-4: Ad Hoc Committees
3-2-1: REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
Unless otherwise provided by law or these ordinances, the following rules shall
apply to all city boards, commissions and committees, all of which are
hereinafter referred to as a "board".
   A.   Established By Ordinance: City boards shall be established by
ordinance, which ordinance shall identify the purpose of the board and its
membership, terms, and powers and duties.
   B.   Authority: Each board shall be an advisory board only.
   C.   Appointment:
      1.   By Mayor: Board members shall be appointed by the mayor, with the
advice and consent of the city council.
      2.   Ex Officio Members: At the request of the city council, the mayor
may appoint up to two (2) members of the city council to serve as ex officio,
nonvoting members of any advisory board of the city, who will act as liaison
from the city council to the board. The term shall be for two (2) years or
until the end of the council member's current city council term, whichever is
less. The appointment shall be in addition to the number of members outlined in
the ordinance establishing such advisory board.
      3.   Records Maintained: A record of all appointments, including the name
of the appointee, the board, committee, panel or body to which the appointment
pertains and the term for which the appointment is made, shall be maintained by
the city recorder and made available for public inspection.
   D.   Terms:
      1.   Staggered: The terms of board members shall be staggered and board
members may be appointed to a term less than the designated term when necessary
to provide for staggered terms.
      2.   Expiration; Vacancies: Board members whose term has expired may
serve until a successor is appointed. Vacancies occurring other than by
expiration of term shall be filled by appointment of the mayor, with the advice
and consent of the city council, for the unexpired term.
   E.   Compensation; Reimbursement For Expenses: Board members shall receive
no compensation for their services, but may be reimbursed for reasonable
expenses incurred in the performance of their duties.
   F.   Chair And Vice Chair; Terms: Each board shall elect a chair and a vice
chair. Each person so elected shall serve for a term of one year.
   G.   Meetings:
      1.   Meetings of each board may be called by:
         a.   The chair;
         b.   The vice chair, if the chair is incapacitated, or otherwise
cannot act;
         c.   A majority of the members of the board; or
         d.   The mayor.
      2.   Meetings of the boards shall be conducted in accordance with the
Utah open and public meetings law, Utah Code Annotated title 52, chapter 4, as
amended.
      3.   Any board which holds regular meetings that are scheduled in advance
over the course of a year shall give public notice at least once each year of
its annual meeting schedule in accordance with the Utah open and public
meetings law, Utah Code Annotated title 52, chapter 4, as amended.
   H.   Minutes And Electronic Recording: Notwithstanding any rules of
procedure adopted by a board or other provisions of these ordinances, in
accordance with the Utah open and public meetings law, the following shall be
the policy and procedure for the taking and approval of minutes for all boards:
      1.   Written minutes shall be taken for all public meetings of any board.
The minutes shall be electronically recorded and taken down by the recorder or
secretary during the course of the meeting.
      2.   Within fifteen (15) calendar days from the end of the meeting, the
recorder or secretary shall prepare proposed written minutes for the meeting
and give a copy of the proposed minutes to each board member for his or her
review and comments.
      3.   Once the proposed minutes have been given to the board members, the
recorder or secretary shall immediately make available to the public the
proposed written minutes, which shall be clearly identified as "awaiting formal
approval" or "unapproved" or with some other appropriate notice that the
proposed minutes are subject to change until formally approved and they shall
become a public document available to any member of the public who requests to
read or copy the proposed minutes.
      4.   The board shall consider the proposed minutes for approval at the
first meeting of the board that immediately follows the recorder or secretary
giving the proposed minutes to the board members. The board members shall
either approve the proposed written minutes as presented; or vote to correct
and amend the proposed written minutes and then approve the corrected and
amended written minutes at that meeting.
      5.   If the board fails to consider the proposed minutes within ninety
(90) calendar days of distribution to the board, or does not take any action to
approve the proposed minutes at the first public meeting held by the board
immediately following the board's receipt of the proposed minutes from the
recorder or secretary, the proposed minutes shall be deemed to have been
approved by the board and will stand as proposed.
      6.   Once the proposed minutes have either been approved by the board, or
have been deemed to have been approved by the inaction of the board, they shall
become the official record of the proceedings of the board and shall be signed
by the recorder or secretary. Official written minutes, and the recording,
shall be kept, according to the retention schedule, by the office of the
recorder or secretary taking the minutes and made available for public
inspection as appropriate under Utah law. Copies of written minutes shall be
filed with the city recorder.
   I.   Rules Of Conduct: Each board may adopt reasonable rules by which it
conducts its business, which rules shall be consistent with ordinance and law.
   J.   Municipal Officers' And Employees' Ethics Act: Board members shall be
subject to the municipal officers' and employees' ethics act, Utah Code
Annotated section 10-3-1301 et seq., as amended.
   K.   Removal From Office: Board members may be removed from office at any
time by the mayor, without cause.
   L.   Quorum: Unless otherwise provided by rule of a board, "quorum" means a
simple majority of the appointed members of a board.
(Ord. 2010-33, 10-12-2010)
3-2-2: LEGISLATIVE COMMITTEES:
   A.   Establishment: The city council may establish, by resolution, citizen
committees in order to assist the city council in legislative functions, such
as policy development or legislative investigations. Such committees shall not
perform or involve any administrative functions pertaining to the city and
shall act only in an advisory capacity to the city council.
   B.   Purpose, Membership And Terms: The resolution establishing such
legislative committee shall be filed with the city recorder and shall identify
the purpose of the committee, its membership, terms of members or the committee
as a whole, and its powers and duties. Appointments to such legislative
committees shall be made by the city council and a record of all appointments,
including the name of the appointee, the committee to which the appointment
pertains and the term for which the appointment is made, shall be maintained by
the city recorder and made available for public inspection. Unless otherwise
provided, members of such committees may be removed by the city council at any
time, without cause.
   C.   Subject To State Laws: Legislative committees and its members shall be
subject to the Utah open and public meetings law and the municipal officers'
and employees' ethics act. The taking and approval of minutes shall follow the
policy and procedure set forth in subsection 3-2-1H of this chapter.
(Ord. 2010-33, 10-12-2010)
3-2-3: EXECUTIVE COMMITTEES:
   A.   Establishment: The mayor may establish, by executive order, citizen
committees in order to assist the mayor or administration in its executive
functions. Such committees shall not have the authority to make administrative
decisions and shall act only in an advisory capacity.
   B.   Purpose, Membership And Terms: The executive order establishing such
executive committee shall be filed with the city recorder and shall identify
the purpose of the committee, its membership, terms of members or the committee
as a whole, and its powers and duties. Appointments to such executive
committees shall be made by the mayor and a record of all appointments,
including the name of the appointee, the committee to which the appointment
pertains and the term for which the appointment is made, shall be maintained by
the city recorder and made available for public inspection. Unless otherwise
provided, members of such committees may be removed by the mayor at any time,
without cause.
   C.   Subject To State Laws: Executive committees and its members shall be
subject to the Utah open and public meetings law and the municipal officers'
and employees' ethics act. The taking and approval of minutes shall follow the
policy and procedure set forth in subsection 3-2-1H of this chapter.
(Ord. 2010-33, 10-12-2010)
3-2-4: AD HOC COMMITTEES:
   A.   Establishment: The city council and the mayor may agree by joint
resolution to establish ad hoc committees to study and recommend policy on a
particular issue, which committees may be staffed by members of the city
administration and council staff. Such joint resolution shall identify the
purpose of the committee, its membership and its powers and duties, and shall
be filed with the city recorder. Appointment shall be by the mayor, with the
advice and consent of the city council, if the actual members are not appointed
as part of the joint resolution. The resolution shall specify a date by which
the committee is expected to complete its duties and shall specify the staff
support to be provided to the committee.
   B.   Subject To State Laws: Ad hoc committees and its members shall be
subject to the Utah open and public meetings law and the municipal officers'
and employees' ethics act. The taking and approval of minutes shall follow the
policy and procedure set forth in subsection 3-2-1H of this chapter.
(Ord. 2010-33, 10-12-2010)
CHAPTER 3
PLANNING COMMISSION
SECTION:
3-3-1: Established; Appointment
3-3-2: Terms, Compensation And Vacancies
3-3-3: Meetings
3-3-4: Powers And Duties
3-3-5: Staff Assistance
3-3-6: Dedication Of Gifts
3-3-7: Conflicts Of Interest; Ethics
3-3-8: Removal From Office
3-3-1: ESTABLISHED; APPOINTMENT:
There is hereby established the Ogden City planning commission which shall
consist of nine (9) members, appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent
of the city council. Members of the commission shall all be residents of the
city.
(1979 Code § 2.56.010; amd. Ord. 93-51, 10-12-1993)
3-3-2: TERMS, COMPENSATION AND VACANCIES:
   A.   For any term commencing prior to July 1, 2002, terms of office shall be
six (6) years or until their successor is appointed. Of the members appointed
for a term commencing in 2002, three (3) members shall be appointed for a term
of five (5) years or until their successor is appointed. Thereafter, terms of
office shall be four (4) years or until their successor is appointed. No more
than three (3) members' terms of office shall expire in any given year, with
each term expiring on July 1 of the last year of the term.
(1979 Code § 2.56.020)
   B.   The city council may, by resolution, fix per diem compensation for the
members of the planning commission based on meetings actually attended. Members
of the planning commission may also be reimbursed for reasonable expenses
incurred while acting in their official capacity.
(1979 Code § 2.56.100)
   C.   Any vacancy occurring during the term of any member of the planning
commission by reason of death, resignation, removal or disqualification shall
be promptly filled by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city
council, for the unexpired portion of the term.
(1979 Code § 2.56.030) (Ord. 93-51, 10-12-1993; amd. Ord. 2001-18, 3-6-2001;
Ord. 2019-33, 7-16-2019)
3-3-3: MEETINGS:
   A.   Designated; Minutes: The planning commission shall meet on a regular
basis, as designated by the commission in its rules. All meetings of the
commission shall be in accordance with the Utah open and public meetings law of
the state. The commission shall keep written minutes of its meetings, copies of
which shall be filed with the city recorder.
   B.   Location: All meetings and public hearings of the planning commission
shall be held in a public place designated by the commission and shall be of
sufficient size to ensure public access to the operations of the commission.
(1979 Code § 2.56.070; Ord. 93-51, 10-12-1993)
3-3-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   General: The planning commission shall have such powers and duties of a
planning commission as is or may be prescribed by the general law of the state
and as provided in the ordinances of the city.
(1979 Code § 2.56.090; Ord. 93-51, 10-12-1993)
   B.   Chair And Vice Chair: The commission shall annually elect a chair and
vice chair. The officers shall serve for one year terms or until their
successors are elected.
(1979 Code § 2.56.050; Ord. 93-51, 10-12-1993; amd. 1999 Code)
   C.   Adopt Rules Of Procedure: The planning commission shall adopt rules and
regulations, not inconsistent with state law or city ordinance, for conducting
its business and may amend such rules from time to time. Such rules may include
policies and procedures for the conduct of its meetings, the processing of
applications, the handling of conflicts of interest and any other purposes
considered necessary for the functioning of the commission.
(1979 Code § 2.56.060; Ord. 93-51, 10-12-1993; amd. 1999 Code)
   D.   Cooperation With Other Local Planning Commissions: The planning
commission, in the exercise of its powers and the discharge of its duties,
shall seek to cooperate with other governmental entities and their planning
commissions and shall seek to develop compatible plans for the future
development of the city.
(1979 Code § 2.56.110; Ord. 93-51, 10-12-1993)
3-3-5: STAFF ASSISTANCE:
The city council and the mayor shall provide necessary funding and appropriate
staff for the operations of the planning commission.
(1979 Code § 2.56.080; Ord. 93-51, 10-12-1993)
3-3-6: DEDICATION OF GIFTS:
The city may accept gifts for the promotion of the purposes and work of the
planning commission, and when such gifts are received for such purpose they
shall be devoted exclusively to the purpose specified by the donor. Donated
funds shall be accounted for and expended in accordance with the budgeting and
financial laws, rules and regulations of the city through its director of
management services.
(1979 Code § 2.56.120; Ord. 93-51, 10-12-1993; amd. 1999 Code)
3-3-7: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST; ETHICS:
Members of the planning commission shall be subject to the municipal officers'
and employees' ethics act, Utah Code Annotated section 10-3-1301 et seq., as
amended, or any successor provision, and all applicable ordinances of the city
regarding conflicts of interest or ethics. A violation of such provisions shall
be grounds for removal from office.
(1979 Code § 2.56.130; Ord. 93-51, 10-12-1993)
3-3-8: REMOVAL FROM OFFICE:
The mayor may remove any member of the planning commission for cause, after
public hearing upon written charges, if a public hearing is requested.
(1979 Code § 2.56.040; Ord. 93-51, 10-12-1993)
CHAPTER 4
BOARD OF ZONING ADJUSTMENT
SECTION:
3-4-1: Established; Appointment
3-4-2: Terms, Compensation And Vacancies
3-4-3: Organization And Meetings
3-4-4: Powers And Duties
3-4-5: Conflicts Of Interest; Ethics
3-4-6: Removal From Office
3-4-1: ESTABLISHED; APPOINTMENT:
There is hereby established a board of adjustment as required under State law,
which shall be known as the Ogden City Board of Zoning Adjustment. The Board
shall consist of five (5) members appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and
consent of the City Council. The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City
Council, may appoint no more than two (2) alternate members to the Board.
Alternate members may serve only in the absence of members of the Board due to
illness, interest in a case before the Board or any other cause.
(1979 Code § 2.48.010; amd. Ord. 93-49, 10-12-1993; Ord. 94-1, 1-4-1994; 1999
Code)
3-4-2: TERMS, COMPENSATION AND VACANCIES:
   A.   The terms of the members of the Board shall be five (5) years; provided
however, that appointments shall be made in such a manner that the term of one
member expires each year.
(1979 Code § 2.48.020; Ord. 93-49, 10-12-1993)
   B.   The City Council may, by resolution, fix per diem compensation for the
members of the Board of Zoning Adjustment based on necessary and reasonable
expenses and on meetings actually attended.
(1979 Code § 2.48.070; Ord. 93-49, 10-12-1993)
   C.   Vacancies shall be filled by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of
the City Council, for the unexpired term of the member whose term becomes
vacant.
(1979 Code § 2.48.030; Ord. 93-49, 10-12-1993)
3-4-3: ORGANIZATION AND MEETINGS:
   A.   Organization; Rules; Conduct Of Meetings: The Board of Zoning
Adjustment shall organize and elect a chair and adopt rules, not inconsistent
with State law or City ordinance, for conducting its business. The Board of
Zoning Adjustment shall meet at the call of the chair and at any other times
that the Board of Zoning Adjustment determines in accordance with its rules.
The chair or, in the absence of the chair, the acting chair, may administer
oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
   B.   Compliance With Open And Public Meetings Law: All meetings of the Board
of Zoning Adjustment shall comply with the requirements of Utah Code Annotated
title 52, chapter 4, Open and Public Meetings law.
   C.   Minutes; Records: The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings,
showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to
vote, indicating that fact; and keep records of its examinations and other
official actions. The records of the Board of Zoning of Adjustment are public
records and shall be maintained in the Department of Community Development. A
copy of the minutes of the meetings of the Board shall be filed in the City
Recorder's office.
(1979 Code § 2.48.050; Ord. 93-49, 10-12-1993; amd. 1999 Code)
3-4-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Board of Zoning Adjustment shall have such powers as are granted to a board
of adjustment under State law and such other powers as are granted in the
zoning ordinances by the City Council.
(1979 Code § 2.48.060; Ord. 93-49, 10-12-1993)
3-4-5: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST; ETHICS:
Members of the Board of Zoning Adjustment shall be subject to the Municipal
Officers' and Employees' Ethics Act, Utah Code Annotated section 10-3-1301 et
seq., as amended, or any successor provision, and all applicable ordinances of
the City regarding conflicts of interest or ethics. A violation of such
provisions shall be grounds for removal from office.
(1979 Code § 2.48.080; Ord. 93-49, 10-12-1993)
3-4-6: REMOVAL FROM OFFICE:
The Mayor may remove any member of the Board of Zoning Adjustment for cause if
written charges are filed against the member with the Mayor and the Mayor shall
provide the member with a public hearing if requested.
(1979 Code § 2.48.040; Ord. 93-49, 10-12-1993)
CHAPTER 5
BOARD OF BUILDING AND FIRE CODE APPEALS
SECTION:
3-5-1: Established
3-5-2: Organization
3-5-3: Meetings; Rules Of Procedure
3-5-4: Powers And Duties
3-5-5: Conflicts Of Interest; Ethics
3-5-1: ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a board of appeals to be known as the board of
building and fire code appeals, hereinafter referred to as the "board".
(Ord. 2008-17, 5-20-2008)
3-5-2: ORGANIZATION:
   A.   Membership; Appointment: The board shall consist of five (5) members
who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to
building construction and who are not employees of the city. Members of the
board shall be appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city
council, and shall serve without compensation. The inspection services manager
and the fire marshal shall be ex officio members but shall have no vote on any
matter before the board. The mayor may appoint, with the advice and consent of
the city council, no more than two (2) alternate members of such board; and in
the event that any regular member be temporarily unable to act owing to
absence, illness, interest in a case before the board, or any cause, the
regular member's place may be taken during such temporary disability by an
alternate member.
   B.   Terms; Removal: Terms for members of the board shall be five (5) years
or until their respective successors are appointed. Vacancies shall be filled
for the unexpired term of any member whose office becomes vacant. Members of
the board may be removed by the mayor for cause.
   C.   Chair And Vice Chair: The board shall annually elect a chair and vice
chair. The officers shall serve for one year terms and until their successors
are elected.
(Ord. 2008-17, 5-20-2008)
3-5-3: MEETINGS; RULES OF PROCEDURE:
   A.   Meetings: Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chair
as needed to hear appeals and at any other times that the board determines in
accordance with its rules. All meetings shall comply with the Utah open and
public meetings law. The board shall keep minutes of its meetings, copies of
which shall be delivered to the city recorder and filed as part of the official
records of the city.
   B.   Adoption Of Rules: The board shall adopt reasonable rules of procedure,
not inconsistent with law or these ordinances, for the conduct of its hearings
and other business, and shall provide in its rules and procedures for a method
of calling special meetings. The board shall render all decisions, orders and
findings in writing which shall be filed with the inspection services manager
and a copy mailed to the appellant or other parties in interest and the same
shall be maintained by the inspection services manager in a form freely
accessible to the public.
   C.   Voting: The concurring vote of a majority of a quorum of the board
shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement or determination of any
administrative official, or to decide in favor of an appellant or party in
interest on any matter upon which it is required to determine under this
chapter and title 16 of this code.
   D.   Conduct Of Hearings: In the conduct of hearings before the board:
      1.   The board shall have the authority to request issuance of subpoenas
under title 4, chapter 4, article B of this code and shall have the power to
administer oaths and affirmations and to certify to official acts.
      2.   A member of the board who did not hear the evidence or has not read
the entire record of the proceedings shall not vote on or take part in the
decision.
      3.   Final decisions of the board shall be in writing and shall contain
findings of fact, a determination of the issues presented, and the requirements
to be complied with.
(Ord. 2008-17, 5-20-2008)
3-5-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   Powers And Duties Provided In Codes: The board shall have those powers
and duties of a board of appeals as provided in the technical codes adopted
under title 16, chapter 2 of this code.
   B.   Powers Concerning Abatement Of Dangerous Buildings: In order to provide
for the final interpretation of the provisions of title 16, chapter 8 of this
code, known and referred to as the Ogden City code for the abatement of
dangerous buildings, hereinafter referred to as "OCCADB", and to hear appeals
under the provisions of the OCCADB, the board shall have the authority and
power to:
      1.   Interpret the provisions of the OCCADB;
      2.   Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error on any
order, requirement, decision or determination made by the building official in
the enforcement of the OCCADB;
      3.   Upon the request and order of the office of the mayor, sit as a
panel of hearing examiners to hear and make proposed findings of facts,
conclusions of law, and orders to the office of the mayor to determine whether
or not buildings or structures in violation of the OCCADB constitute public
nuisances requiring abatement by demolition or repair by the city at the
owner's expense; and
      4.   Recommend the use of budgeted funds designated for abatement by
demolition, repair and boarding to defray city expense in abatement procedures
and the manner of collection of the same, be it by suit, special assessment or
placement of a certified lien against the property.
   C.   Board Recommendation: The board may recommend new procedures to the
building official and the mayor, and new ordinances to the city council.
   D.   Powers Concerning Floodplain Variances: The board may hear and decide
appeals from the floodplain overlay zone as provided in section
15-26-10 of this code.
(Ord. 2015-21, 5-26-2015)
3-5-5: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST; ETHICS:
Members of the board shall be subject to the municipal officers' and employees'
ethics act, Utah Code Annotated section 10-3-1301 et seq., as amended, or any
successor provision, and all applicable ordinances of the city regarding
conflicts of interest or ethics. A violation of such provisions shall be
grounds for removal from office.
(Ord. 2008-17, 5-20-2008)
CHAPTER 6
RESERVED
(Ord. 2017-1, 1-24-2017)
CHAPTER 7
EMPLOYEE APPEALS
ARTICLE A.  MERIT EMPLOYEES
SECTION:
3-7A-1: Right Of Appeal
3-7A-1: RIGHT OF APPEAL:
   A.   Entitlement: Except employees described in Utah Code Annotated section
10-3-1105(2), and members of the sworn public safety service, an employee who
is discharged, suspended for more than two (2) days without pay, or
involuntarily transferred from one position to another with less remuneration
for any disciplinary reason, may appeal to the hearing officer the final
decision to discharge, suspend without pay, or involuntarily transfer.
   B.   Hearing Officer: The hearing officer is established as the chief
executive officer of the city or his or her designee.
   C.   Exhaustion Of Remedies: The employee shall exhaust all administrative
remedies before appealing to the hearing officer.
   D.   Exclusion: This article does not apply to an employee discharged or
transferred to a position with less remuneration if the discharge or transfer
is the result of a layoff, reorganization, or other nondisciplinary reason.
   E.   Policies: The administration shall adopt policies implementing the
appeal process authorized by this article.
(Ord. 2017-1, 1-24-2017)
ARTICLE B.  SWORN PUBLIC SAFETY EMPLOYEES; PUBLIC SAFETY EMPLOYEE APPEAL BOARD
SECTION:
3-7B-1: Right Of Appeal
3-7B-2: Established; Appointment And Terms; Removal
3-7B-3: Organization
3-7B-4: Duties And Responsibilities
3-7B-5: Rules And Regulations
3-7B-6: Administrative Support
3-7B-1: RIGHT OF APPEAL:
   A.   Entitlement: A sworn employee in the police or fire department, other
than chiefs, assistant chiefs and introductory employees, who is discharged,
suspended for more than two (2) days without pay (16 hours for a 40 hour
workweek, or 24 hours for a 56 hour workweek employee) or involuntarily
transferred from one position to another with less remuneration for any
disciplinary reason, may appeal to the public safety employee appeal board the
final decision to discharge, suspend without pay, or involuntarily transfer.
   B.   Exhaustion Of Remedies: The employee shall exhaust all administrative
remedies before appealing to the public safety employee appeal board.
   C.   Exclusion: This article does not apply to an employee discharged or
transferred to a position with less remuneration if the discharge or transfer
is the result of a layoff, reorganization, or other nondisciplinary reason.
(Ord. 2017-1, 1-24-2017)
3-7B-2: ESTABLISHED; APPOINTMENT AND TERMS; REMOVAL:
   A.   Dissolution Of Civil Service Commission: Pursuant to Utah Code
Annotated section 10-3-1003(1)(a), Ogden City hereby dissolves the previously
established civil service commission, together with all rules and regulations
promulgated by the civil service commission.
   B.   Establishment Of Public Safety Employee Appeal Board: A public safety
employee appeal board is hereby established, which shall consist of three (3)
members appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city
council. Their term of office shall be for three (3) years; provided, however,
that of the first appointments, one shall serve until June 30, 2019, and
another to serve to June 30, 2020, and another member to serve until June 30,
2021. In the month of June 2019, and every year thereafter, one member shall in
like manner be appointed for the term of three (3) years to take the place of
the member whose term shall next expire. If a vacancy occurs, it shall be
filled by appointment by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city
council, for the unexpired portion of the term. The mayor may remove any member
of the public safety employee appeal board for cause, after public hearing upon
written charges, if a public hearing is requested. Any member may serve more
than one term if reappointed.
(Ord. 2017-1, 1-24-2017)
3-7B-3: ORGANIZATION:
   A.   Qualifications: No member of the public safety employee appeal board
shall, during the member's tenure in office, hold any other public office, nor
shall such member be a candidate for any other public office. Not more than two
(2) members of the public safety employee appeal board shall at any one time be
of the same political party.
   B.   Selection Of Chair: The public safety employee appeal board shall
organize by selecting one of its members to be chair.
   C.   Establish Rules And Regulations: The administration shall adopt
policies implementing the appeal process authorized by this article.
   D.   Compensation: Each member shall receive twenty five dollars ($25.00)
per diem for each meeting of the board attended; provided, however, that no
member shall receive more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) in any one month.
(Ord. 2017-1, 1-24-2017)
3-7B-4: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
The public safety employee appeal board shall hear and decide appeals of sworn
employees in the police and fire departments, other than chiefs, assistant
chiefs or deputy chiefs, and introductory employees, with respect to discharge,
suspension for more than two (2) days without pay, involuntarily transfer from
one position to another with less remuneration for any disciplinary reason.
Demotions do not include removal of assignment in the police and fire
departments. For sworn fire personnel, suspensions of more than sixteen (16)
hours for a forty (40) hour workweek employee or more than twenty four (24)
hours for a fifty six (56) hour workweek employee are eligible for appeal.
(Ord. 2017-1, 1-24-2017)
3-7B-5: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The following rules shall apply to appeals before the public safety employee
appeal board:
   A.   Written Notice; Hearing: An employee appealing, when permitted by these
ordinances, shall file a written notice of appeal with the city recorder within
fourteen (14) calendar days after the subject action. The notice of appeal
shall be upon a form approved by the chief administrative officer and available
in the city recorder's office. Upon the filing of the appeal, the city recorder
shall forthwith refer a copy of the same to the public safety employee appeal
board. The appeal board shall set a date for a hearing, take and receive
evidence and fully hear and determine the matter which is the subject of the
appeal.
   B.   Personal Appearance; Representation: The officer or employee shall be
entitled to appear in person and to be represented by counsel (who may be, but
is not required to be, an attorney at law), to have a public hearing, to
confront the witness whose testimony is to be considered and to examine the
evidence to be considered by the appeal board.
   C.   Review By Mayor: An employee may request the final action of the public
safety employee appeal board to be modified or vacated by the mayor within
fifteen (15) days of its issuance. After such period, the final action of the
board shall not be subject to further appeal or proceeding within the
jurisdiction of Ogden City. This provision does not affect the date of issuance
of final action or order of the board for purposes of appeal to the court of
appeals.
   D.   Appeals To The Court Of Appeals: A final action or order of the public
safety employee appeal board may be appealed to the court of appeals by filing
with that court a notice of appeal within thirty (30) days after issuance of
the final action or order.
   E.   Decision: The decision of the appeal board shall be certified to the
city recorder within fifteen (15) calendar days from the date the matter is
referred to it, except that for good cause, the appeal board may extend the
fifteen (15) day period to a maximum of sixty (60) days, if the employee and
city both consent. Each decision of the appeal board shall require a majority
of two (2) votes in favor of the decision to take effect. If the appeal board
finds in favor of an employee, the decision shall provide that the employee
shall receive his or her salary, or any deficiency in salary, for any period of
time during which he or she was wrongfully deprived of the same.
   F.   Certification Of Decision: In the event that the appeal board does not
uphold the action which is the subject of the appeal, the city recorder shall
certify the decision to the officer or employee affected, and also to the
director of the department from whose order the appeal was taken. The officer
or employee shall be paid his or her salary, commencing with the next working
day following the certification by the city recorder of the appeal board's
decision; provided, that the employee or officer concerned, reports for his or
her assigned duties during the next working day. The appeal board may award
only the relief described in this section.
   G.   Standard Of Review: The standard of review before the public safety
appeal board shall be whether the employment action complained of constitutes
an abuse of discretion.
(Ord. 2017-1, 1-24-2017)
3-7B-6: ADMINISTRATIVE SUPPORT:
All administrative support, including, but not limited to, recordkeeping,
secretarial, facilities, minutes and notice shall be provided by the city
recorder's office.
(Ord. 2017-1, 1-24-2017)
CHAPTER 8
HOUSING AUTHORITY
SECTION:
3-8-1: Created
3-8-1: CREATED:
The City has created by Resolution 670-70, dated February 19, 1970, an
authority, corporate and politic, to be known as the Ogden City Housing
Authority, pursuant to the provisions of the Housing Authorities Law of the
State, as enacted by House Bill 264, laws of 1969, approved March 26, 1969. The
Authority is authorized to transact business and exercise those powers as
provided in Utah Code Annotated title 9, chapter 4, as amended. Commissioners
shall be appointed and removed as provided in State law.
(1979 Code § 2.14.010; Ord. 93-41, 10-12-1993)
CHAPTER 9
REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY 1
SECTION:
3-9-1: History
3-9-2: Governing Body; Adoption Of Bylaws
3-9-3: Agency Funds
 
Notes
1 1. Prior ordinance history: 1979 Code §§ 2.16.010, 2.16.020, 2.16.030; Ord.
  93-42, 10-12-1993; 1999 Code.
3-9-1: HISTORY:
In 1969, a redevelopment agency was formed in the city pursuant to the Utah
community redevelopment law, Utah Code Annotated section 17A-2-1106 et seq., as
amended, and known as the Ogden City redevelopment agency. In 1976, it was
deemed desirable that future redevelopment activities in the city be carried
out pursuant to the provisions of the neighborhood development act, Utah Code
Annotated section 17A-2-1201 et seq., and, in pursuit of that desire, the city
council established a redevelopment agency pursuant to said neighborhood
development act and designated itself the Ogden City redevelopment agency
pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 17A-2-1203, as amended, complete with
all powers and subject to all restrictions provided in said neighborhood
development act, by ordinance 33-76, dated September 30, 1976. The Ogden City
redevelopment agency continues to operate as an agency, pursuant to the
redevelopment agencies act, Utah Code Annotated section 17B-4-101 et seq.
(Ord. 2003-17, 3-25-2003)
3-9-2: GOVERNING BODY; ADOPTION OF BYLAWS:
   A.   The individual members of the city council constitute the members of
the board of the Ogden City redevelopment agency, which board is the governing
body of the agency and shall have the power to transact the business and
exercise all the powers of an agency as provided for in the redevelopment
agencies act, Utah Code Annotated section 17B-4-101 et seq., as amended, or its
successor.
   B.   The board of the Ogden City redevelopment agency shall adopt bylaws
governing the regulation and management of the affairs of the agency.
(Ord. 2003-17, 3-25-2003)
3-9-3: AGENCY FUNDS:
Funds of the Ogden City redevelopment agency shall be accounted for separately
from the funds of the city.
(Ord. 2003-17, 3-25-2003)
CHAPTER 10
RESERVED
CHAPTER 11
CHRISTMAS VILLAGE COMMITTEE
SECTION:
3-11-1: Objectives And Purpose
3-11-2: Organization
3-11-3: Adoption Of Rules And Regulations By Mayor
3-11-4: Powers And Duties
3-11-5: Conflicts Of Interest; Ethics
3-11-6: Sunset Provision
3-11-1: OBJECTIVES AND PURPOSE:
It is the objective and purpose of the city to annually present a display in
the Municipal Gardens for the benefit of the community celebrating the
Christmas holiday season and depicting the origins and traditions of the
holiday. The overall theme of Christmas Village shall be secular in nature. In
order to accomplish these ends, a Christmas Village committee shall be
established to exert leadership and promote excellence in all aspects of
Christmas Village and to advise the city council, the mayor and administration
in all aspects regarding Christmas Village.
(1979 Code § 2.26.010; amd. Ord. 93-45, 10-12-1993)
3-11-2: ORGANIZATION:
   A.   Membership; Compensation: There is hereby created the Christmas Village
committee which shall consist of fourteen (14) voting members appointed by the
mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council. Seven (7) of the voting
members of the committee shall be selected from nominations made by the Weber
County commission, if the commission exercises its privilege to make such
nominations. Members shall be residents of Ogden City or Weber County. One
member of the committee shall be an Ogden City employee designated by the
mayor. The mayor, upon recommendation of the chair of the committee, shall also
have the authority to appoint other officials and assistants that the mayor and
the chair deem necessary, but such persons shall not have the right to vote.
All members shall serve without compensation.
   B.   Terms And Vacancies: All members of the Christmas Village committee
shall serve for a term of three (3) years, except that of the members appointed
in 1997, seven (7) shall serve for a term of one year. Any member may be
reappointed to successive terms. Vacancies occurring in the committee other
than by expiration of the term shall be filled by appointment of the mayor,
with the advice and consent of the city council, for the unexpired term.
   C.   Chair And Vice Chair: The committee shall annually elect a chair, vice
chair and past chair. The chair shall supervise and coordinate all activities
of the Christmas Village committee. The vice chair shall assist the chair in
all of the duties and functions and shall take over the duties and
responsibilities of the chair in the absence of the chair. Upon election by the
committee, the vice chair moves into the chair position, and the chair moves
into the past chair position. The chair, vice chair and past chair serve a one
year term, or until their successors are elected. Members of the committee
shall be assigned duties and responsibilities by the chair.
   D.   Meetings; Rules Of Procedure: Meetings of the committee shall be held
at least monthly from June through January, and other meetings may be called as
needed by the chair or three (3) members of the committee. Minutes shall be
kept of all meetings, copies of which shall be filed with the city recorder.
Meetings shall be held in accordance with the Utah open and public meetings
law. The committee shall establish rules of procedure for conducting its
business.
   E.   Staff Assistance: The mayor may provide such administrative support and
staff assistance as is determined by the mayor to be necessary for the
operations of the committee within existing budgetary restraints.
   F.   Removal Of Members: Members of the committee may be removed by the
mayor at any time for any reason.
(Ord. 2013-40, 8-27-2013)
3-11-3: ADOPTION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS BY MAYOR:
The mayor may adopt rules and regulations which are in the public interest and
are reasonably necessary for the successful operation of Christmas Village. All
such rules shall be reduced to writing and filed in the City Recorder's Office.
(1979 Code § 2.26.100; amd. Ord. 93-45, 10-12-1993)
3-11-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The committee shall have the following duties and powers:
   A.   Displays, Activities And Programs: The committee shall advise
administration on the displays, activities and programs which will be a part of
Christmas Village.
   B.   Budget Preparation: The committee shall advise the Mayor and City
Council, as needed, in the preparation and adoption of the budget for Christmas
Village and shall recommend to the Mayor and the Director of Community Services
how the approved budget for Christmas Village should be expended.
   C.   Recommend Rules And Regulations: The committee may recommend to the
Mayor the adoption of rules or regulations which are in the public interest and
are necessary for the successful operation of Christmas Village.
   D.   Contracts; Restriction: The committee shall not have the right or power
to enter into any contract binding the City. Any contract in furtherance of
Christmas Village shall be approved and executed as provided by the ordinances,
and rules and regulations of the City.
   E.   Finances: All monies budgeted for or generated by the Christmas Village
Committee shall be accounted for and expended in accordance with the budgeting
and financial laws, rules and regulations of the City through its Director of
Management Services.
   F.   Submit Annual Report: Submit an annual report in writing to the City
Council and Mayor of the committee's activities during the preceding year,
together with its recommendations for the following year by March 30 of each
year.
(1979 Code § 2.26.080; amd. Ord. 93-45, 10-12-1993; Ord. 98-8, 2-3-1998)
3-11-5: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST; ETHICS:
Members of the Christmas Village Committee shall be subject to the Municipal
Officers' and Employees' Ethics Act, Utah Code Annotated section 10-3-1301 et
seq., as amended, or any successor provision, and all applicable ordinances of
the City regarding conflicts of interest or ethics.
(1979 Code § 2.26.090; amd. Ord. 93-45, 10-12-1993)
3-11-6: SUNSET PROVISION:
Unless subsequently extended by appropriate action, the term of the Christmas
Village Committee shall sunset and expire on April 1, 2022.
(Ord. 2019-13, 3-26-2019)
CHAPTER 12
GOLDEN HOURS ADVISORY COMMITTEE
SECTION:
3-12-1: Objectives And Purpose
3-12-2: Organization
3-12-3: Adoption Of Rules And Regulations By Mayor
3-12-4: Powers And Duties
3-12-5: Conflicts Of Interest; Ethics
3-12-6: Sunset Provision
3-12-1: OBJECTIVES AND PURPOSE:
The Golden Hours advisory committee's objectives and purposes, in conjunction
with Weber human services, are to provide annual review of programs and
activities and to advise the mayor and city council in matters pertaining to
the operations of the Golden Hours center.
(1979 Code § 2.28.010; amd. Ord. 96-11, 2-6-1996)
3-12-2: ORGANIZATION:
   A.   Membership; Compensation: There is hereby created the Golden Hours
advisory committee which shall consist of nine (9) voting members, of which
five (5) will be nominated to represent the city and four (4) members will be
nominated by the Weber human services department of aging and shall be active
participants of the Weber human services aging programs; and three (3) ex
officio, nonvoting members shall be the city recreation division manager, the
Weber human services director of senior programs and the Golden Hours center
supervisor. All members will be appointed by the mayor, with the advice and
consent of the city council. The mayor, upon recommendation of the chair of the
Golden Hours advisory committee, shall also have the authority to appoint other
officials and assistants that the mayor and the chair deem necessary, but such
person shall not have the right to vote. All members shall serve without
compensation.
   B.   Terms; Vacancies: All members of the Golden Hours advisory committee
shall serve for a term of two (2) years with the exception that initial members
shall be equally split between one and two (2) year terms. Vacancies occurring
in the committee, other than by expiration of the term, shall be filled by
appointment of the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council, for
the unexpired term.
   C.   Chair And Vice Chair; Terms: The committee shall elect a chair and vice
chair. The officers shall serve for a one year term and shall serve until their
successor is elected. Officers may be reelected for consecutive terms. Members
of the committee shall be assigned duties and responsibilities by the chair.
   D.   Meetings; Rules Of Procedure: Meetings of the committee shall be held
at least monthly. Other meetings may be called as needed by the chair or three
(3) members of the committee. Minutes shall be kept of all meetings, copies of
which shall be filed with the city recorder. Meetings shall be held in
accordance with the Utah open and public meetings law. The committee shall
establish rules of procedure for conducting its business.
   E.   Staff Assistance: The mayor may provide such administrative support and
staff assistance as is determined by the mayor to be necessary for the
operations of the committee within existing budgetary restraints.
   F.   Removal Of Members: Members of the committee may be removed by the
mayor at any time for any reason.
(Ord. 2015-7, 3-17-2015)
3-12-3: ADOPTION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS BY MAYOR:
The mayor may adopt rules and regulations which are in the public interest and
are reasonably necessary for the successful operation of the Golden Hours
center. All such rules shall be reduced to writing and filed in the city
recorder's office.
(1979 Code § 2.28.100; amd. Ord. 96-11, 2-6-1996)
3-12-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The committee's duties and powers shall include, but not be limited to:
   A.   Policies, Programs And Activities: The committee shall advise
administration on the policies, programs and activities to be conducted at the
Golden Hours center.
   B.   Budget Preparation: The committee shall advise the mayor and city
council, as needed, in the preparation and adoption of the budget for the
Golden Hours center.
   C.   Rules And Regulations: The committee may recommend to the mayor the
adoption of rules or regulations which are in the public interest and are
necessary to the successful operation of the Golden Hours center.
   D.   Investigate Availability Of Funds: The committee may investigate the
availability of funds and other assistance which might be or may become
available from the federal or state governments or from any other source and
advise the mayor and city council.
   E.   Submit Annual Report: In March of each year, the Golden Hours advisory
committee shall submit in writing to the city council an annual report of the
Golden Hours center activities during the preceding year, together with its
recommendations for the subsequent year.
(1979 Code §§ 2.28.080, 2.28.110; amd. Ord. 96-11, 2-6-1996; Ord. 2008-6, 3-18-
2008)
3-12-5: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST; ETHICS:
Members of the Golden Hours advisory committee shall be subject to the
municipal officers' and employees' ethics act, Utah Code Annotated section 10-
3-1301 et seq., as amended, or any successor provision, and all applicable
ordinances of the city regarding conflicts of interest or ethics.
(1979 Code § 2.28.090; amd. Ord. 96-11, 2-6-1996)
3-12-6: SUNSET PROVISION:
Unless subsequently extended by appropriate action, the term of the Golden
Hours advisory committee shall sunset and expire on March 15, 2018.
(Ord. 2015-7, 3-17-2015)
CHAPTER 13
RESERVED
 
CHAPTER 14
MARSHALL N. WHITE CENTER ADVISORY COMMITTEE
SECTION:
3-14-1: Purpose
3-14-2: Organization
3-14-3: Powers And Duties
3-14-4: Conflicts Of Interest; Ethics
3-14-5: Sunset Provision
3-14-1: PURPOSE:
This Chapter is enacted and intended for the purpose of establishing, by
ordinance, the Marshall N. White Center Advisory Committee, whose objectives
and purposes shall be to advise the City Council and the Mayor in matters
pertaining to the operations of the Marshall N. White Center. The provisions of
this Chapter shall supersede Resolution 66-88, dated September 22, 1988, which
resolution originally established the Committee as the Marshall N. White Center
Advisory Board, and any amendments thereto.
(1979 Code § 2.32.010; Ord. 93-46, 10-12-1993)
3-14-2: ORGANIZATION:
   A.   Membership: There is established a Marshall N. White Center Advisory
Committee which shall consist of eleven (11) voting members and four (4) ex
officio, nonvoting members as follows: one member of the Parks and Recreation
Advisory Committee, the City Recreation Manager, the Director of the Marshall
N. White Center and the Assistant Director of the Marshall N. White Center. All
voting members shall be either residents of the City or provide expertise
necessary in the performance of the duties of the Committee; but in no event
shall Committee membership be comprised of less than a majority of City
residents.
(1979 Code § 2.32.020; Ord. 93-46, 10-12-1993; amd. Ord. 97-58, 7-22-1997)
   B.   Appointment; Terms And Removal; Compensation: Members of the Committee
shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City
Council, and shall serve for a term of three (3) calendar years. Ex officio
members shall serve for their term of office. Any Committee member may be
removed by the Mayor at any time, for any reason. The members shall serve
without compensation and as a public service to the community.
(1979 Code § 2.32.030; Ord. 93-46, 10-12-1993)
   C.   Chair And Vice Chair; Terms: The Committee shall select a chair and a
vice chair who shall serve for one year or until such time as their successor
is elected.
(1979 Code § 2.32.040; Ord. 93-46, 10-12-1993)
   D.   Rules Of Procedure; Meetings: The Committee may establish rules of
procedure, not inconsistent with law or these ordinances, for conducting its
meetings and business. The Committee shall meet on a monthly basis and shall
provide in its rules for a method of calling special meetings. The Committee
shall keep minutes of its meetings, copies of which shall be filed with the
City Recorder as part of the official records of the City. Meetings of the
Committee shall be conducted in accordance with the Utah Public and Open
Meetings law.
(1979 Code § 2.32.050; Ord. 93-46, 10-12-1993)
   E.   Finances: Any funding for the Marshall N. White Center generated by the
Committee shall be accounted for and expended in accordance with the budgeting
and financial laws, rules and regulations of the City through its Director of
Management Services.
(1979 Code § 2.32.080; Ord. 93-46, 10-12-1993)
   F.   Staff Assistance: The Mayor shall provide such administrative support
and staff assistance as is determined by the Mayor to be necessary for the
operations of the Committee, within existing budgetary restraints.
(1979 Code § 2.32.070; Ord. 93-46, 10-12-1993)
3-14-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   Act As Advisory Body: The committee shall act as an advisory body to
the city council and the mayor in matters pertaining to the operations of the
Marshall N. White Center and in such capacity shall:
      1.   Recommend policies, programs and activities to be conducted at the
Marshall N. White Community Center;
      2.   Assist the director of the center in the preparation of a proposed
budget for each year's activities;
      3.   Assist in the development of goals, objectives and strategies to be
pursued at the Marshall N. White Community Center, including means of
implementation and associated costs;
      4.   Investigate the availability of funds and other assistance which
might be or may become available from the federal or state government or from
any other source and advise the city council thereof, together with its
recommendations and assistance in obtaining the same; and
      5.   Recommend what cooperation and coordination can be made in the use
of the center with the public schools, social and service agencies and other
interested organizations and including such matters with their recommendations
to the city council as to policies which the council should adopt.
   B.   Recommendations For Operation And Use: The committee may make
recommendations to the city council and the mayor as to any and all matters
concerning the operation and use of the Marshall N. White Center for the
purpose of obtaining the maximum use of the center for the most people.
(1979 Code § 2.32.060; Ord. 93-46, 10-12-1993)
   C.   Annual Report Of Activities: In March of each year, the committee shall
submit in writing to the city council a report of the center's activities
during the preceding calendar year, together with its recommendations for the
subsequent year.
(1979 Code § 2.32.090; Ord. 93-46, 10-12-1993)
3-14-4: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST; ETHICS:
Members of the Marshall N. White Center advisory committee shall be subject to
the municipal officers' and employees' ethics act, Utah Code Annotated section
10-3-1301 et seq., as amended, or any successor provision, and all applicable
ordinances of the city regarding conflicts of interest or ethics.
(1979 Code § 2.32.100; Ord. 93-46, 10-12-1993)
3-14-5: SUNSET PROVISION:
Unless subsequently extended by appropriate action, the term of this committee
shall sunset and expire on March 31, 2009.
(1979 Code § 2.32.110; Ord. 93-46, 10-12-1993; amd. Ord. 97-58, 7-22-1997; Ord.
2000-23, 4-25-2000; Ord. 2003-22, 5-6-2003; Ord. 2006-11, 4-11-2006)
CHAPTER 15
RESERVED
 
CHAPTER 16
OGDEN CITY ARTS ADVISORY COMMITTEE
SECTION:
3-16-1: Purpose
3-16-2: Organization
3-16-3: Powers And Duties
3-16-4: Conflicts Of Interest; Ethics
3-16-5: Reserved
3-16-6: Public Art Program; Administration
3-16-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted and intended for the purpose of establishing, by
ordinance, the Ogden City arts advisory committee, whose purpose shall be to
foster an environment where the arts can thrive and become an integral part of
the infrastructure of the city. The goals of the Ogden City arts advisory
committee acting in conjunction with the Ogden City arts coordinator shall be:
   A.   To recommend arts policies for the city;
   B.   To coordinate and administer defined arts functions;
   C.   To assist in the nourishment of a positive image for the community that
will benefit residents, attract visitors, and enhance the vision for Ogden's
future;
   D.   To educate the public, promote the arts, and increase public awareness
of the benefits the arts provide for a well rounded community;
   E.   To provide financial resource information and assistance to artists and
art organizations; and
   F.   To serve as the municipal cultural council for Ogden City, having as
its primary purpose the advancement and preservation of the arts, including
visual art, music, theater, dance, literary art and art education, for purposes
of applying for and receiving funding distributed annually from the county
legislative body to support cultural organizations.
(Ord. 2015-41, 9-1-2015)
3-16-2: ORGANIZATION:
   A.   Created; Compensation: There is hereby established the Ogden City arts
advisory committee, which shall consist of fourteen (14) members, which number
may be increased by the mayor as the need changes; provided however, that there
shall be at no time more than sixteen (16). All members of the committee shall
be either residents of the city or provide expertise necessary in the
performance of the duties of the committee, but in no event, shall committee
membership be comprised of less than a majority of city residents. All members
shall be appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city
council. Members of the committee shall serve without compensation.
   B.   Composition: Eight (8) of the members of the Ogden City arts advisory
committee shall be arts professionals or arts administrators and shall
individually or collectively represent the eight (8) major areas of the arts:
dance, design arts, folk arts, literature, media arts, music, theater, and
visual arts. Six (6) members shall be representatives of the community at
large, and might include for the purpose of interfacing elementary/secondary
schools, university, public library, and local business and people who bring
special skills necessary for the productive management of the committee.
   C.   Terms: Members shall be appointed for four (4) year terms. Members may
be appointed to a maximum of two (2) full successive terms. Those who have
served for the maximum number of successive terms may be reappointed after a
minimum of one year off of the committee.
   D.   Chair, Vice Chair And Past Chair: The Ogden City arts advisory
committee shall annually elect a chair, vice chair, and past chair. Any vacancy
may be filled by the Ogden City arts advisory committee for the balance of the
remaining term. The chair shall supervise and coordinate all activities of the
committee. The vice chair shall assist the chair in all of the duties and
functions and shall take over the duties and responsibilities of the chair in
the absence of the chair. Upon election by the committee, the vice chair moves
into the chair position, and the chair moves into the past chair position. The
chair, vice chair and past chair serve a one year term, or until their
successors are elected. If a member is elected to serve as chair, vice chair or
past chair at the end of the member's term, the term will be extended as needed
to allow the member to rotate through the chair, vice chair, and past chair
positions.
   E.   Meetings; Rules Of Procedure: Regular meetings of the Ogden City arts
advisory committee shall be held at least monthly, as needed, and other
meetings called by the chair or three (3) members of the committee may be held
as needed. Meetings shall be held in conformance with the Utah open and public
meetings act. The Ogden City arts advisory committee may establish rules and
procedures, not inconsistent with law or this code, for conducting its business
and meetings. The Ogden City arts advisory committee shall take written minutes
and make an electronic recording of its meetings, copies of which shall be
filed with the city recorder's office. The taking and approval of minutes shall
follow the policy and procedure set forth in subsection 3-2-1H of this title.
   F.   Vacancies: Vacancies occurring in the membership of the Ogden City arts
advisory committee other than by expiration of term of office shall be filled
by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council for the unexpired
term.
   G.   Finances: All monies budgeted for or generated by the Ogden City arts
advisory committee shall be accounted for and expended in accordance with the
budgeting and financial laws, rules and regulations of the city through its
director of management services.
   H.   Staff Assistance: The mayor may provide administrative support and
assign, hire, or contract for such staff assistance as is determined to be
necessary for the operations of the Ogden City arts advisory committee, within
existing budgetary restraints.
   I.   Removal: Any member of the Ogden City arts advisory committee may be
removed at any time by the mayor for any reason.
(Ord. 2015-41, 9-1-2015)
3-16-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Ogden City arts advisory committee shall act through and under the
direction of the Ogden City arts coordinator in the exercise of the following
powers and duties:
   A.   Advisory Body: The Ogden City arts advisory committee may act as an
advisory body to the city council and the mayor concerning the cultural welfare
of the community.
   B.   Coordinate And Encourage Cultural Events: The Ogden City arts advisory
committee may consult with persons and organizations sponsoring arts activities
with the purpose of coordinating and encouraging diversified and appropriate
cultural events.
   C.   Recommend Distribution Of Funding: The Ogden City arts advisory
committee shall recommend to city administration a fair distribution of arts
funding to be appropriated by the city council. After making any necessary
adjustments to conform to grant criteria, the administration shall submit the
funding recommendation to the city council for approval.
   D.   Establish Standing Committees: The Ogden City arts advisory committee
may establish such standing committees as deemed necessary to fulfill its
objectives.
   E.   Submit Annual Report: In July of each year, the Ogden City arts
advisory committee shall submit in writing to the city council and the mayor an
annual report of its activities during the preceding fiscal year, including the
results of the public art program, together with any recommendations for the
subsequent year.
   F.   Advise On Public Art Program: Acting through its design subcommittee,
and consistent with other provisions contained in this chapter, advise the
mayor on the public art program adopted in title 4, chapter 1, article C of
this code.
   G.   Arts Master Plan: Advise city administration on adoption and
implementation of an arts master plan, which shall be developed in accordance
with the Ogden City general plan, including stand alone visual arts projects,
and integrated building design projects.
   H.   Mayor's Awards In The Arts: To assist with planning the mayor's awards
in the arts.
   I.   Ogden Art Stroll: To assist with planning the Ogden City art stroll.
   J.   Grant Funding: In conjunction with city administration, apply for
funding distributed annually from the county legislative body, and other
private or governmental sources, to support cultural organizations.
   K.   Ephemeral Art: Coordinate ephemeral art at a reception or other public
event to unveil or dedicate a public art project. (An example of ephemeral art
would be a musical or dance performance piece chosen to highlight the public
event.)
   L.   Arts On The Town: To assist with planning the Ogden City Arts On The
Town.
(Ord. 2015-41, 9-1-2015; amd. Ord. 2016-23, 4-12-2016)
3-16-4: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST; ETHICS:
Members of Ogden City arts shall be subject to the municipal officers' and
employees' ethics act, Utah Code Annotated section 10-3-1301 et seq., as
amended, or any successor provision, and all applicable ordinances of the city
regarding conflicts of interest or ethics. A violation of such provisions shall
be grounds for removal from office.
(Ord. 2015-41, 9-1-2015)
3-16-5: [RESERVED]
3-16-6: PUBLIC ART PROGRAM; ADMINISTRATION:
The Ogden City arts advisory committee shall act through and under the
direction of the Ogden City arts coordinator in the exercise of the following
powers and duties:
   A.   The Ogden City arts advisory committee shall assist the director of
community and economic development or the director's designee in the
administration of the public art program set forth in title 4, chapter 1,
article C of this code by:
      1.   Developing and making recommendations to the mayor with regard to
procedures and implementation of the public art program, with the final
decision concerning such recommendations and final disbursements for all
appropriated funds resting with the mayor;
      2.   Acting through the design subcommittee, recommending to the mayor or
the mayor's designee the selection of artists for public arts projects,
together with the reviewing of design, execution and placement, and the
acceptance of art in consultation with the architects for major public
projects, subject to final written approval in each instance by the mayor or
the mayor's designee, and the budgetary or other review of the city council;
and
      3.   Annually appointing a design subcommittee as provided in subsection
B of this section and a review subcommittee as provided in subsection C of this
section.
      4.   Annually submitting a written report to the city council, on or
before November 1, detailing the results of the public art program, including
documentation of ephemeral art funded from the public arts fund, in the prior
fiscal year.
   B.   The Ogden City arts advisory committee shall appoint a design
subcommittee which shall consist of at least five (5) voting members, to
oversee the selection of artists and art that will be funded by the public art
program. Members of the design subcommittee shall include at least three (3)
members of the Ogden City arts advisory committee, the department director, or
the director's designee, responsible for the design and construction of any
associated major public project, as applicable, and members of the general
public as appropriate. The director of community and economic development, or
the director's designee, and a city council member or designee, shall be ex
officio members of the design subcommittee. Consistent with the other
provisions of this chapter, the design subcommittee shall:
      1.   Advise city administration regarding establishing an open and fair
process for selecting artists and art for public arts projects; and
      2.   Serve as the reviewing panel for each public arts project and submit
no fewer than two (2) and no more than five (5) recommendations for artists to
the mayor for final approval.
   C.   The Ogden City arts advisory committee shall appoint a review
subcommittee which shall consist of at least six (6) voting members, to review
and make recommendations regarding potential public arts projects that may be
funded by the public art program. Members of the review subcommittee shall
include at least three (3) members of the Ogden City arts advisory committee,
the planning manager, the public services director, or the director's designee
and the management services director, or the director's designee. The director
of community and economic development, or the director's designee, and a city
council member or designee, shall be ex officio members of the review
subcommittee. Consistent with the other provisions of this chapter, the review
subcommittee shall:
      1.   Review and rank potential art projects to be funded by the public
art program consistent with the master plan for arts and culture; and
      2.   Forward its recommendations for all potential public art projects to
the director of community and economic development.
(Ord. 2016-23, 4-12-2016)
CHAPTER 17
RESERVED
 
CHAPTER 18
OGDEN DIVERSITY COMMISSION
SECTION:
3-18-1: Purpose
3-18-2: Organization
3-18-3: Powers And Duties
3-18-4: Conflicts Of Interest; Ethics
3-18-5: Representation
3-18-6: Affiliation
3-18-1: PURPOSE:
Whereas, the charter for creating an Ogden diversity strategy (charter) was
adopted on September 13, 2016, the Ogden diversity commission is hereby
organized and operated exclusively as an advisory committee to the mayor and
the city council to carry out the mission established by the charter. Acting
through the mayor's office of diversity affairs, the commission shall work to
establish a collaborative connection between the city of Ogden, individuals,
institutions, and organizations working toward meeting the needs of our diverse
communities, Ogden-Weber Tech College, Weber State University, Ogden and Weber
school districts, and private and charter schools. A collaborative strategic
plan will be used to identify and resolve issues, promote equity, cultivate
positive cultural awareness, promote cultural traditions, and enhance the well
being and quality of life of those living in or visiting Ogden.
(Ord. 2016-50, 9-13-2016)
3-18-2: ORGANIZATION:
   A.   Membership, Staff: There is hereby established an advisory committee to
be known as the Ogden diversity commission which shall be comprised of not
fewer than nine (9) members, but not more than eleven (11) members, appointed
by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council. The commission
shall be staffed by the mayor's office of diversity affairs.
   B.   Qualifications: Members shall be appointed by the mayor so as to
provide representation from a reasonably broad spectrum of the community,
including, but not limited to, the following factors: areas of expertise,
advocacy experience, community involvement, student status, profession,
education, race, ethnicity, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation,
national origin, age, religion, ability, economic diversity, and geographic
identification. Members must live, work, volunteer, worship or be enrolled in
school within the city of Ogden.
   C.   Vacancies, Removal: When a vacancy occurs, the commission, in
consultation with the mayor's office of diversity affairs, may nominate up to
three (3) individuals for consideration for appointment by the mayor. The same
process shall be used when an interim vacancy occurs to appoint a member to
fill the balance of the term. The mayor may remove any member of the commission
for cause, upon the written recommendation of the full commission, and the
mayor shall provide the member with a public hearing if requested.
   D.   Recruitment: Recruitment of commission members is intended to
facilitate leadership development and mentoring opportunities from among
Ogden's diverse community.
   E.   Term: Appointments to the commission are for two (2) year terms,
provided, however, that of the initial appointments, five (5) shall be
appointed to a one year term, and four (4) shall be appointed to a two (2) year
term. Initial appointees may serve for a maximum of five (5) years. Ongoing, no
member may serve for more than two (2) consecutive two (2) year terms.
   F.   Compensation, Reimbursement: Members of the commission shall serve
without compensation, except that they may be reimbursed for reasonable
expenses incurred while acting in their official capacity.
   G.   Executive Committee: The commission at its first meeting shall elect an
executive committee consisting of commission chair, vice chair, and chairs of
each functional committee. Executive committee officers shall serve for a one
year term and shall serve until their successor is elected.
   H.   Functional Committees: The commission shall create functional
committees that meet on a regular basis to implement and monitor strategic
focus areas from the collaborative strategic plan. At the discretion of the
commission, functional committees may be convened or disbanded according to
need. Functional committees shall develop and execute work plans and provide
analyses and recommendations related to the committee's strategic focus area.
Functional committees are advisory to the commission. Chairs of each functional
committee shall be elected by the commission at least annually from the
membership of the commission. The chairs of the functional committees shall
serve on the executive committee. Functional committee members shall be
appointed by the commission and may include outside advisors and citizens. The
size of the functional committee and frequency of committee meetings may
increase or decrease according to need. The work of the committees shall be
transparent and accountable to the commission, the mayor's office of diversity
affairs, and the community at large, and shall be communicated through regular
reporting during public commission meetings.
   I.   Rules Of Procedure; Meetings: The commission may establish rules of
procedure for conducting its business. Meetings of the commission shall be held
in accordance with the Utah public and open meetings law. Meetings of the
commission shall be held at least monthly. Staff of the mayor's office of
diversity affairs shall take minutes of its meetings, copies of which shall be
filed with the city recorder's office.
(Ord. 2016-50, 9-13-2016; amd. Ord. 2017-11, 3-7-2017)
3-18-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   Serve In Advisory Capacity: The commission shall serve in an advisory
capacity to the city council and mayor. The commission shall address issues and
assignments as directed by the city council or mayor, as well as pursue
projects in furtherance of the strategic plan of the commission which are
generated by the members of the commission in consultation with the mayor's
office of diversity affairs. Acting through the mayor's office of diversity
affairs, the commission shall have jurisdiction to undertake its mission
through communication, collaboration, education and advocacy, but shall not
have civil rights enforcement authority.
   B.   Public Meetings: At the written request of the mayor and/or city
council, the commission may hold public meetings on issues relevant to the
commission's purpose, but shall not have independent authority to convene a
public meeting, make inquiries, or conduct investigations.
   C.   Annual Report: At least annually, the commission shall report to the
mayor and the city council on its accomplishments and provide the mayor and
city council with an assessment of its effectiveness and any concerns during
the preceding year.
(Ord. 2016-50, 9-13-2016)
3-18-4: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST; ETHICS:
Members of the commission shall be subject to the municipal officers' and
employees' ethics act, Utah Code Annotated section 10-3-1301 et seq., as
amended, or any successor provision, and all applicable ordinances of the city
regarding conflicts of interest or ethics. A violation of such provisions shall
be grounds for removal from office.
(Ord. 2016-50, 9-13-2016)
3-18-5: REPRESENTATION:
Service on the commission does not prohibit members from speaking in an
individual capacity or participating in government as members of the general
public. In so doing, commissioners shall clarify that they are speaking or
acting in their individual capacity and not on behalf of the commission. Public
statements regarding commission action shall only be expressed with prior
authorization being granted at a regular or special meeting of the commission.
The chair will speak for the commission when and as directed by the commission.
(Ord. 2016-50, 9-13-2016)
3-18-6: AFFILIATION:
The commission may affiliate with other organizations that share similar
purposes or that seek to support the efforts of the commission. However, no
other organization can represent the views of the commission on any issue
without prior authorization being granted at a regular or special meeting of
the commission.
(Ord. 2016-50, 9-13-2016)
CHAPTER 19
COMPETITIVE SPORTS BOARD
SECTION:
3-19-1: Purpose
3-19-2: Organization
3-19-3: Powers And Duties
3-19-4: Compensation; Terms
3-19-5: Elections Of Chair; Rules Of Procedure; Meetings
3-19-6: Finances
3-19-7: Staff Assistance
3-19-8: Vacancies And Removal Of Members
3-19-9: Conflicts Of Interest; Ethics
3-19-10: Fees
3-19-11: Sunset Provision
3-19-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted and intended for the purpose of establishing the Ogden
City competitive sports board, whose purpose shall be to foster an environment
where competitive youth athletics can thrive and become an integral part of the
youth recreational opportunities in Ogden City and to facilitate the transition
of interested youth athletes from recreational level to competitive level
athletics.
(Ord. 2016-33, 6-14-2016)
3-19-2: ORGANIZATION:
   A.   Membership; Appointment:
      1.   There is hereby established the Ogden City competitive sports board,
hereinafter referred to as the "Ogden City comp board", which shall consist of
no less than nine (9) members, but not more than fifteen (15) members,
appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council. The
members shall include, insofar as possible:
         a.   Two (2) members representing the Ogden City recreation division;
         b.   One member from each subcommittee representing a specific sport;
         c.   One member from the Ogden City parks and recreation advisory
committee;
         d.   One member representing Ogden school district;
         e.   One member representing Weber State University;
         f.   One member representing business interests;
         g.   One member representing fundraising interests;
         h.   One member representing athletic equipment safety interests;
         i.   Up to six (6) members from either the citizens of Ogden City at
large or from outside of the city and who are capable of representing interests
determined by the mayor to benefit the board in the performance of its powers
and duties;
         j.   The Ogden City recreation manager shall be an ex officio member
of the board.
   B.   Appointment Of Citizens: In the event that no representative member of
the above listed groups or interests can be found willing to serve upon the
board, the appointment of members in place thereof may be made from the
citizens of Ogden City at large.
(Ord. 2016-33, 6-14-2016)
3-19-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Ogden City comp board shall serve as an advisory body to the city council
and mayor and shall act through and under the direction of the Ogden City
recreation manager in the exercise of the following powers and duties:
   A.   To provide opportunities for Ogden City youth to participate in
competitive athletics at an affordable level;
   B.   To prepare Ogden City youth for competitive athletics at the junior
high and high school levels;
   C.   To facilitate the transition of interested athletes from recreation
level to competitive level athletics;
   D.   To educate, recruit, promote and manage athletes and coaches who desire
to participate in competitive youth athletics;
   E.   To coordinate efforts of Ogden City recreation, Ogden City school
district, Weber State University and vested members of the Ogden City community
with respect to competitive youth athletics;
   F.   To promote competitive youth athletics and increase public awareness of
the benefits of competitive youth athletics;
   G.   To apply for grants and conduct fundraising to support its activities;
   H.   To establish such standing committees comprised of board members and
nonboard members as deemed necessary for the performance of its duties;
   I.   To submit in writing to the mayor and city council an annual report of
its activities during the preceding year, together with any recommendations for
the subsequent year.
(Ord. 2016-33, 6-14-2016)
3-19-4: COMPENSATION; TERMS:
All members of the board shall serve without compensation and each member shall
hold office until a successor is appointed and qualifies. Each member of the
board shall serve for a term of three (3) years hereafter for so long as the
board shall continue to operate. Existing board members may be appointed to
serve additional terms at the commencement of each new three (3) year period.
(Ord. 2016-33, 6-14-2016)
3-19-5: ELECTIONS OF CHAIR; RULES OF PROCEDURE; MEETINGS:
   A.   The board shall annually elect a chair, a vice chair and such other
officers from its membership as it may deem necessary. The chair shall
supervise and coordinate all activities of the board. The vice chair shall
assist the chair in all of the duties and functions and shall take over the
duties and responsibilities of the chair in the absence of the chair. Upon
election by the board, the vice chair moves into the chair position, and the
chair moves into the past chair position. The chair, vice chair and past chair
serve a one year term, or until their successors are elected. Members of the
board shall be assigned duties and responsibilities by the chair.
   B.   The board may establish rules and procedures, not inconsistent with the
law of these ordinances, for conducting its meetings and business.
   C.   The board shall meet at regular, stated times and places and the board
shall provide in its rules and procedures for a method of calling special
meetings.
   D.   The board may recommend to the mayor that a board member be removed for
repeated failure to attend board meetings.
   E.   All meetings shall be conducted in accordance with the Utah open and
public meetings law.
   F.   The board shall take minutes of its meeting, copies of which shall be
filed with the city recorder's office as part of the official records of the
city.
(Ord. 2016-33, 6-14-2016)
3-19-6: FINANCES:
Any monies budgeted for or generated by the board shall be accounted for and
expended in accordance with the budgeting and financial laws, rules and
regulations of the city through its director of management services.
(Ord. 2016-33, 6-14-2016)
3-19-7: STAFF ASSISTANCE:
The mayor may provide such administrative support staff assistance as is
determined by the mayor to be necessary for the operations of the board, within
existing budgetary restraints.
(Ord. 2016-33, 6-14-2016)
3-19-8: VACANCIES AND REMOVAL OF MEMBERS:
Vacancies occurring in the membership of said board other than by expiration of
the limited term of such board shall be filled by the mayor, with advice and
consent of the city council, for the unexpired term. The mayor may, at any
time, remove any member from the board for any reason.
(Ord. 2016-33, 6-14-2016)
3-19-9: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST; ETHICS:
Members of the Ogden City comp board shall be subject to the municipal
officers' and employees' ethics act, Utah Code Annotated section 10-3-1301 et
seq., as amended, or any successor provision, and all applicable ordinances of
the city regarding conflicts of interest or ethics.
(Ord. 2016-33, 6-14-2016)
3-19-10: FEES:
All fees shall be set following Ogden City ordinance with the assistance of the
recreation manager.
(Ord. 2016-33, 6-14-2016)
3-19-11: SUNSET PROVISION:
Unless subsequently extended by appropriate action, the term of the Ogden City
competitive sports board shall sunset and expire in 2019.
(Ord. 2016-33, 6-14-2016)
CHAPTER 20
PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY COMMITTEE
SECTION:
3-20-1: Purpose
3-20-2: Organization
3-20-3: Powers And Duties
3-20-4: Conflicts Of Interest; Ethics
3-20-5: Sunset Provision
3-20-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted and intended for the purpose of establishing the Ogden
parks and recreation advisory committee, whose objectives and purposes shall be
to advise the city council and the mayor in matters pertaining to parks and
recreation.
(Ord. 2012-53, 12-4-2012)
3-20-2: ORGANIZATION:
   A.   Membership: The parks and recreation advisory committee shall be
composed of nine (9) voting members who are citizens of the city and who shall
be appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council. The
director of public services, the division manager responsible for parks and the
division manager responsible for recreation shall be ex officio, nonvoting
members of the advisory committee.
   B.   Compensation; Terms: All members of the parks and recreation advisory
committee shall serve without compensation, and each member shall hold office
until his successor is appointed. Members shall be appointed to three (3) year
terms; provided however, that appointments made after November 1, 1992, shall
be staggered with the terms of two (2) members of the committee expiring in
each calendar year.
   C.   Election Of Officers; Rules And Procedures; Meetings: The parks and
recreation advisory committee shall: annually elect a chair and such other
officers and such committees from its membership as it may deem necessary;
adopt rules of procedure not inconsistent with law or these ordinances for the
proper conduct of its meetings and the discharge of its powers and duties; and
keep minutes of all formal action taken by the advisory committee. Copies of
such minutes shall be delivered to the city recorder for filing as part of the
official records of the city. The advisory committee shall meet at least
monthly at regular stated times and places. All meetings shall be open to the
public. The advisory committee shall provide in its rules and procedures for a
method of calling special meetings.
   D.   Filling Vacancies; Termination: Vacancies occurring in the membership
of the advisory committee other than by expiration of term of office shall be
filled by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council for the
unexpired term. The mayor shall have the power, at any time, to order the
termination of any membership on the advisory committee, when such action shall
be deemed to be for the best interest of the city, and the mayor may thereupon
appoint a successor for the unexpired term of such member.
   E.   Administrative Assistance: The mayor shall provide such administrative
support and staff assistance as is determined by the mayor to be necessary for
the operations of the advisory committee, within existing budgetary restraints.
   F.   Finances: Any monies generated by the committee for city parks and
recreation programs and projects shall be accounted for and expended in
accordance with the budgeting and financial laws, rules and regulations of the
city through its director of management services.
(Ord. 2012-53, 12-4-2012)
3-20-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   Committee Authority: The authority delegated by this chapter to the
parks and recreation advisory committee shall apply to all city parks, land
owned or acquired by the city for park purposes, all recreation activities or
facilities under city control, city golf facilities, and the parking or
planting spaces between the traveled surface and sidewalks or street lines.
   B.   Advisory Capacity: The parks and recreation advisory committee shall
act in an advisory capacity to the city council and the mayor in all matters
pertaining to public recreation and parks, specifically including, but not
limiting itself to, the following:
      1.   Recommend Policies: Recommend policies pertaining to parks and
recreation to the city council and advise the mayor and the director of public
services on problems of development and improvement of existing recreation
areas, parks, facilities, programs and services.
      2.   Recommend Coordination Of Services: Study and make recommendations
on the coordination and possible duplication of city recreation services with
the programs of other governmental agencies and voluntary organizations.
      3.   Develop And Update Plan: Work with the city planning commission to
develop and update on a periodic basis a parks and recreation plan as part of
the city general plan. The items to be covered by such plan should include the
development of future recreation facilities and services with relation to the
city's future park and recreation needs. The location and methods of acquiring
property suitable for future recreation or park development should also be
included.
      4.   Recommend Goals And Programs: Recommend, in conjunction with the
director of public services, a proposed annual set of goals, objectives,
strategies and their associated costs which the mayor and city council may use
in establishing an annual budget for the divisions within the public services
department responsible for the parks and recreation functions; and formulate
and recommend a long range park and recreation capital improvement program
consistent with the most current parks and recreation plan. The proposed annual
goals, objectives and strategies shall be presented to the mayor in a written
form and in sufficient time that it can be considered for the city's annual
budget process.
      5.   Render Advisory Services: Render such advisory services to the city
council and mayor on parks and recreation matters as the city council or mayor
may from time to time require.
      6.   Submit Annual Report: Submit an annual report, in writing, to the
city council and the mayor of the committee's activities during the preceding
year, together with its recommendations for the following year.
(Ord. 2012-53, 12-4-2012)
3-20-4: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST; ETHICS:
Members of the parks and recreation advisory committee shall be subject to the
municipal officers' and employees' ethics act, Utah Code Annotated section 10-
3-1301 et seq., as amended, or any successor provision, and all applicable
ordinances of the city regarding conflicts of interest or ethics.
(Ord. 2012-53, 12-4-2012)
3-20-5: SUNSET PROVISION:
Unless subsequently extended by appropriate action, the term of this committee
shall sunset and expire on March 15, 2018.
(Ord. 2015-8, 3-17-2015)
CHAPTER 21
RESERVED
 
CHAPTER 22
TRAILS NETWORK COMMITTEE
SECTION:
3-22-1: Purpose
3-22-2: Organization
3-22-3: Duties And Powers
3-22-4: Conflicts Of Interest; Ethics
3-22-5: Sunset Provision
3-22-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted and intended for the purpose of establishing, by
ordinance, the Ogden trails network committee, hereinafter referred to as the
committee, whose objectives and purposes shall be to advise the city council
and the mayor in matters pertaining to the planning and development of the
trails system within the city. The provisions of this chapter shall supersede
resolution 27-91, dated May 9, 1991, which resolution originally created the
East Bench trails committee.
(1979 Code § 2.30.010; amd. Ord. 93-21, 5-25-1993; Ord. 2002-40, 9-17-2002)
3-22-2: ORGANIZATION:
   A.   Membership; Appointment:
      1.   There is hereby created an advisory committee to be known as the
Ogden trails network committee, which shall consist of not less than nine (9)
members, but not more than fourteen (14) members, appointed by the mayor, with
the advice and consent of the city council. The members shall include, insofar
as possible:
         a.   One member from the Weber Pathways Organization.
         b.   One member from the Ogden City parks and recreation advisory
committee.
         c.   One member from each of the following areas: north of 12th
Street; west of Monroe Boulevard and south of 12th Street; east of Monroe
Boulevard between 12th Street and 36th Street; and east of Monroe Boulevard
south of 36th Street.
         d.   Up to five (5) members from either the citizens of the city at
large or from outside of the city and who are capable of representing interests
determined by the mayor to benefit the committee in the performance of its
powers and duties.
         e.   One nonvoting member from the city planning commission.
         f.   One nonvoting member representing the U.S. forest service.
         g.   One nonvoting member representing the city public services
department.
      2.   In the event that no representative member of the above listed
groups or areas can be found willing to serve upon the committee, the
appointment of members in place thereof may be made from the citizens of the
city at large.
   B.   Compensation; Terms: All members of the committee shall serve without
compensation, and each member shall hold office until a successor is appointed
and qualified. Each member of the committee shall serve for a term of three (3)
years which term shall run from July 1, 2009 to June 30, 2012, and every three
(3) years thereafter for so long as the committee shall continue to operate.
Existing committee members may be appointed to serve additional terms at the
commencement of each new three (3) year period.
   C.   Election Of Chair; Rules Of Procedure; Meetings:
      1.   The committee shall annually elect a chair, vice chair and past
chair, and such other officers from its membership as it may deem necessary.
The chair shall supervise and coordinate all activities of the committee. The
vice chair shall assist the chair in all of the duties and functions and shall
take over the duties and responsibilities of the chair in the absence of the
chair. Upon election by the committee, the vice chair moves into the chair
position, and the chair moves into the past chair position. The chair, vice
chair and past chair serve a one year term, or until their successors are
elected. Members of the committee shall be assigned duties and responsibilities
by the chair.
      2.   The committee may establish rules and procedures, not inconsistent
with law or these ordinances, for conducting its meetings and business.
      3.   The committee shall meet at regular, stated times and places and the
committee shall provide in its rules for a method of calling special meetings.
      4.   The committee may designate such subcommittees from its membership
as it may deem necessary to assist in the performance of its duties.
      5.   The committee may recommend to the Mayor that a committee member be
removed for repeated failure to attend committee meetings.
      6.   All meetings shall be conducted in accordance with the Utah Public
and Open Meetings Law.
      7.   The committee shall take minutes of its meetings, copies of which
shall be filed with the City Recorder's Office as part of the official records
of the City.
   D.   Finances: Any monies generated for the City by the committee shall be
accounted for and expended in accordance with the budgeting and financial laws,
rules and regulations of the City through its Director of Management Services.
   E.   Staff Assistance: The Mayor shall provide such administrative support
and staff assistance as is determined by the Mayor to be necessary for the
operations of the committee, within existing budgetary restraints.
   F.   Vacancies; Removal Of Members: Vacancies occurring in the membership of
said committee other than by expiration of the limited term of such committee
shall be filled by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council,
for the unexpired term. The Mayor may, at any time, remove any member from the
committee for any reason.
(Ord. 2015-49, 11-24-2015)
3-22-3: DUTIES AND POWERS:
The Ogden Trails Network Committee shall act in an advisory capacity to the
City Council and the Mayor in all matters pertaining to nonmotorized trails
either in or connecting to Ogden City, specifically including, but not limiting
itself to, the following:
   A.   Trail Development: Location and development of trails along the East
Bench, Ogden and Weber Rivers and other connective trails to these systems;
   B.   Public Information: Development of public information about the trails;
   C.   Trail Access: Working with property owners to develop an appropriate
means to maintain trail access;
   D.   Implementation Of The General Plan: Implementing the East Bench trails
and Ogden River Parkway sections of the Ogden City general plan;
   E.   Grants: Applying for grants;
   F.   State And Federal Programs: Encouraging State and Federal support for
the nonmotorized trails and river parkway programs; and
   G.   Additional Action And Duties: Taking such other actions as appropriate
to effectuate the foregoing, and performing such other duties as assigned by
the City Council or the Mayor.
(1979 Code § 2.30.070; amd. Ord. 93-21, 5-25-1993; Ord. 2002-40, 9-17-2002)
3-22-4: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST; ETHICS:
Members of the Ogden Trails Network Committee shall be subject to the Municipal
Officers' and Employees' Ethics Act, Utah Code Annotated section 10-3-1301 et
seq., as amended, or any successor provision, and all applicable ordinances of
the City regarding conflicts of interest or ethics.
(1979 Code § 2.30.090; amd. Ord. 93-21, 5-25-1993; Ord. 2002-40, 9-17-2002)
3-22-5: SUNSET PROVISION:
Unless subsequently extended by appropriate action, the term of the Ogden
Trails Network Committee shall sunset and expire on June 30, 2021.
(Ord. 2018-19, 6-26-2018)
CHAPTER 23
URBAN FORESTRY ADVISORY COMMITTEE
SECTION:
3-23-1: Purpose
3-23-2: Organization
3-23-3: Powers And Duties
3-23-4: Conflicts Of Interest; Ethics
3-23-5: Sunset Provision
3-23-1: PURPOSE:
This Chapter is enacted and intended for the purpose of establishing, by
ordinance, the Urban Forestry Advisory Committee, whose objectives and purposes
shall be to advise the City Council and the Mayor in matters pertaining to the
City's urban forest. The provisions of this Chapter shall supersede Resolution
58-82, dated September 23, 1982, which Resolution originally established the
Committee, and any amendments thereto.
(1979 Code § 2.38.010; Ord. 93-48, 10-12-1993)
3-23-2: ORGANIZATION:
   A.   Membership; Compensation: There is hereby established an Urban Forestry
Advisory Committee, which shall consist of eleven (11) members who are either
residents of the City or provide expertise necessary in the performance of the
duties of the Committee, appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of
the City Council; but in no event shall Committee membership be comprised of
less than a majority of City residents. All members shall serve without
compensation.
(1979 Code § 2.38.020; Ord. 93-48, 10-12-1993; amd. Ord. 96-53, 11-5-1996)
   B.   Terms: Members shall be appointed to three (3) year terms; provided
however, that appointments made after November 1, 1992, shall be staggered with
the terms of three (3) members of the Committee expiring in each calendar year.
(1979 Code § 2.38.030; Ord. 93-48, 10-12-1993)
   C.   Vacancies; Removal: Vacancies occurring in the membership of the
Committee, other than by expiration of term of office, shall be filled by the
Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council, for the unexpired term.
Any Committee member may be removed at any time by the Mayor for any reason.
(1979 Code § 2.38.040; Ord. 93-48, 10-12-1993)
   D.   Meetings; Rules Of Procedure: The Committee may establish rules of
procedure for conducting its business. The Committee shall meet on a regular
basis, at regularly stated times and places and shall provide in its rules for
a method of calling special meetings. Minutes shall be kept of its meetings,
copies of which shall be filed with the City Recorder as part of the official
records of the City. Meetings of the Committee shall be conducted in accordance
with the Utah Public and Open Meetings law.
(1979 Code § 2.38.060; Ord. 93-48, 10-12-1993; amd. 1999 Code)
   E.   Chair: The Committee shall annually elect a chair who shall assume
responsibility for the discharge of the Committee's duties.
(1979 Code § 2.38.050; Ord. 93-48, 10-12-1993; amd. 1999 Code)
   F.   Administrative Support: The Mayor shall provide such administrative
support and staff assistance as is determined by the Mayor to be necessary for
the operations of the Committee, within existing budgetary restraints.
(1979 Code § 2.38.070; Ord. 93-48, 10-12-1993)
3-23-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Urban Forestry Advisory Committee shall act in an advisory capacity to the
City Council, the Mayor, and City administration in all matters pertaining to
the City's urban forest; specifically including, but not limiting itself to,
the following:
   A.   Study Problems And Determine Needs: To study the problems and determine
the needs of the urban forest in the City;
   B.   Recommend, Review And Update Plan: To recommend and then periodically
review and update an Ogden City community urban forest plan, which designates
the type and kind of trees to be planted upon Municipal streets and in parks;
   C.   Assist In Dissemination Of Information: To assist in the dissemination
of news and information regarding the selection, planting and maintenance of
trees within the corporate limits, whether they be on public or private
property, and to make such recommendations from time to time and to the City
Council, the Mayor and City administration as to desirable legislation
concerning the community urban forest program and activities for the City;
   D.   Consider Matters Within Scope: To consider, investigate, make findings,
report and recommend upon any special matter or question within the scope of
its work when requested by the City Council, the Mayor or City administration;
   E.   Submit Annual Report: The committee shall annually submit in writing to
the City Council and the Mayor a report of the committee's activities during
the preceding year, together with its recommendations for the following year.
   F.   Perform Other Assigned Duties: Such other duties as may be assigned by
the City Council or the Mayor.
(1979 Code §§ 2.38.080, 2.38.090; amd. Ord. 93-48, 10-12-1993)
3-23-4: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST; ETHICS:
Members of the Urban Forestry Advisory Committee shall be subject to the
Municipal Officers' and Employees' Ethics Act, Utah Code Annotated section 10-
3-1301 et seq., as amended, or any successor provision, and all applicable
ordinances of the City regarding conflicts of interest or ethics.
(1979 Code § 2.38.100; amd. Ord. 93-48, 10-12-1993)
3-23-5: SUNSET PROVISION:
Unless subsequently extended by appropriate action, the term of this committee
shall sunset and expire on June 30, 2022.
(Ord. 2018-41, 12-18-2018)
CHAPTER 24
RESERVED
CHAPTER 25
RESERVED
CHAPTER 26
RESERVED
(Per correspondence dated 8-15-2011)
CHAPTER 27
RESERVED
CHAPTER 28
RESERVED
 
CHAPTER 29
RESERVED
 
CHAPTER 30
COMMUNITY AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT CITIZENS ADVISORY COMMITTEE
SECTION:
3-30-1: Purpose
3-30-2: Organization
3-30-3: Powers And Duties
3-30-4: Sunset Provision
3-30-1: PURPOSE:
In 1994, the board of the Ogden redevelopment agency established, by resolution
1-94, a citizen advisory committee to assist the agency in the adoption of
policies, procedures and budgets related to neighborhood and economic
development activities using federal and state funding administered by the
agency on behalf of the city. In 2003, the city assumed full responsibility for
administration of such funds. This chapter is enacted and intended for the
purpose of reestablishing the citizen advisory committee as a city committee.
(Ord. 2010-10, 3-16-2010)
3-30-2: ORGANIZATION:
   A.   Establishment; Membership: There is hereby established the community
and economic development citizens advisory committee that shall consist of
eight (8) members, appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the
city council. The membership of the committee shall be comprised of two (2)
Ogden City residents, a representative of either the Ogden City planning
commission or Ogden City landmarks commission, a representative of the Ogden
housing authority, a person representing the interests of Ogden businesses, and
three (3) at large representatives from organizations that participate in
community and economic development in Ogden. The entities from which the at
large membership may be chosen include, but are not limited to: education,
business, nonprofit service organizations, the Ogden City multicultural
advisory committee, human service providers, homeless service providers, and
Ogden neighborhoods.
   B.   Terms, Vacancies: Members of the committee shall serve for a term of
three (3) years, or until their successor is appointed. Vacancies occurring in
the membership of the committee other than by expiration of term of office
shall be filled by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council
for the unexpired term. Members appointed midterm shall be eligible for
appointment to a full term. Members may be appointed to a maximum of three (3)
full successive terms, in addition to any partial term served.
   C.   Chair And Vice Chair, Organization Of Committee: The committee shall
organize itself and annually elect a chair and vice chair of the committee.
   D.   Compensation; Meetings; Rules Of Procedure: All members of the
committee shall serve without compensation. All meetings of the committee shall
be open to the public and shall comply with the Utah open and public meetings
act. The committee shall keep written minutes of its meetings, and a recording.
Copies of written minutes shall be filed in the city recorder's office. The
committee may adopt rules and procedures, not inconsistent with law or these
ordinances, for conducting its business and meetings.
   E.   Administrative Support: The mayor will provide such administrative
support and staff as is determined by the mayor to be necessary for the
operations of the committee.
   F.   Removal: Any member of the community and economic development citizens
advisory committee may be removed at any time by the mayor for any reason.
(Ord. 2010-10, 3-16-2010)
3-30-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The community and economic development citizens advisory committee shall
annually review the policies, procedures, and budgets related to neighborhood
and economic development activities in which the following funding sources are
utilized:
   A.   Community development block grant;
   B.   Economic development initiative;
   C.   HOME program;
   D.   Special purpose grant; and
   E.   Any other federal or state grants:
      1.   Administered by the community and business development department
for the purpose of neighborhood or economic development activities,
      2.   The terms of which require citizen participation in the process of
authorizing the use of such funds, and
      3.   No other committee has been specifically established for such
purpose.
(Ord. 2010-10, 3-16-2010)
3-30-4: SUNSET PROVISION:
Unless subsequently extended by appropriate action, the term of this committee
shall sunset and expire on November 30, 2020.
(Ord. 2017-4, 2-21-2017)
CHAPTER 31
OGDEN NATURAL RESOURCES AND SUSTAINABILITY STEWARDSHIP COMMITTEE
SECTION:
3-31-1: Purpose
3-31-2: Organization
3-31-3: Duties And Powers
3-31-4: Conflicts Of Interest; Ethics
3-31-5: Representation
3-31-6: Annual Reporting Requirements
3-31-7: Sunset Provision
3-31-1: PURPOSE:
Whereas, this chapter is enacted and intended for the purpose of establishing,
by ordinance, the Ogden Natural Resources and Sustainability Stewardship
Committee, hereinafter referred to as the committee, whose objectives and
purposes shall be to advise the City Council and the Mayor in matters
pertaining to citizen education programs relating to sustainable environmental
practices and responsible stewardship of the City's natural resources.
(Ord. 2018-35, 11-20-2018)
3-31-2: ORGANIZATION:
   A.   Base Membership; Appointment: There is hereby established an advisory
committee to be known as the Ogden Natural Resources and Sustainability
Stewardship Committee, which shall consist of not less than seven (7) voting
members, but not more than nine (9) voting members, appointed by the Mayor,
with the advice and consent of the City Council. Base members shall include,
insofar as possible:
      1.   One member from the business or education community.
      2.   One member from each of the four (4) Municipal districts, where
possible and practical.
      3.   Up to four (4) members from citizens of the City at large.
      4.   One nonvoting member representing the City Public Services
Department.
      5.   One nonvoting member from the City Council staff.
In the event that no representative member of the above listed groups or areas
can be found willing to serve upon the committee, the appointment of members in
place thereof may be made from the citizens of the City at large.
   B.   Student Membership; Appointment: In addition to the base membership
established in subsection A of this section, up to three (3) additional voting
student members may be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of
the City Council. Student members shall be at least fifteen (15) years of age,
but not more than eighteen (18) years of age at the time of appointment, and be
either a resident of Ogden City or attend a secondary school located in Ogden
City. Insofar as possible, student appointees shall represent different
secondary schools (e.g., Ben Lomond High School, Ogden High School, DaVinci
Academy).
   C.   Compensation; Terms: All members of the committee shall serve without
compensation, except that they may be reimbursed for reasonable expenses
incurred while acting in their official capacity with pre-approval.
   D.   Term: Appointments for base members of the committee are for three (3)
year terms provided, however, that of the initial appointments, three (3)
members shall be appointed to two (2) year terms. Each member shall hold office
until a successor is appointed and qualified and for so long as the committee
shall continue to operate. Existing committee members may be appointed to serve
additional terms at the commencement of each new three (3) year period. No
member may serve for more than three (3) consecutive three (3) year terms.
Appointments for student members of the committee shall be for one year. Each
student member shall hold office until a successor is appointed and qualified
and for so long as the committee shall continue to operate. Existing student
committee members may be appointed to serve an additional term at the
commencement of a new one year period. Insofar as possible, no student member
may serve for more than two (2) consecutive one year terms.
   E.   Election Of Chair; Rules Of Procedure; Meetings:
      1.   Election: The committee shall annually elect a Chair, Vice Chair and
Past Chair, and such other officers from its membership as it may deem
necessary. The Chair shall supervise and coordinate all activities of the
committee. The Vice Chair shall assist the Chair in all of the duties and
functions and shall take over the duties and responsibilities of the Chair in
the absence of the Chair. Upon election by the committee, the Vice Chair moves
into the Chair position, and the Chair moves into the Past Chair position. The
Chair, Vice Chair and Past Chair serve a one year term, or until their
successors are elected. Members of the committee shall be assigned duties and
responsibilities by the Chair.
      2.   Rules And Procedures: The committee may establish rules and
procedures, not inconsistent with law or ordinances, for conducting its
meetings and business.
      3.   Meeting Times: The committee shall meet at regular, stated times and
places, on at least a quarterly basis, and the committee shall provide in its
rules for a method of calling special meetings.
      4.   Subcommittees: The committee may designate such subcommittees from
its membership as it may deem necessary to assist in the performance of its
duties.
      5.   Removal: The committee may recommend to the Mayor that a committee
member be removed for unexcused absence for three (3) consecutive meetings or
attendance below seventy five percent (75%) of scheduled meetings over an
eighteen (18) month period.
      6.   Conducting Meetings: All meetings shall be conducted in accordance
with the Utah Open and Public Meetings Act, as prescribed in Utah Code
Annotated section 52-4.
      7.   Minutes: The committee shall take minutes of its meetings, copies of
which shall be filed with the City Recorder's Office as part of the official
records of the City.
      8.   Quorum; Establishing: For the purposes of establishing a quorum, the
number of base membership appointments shall be used.
   F.   Finances: Any monies generated for the City by the committee shall be
accounted for and expended in accordance with the budgeting and financial laws,
rules and regulations of the City through its Director of Management Services.
   G.   Staff Assistance: The Mayor shall provide such administrative support
and staff assistance as is determined by the Mayor to be necessary for the
operations of the committee, within existing budgetary restraints.
   H.   Vacancies; Removal Of Members: Vacancies occurring in the membership of
said committee other than by expiration of the limited term of such committee
shall be filled by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council,
for the unexpired term. The Mayor may, at any time, remove any member from the
committee for any reason.
(Ord. 2019-14, 3-26-2019)
3-31-3: DUTIES AND POWERS:
   A.   Educational Programs: The Ogden Natural Resources and Sustainability
Stewardship Committee shall act in an advisory capacity to the City Council and
the Mayor in all matters pertaining to educational programs relating to
environmental sustainability and responsible stewardship of natural resources,
specifically including, but not limited to, the following:
      1.   Waste reduction and recycling;
      2.   Disposal of hazardous materials;
      3.   Power and water conservation;
      4.   Air quality impacts; and
      5.   Open space maintenance.
   B.   Policies And Programs: At the request of the Council or Mayor, the
committee may recommend environmental policies and programs that will assist
the City in becoming a more sustainable community.
   C.   Grants: Identifying opportunities for City grant funding applications
relative to environmental sustainability and stewardship of natural resources.
   D.   State And Federal Programs: Encouraging City pursuit of State and
Federal support for sustainability and natural resource conservation programs.
   E.   Additional Action And Duties: Taking such other actions as appropriate
to effectuate the foregoing, and performing such other duties as assigned by
the City Council or the Mayor.
   F.   Serve In Advisory Capacity: The committee shall serve in an advisory
capacity to the City Council and Mayor. The committee shall address issues and
assignments as directed by the City Council or Mayor, but shall not have policy
adoption or enforcement authority.
(Ord. 2018-35, 11-20-2018)
3-31-4: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST; ETHICS:
Members of the Ogden Natural Resources and Sustainability Stewardship Committee
shall be subject to the Municipal Officers' and Employees' Ethics Act, Utah
Code Annotated section 10-3-1301 et seq., as amended, or any successor
provision, and all applicable ordinances of the City regarding conflicts of
interest or ethics.
(Ord. 2018-35, 11-20-2018)
3-31-5: REPRESENTATION:
Service on the committee does not prohibit members from speaking in an
individual capacity or participating in government as members of the general
public. In so doing, committee members shall clarify that they are speaking or
acting in their individual capacity and not on behalf of the committee. Public
statements regarding committee action shall only be expressed with prior
authorization being granted at a regular or special meeting of the committee.
The Chair will speak for the committee when and as directed by the committee.
(Ord. 2018-35, 11-20-2018)
3-31-6: ANNUAL REPORTING REQUIREMENTS:
The Ogden Natural Resources and Sustainability Stewardship Committee will file
a report with the City Council and Mayor by August 1st of each year. The report
should include the committee's activities during the preceding year, together
with its recommendations for the following year.
(Ord. 2018-35, 11-20-2018)
3-31-7: SUNSET PROVISION:
Unless subsequently extended by appropriate action, the term of the Ogden
Natural Resources and Sustainability Stewardship Committee shall sunset and
expire on December 31, 2021.
(Ord. 2018-35, 11-20-2018)
TITLE 4
REVENUE, FINANCE AND GENERAL ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
FINANCIAL ADMINISTRATION
ARTICLE A.  GENERAL FINANCIAL ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
4-1A-1: Uniform Fiscal Procedures Act
4-1A-2: Finance Officer; Appointment
4-1A-3: Budgetary Expenditures; Authority
4-1A-4: General Duties, Regulations And Requirements
4-1A-5: Use Of General Fund Monies Repaid From Tax Increment
4-1A-6: Debts Owed City
4-1A-7: Claims Against City; Risk Management Committee
4-1A-8: Nondepartmental Accounts Within The General Fund
4-1A-1: UNIFORM FISCAL PROCEDURES ACT:
   A.   Financial Reporting Procedures: The accounting, budgeting and financial
reporting procedures of the city shall be in accordance with the uniform fiscal
procedures act, Utah Code Annotated title 10, chapter 6, or any successor
provisions.
   B.   Departments; Authority: For the purposes outlined in the uniform fiscal
procedures act, a department shall be those departments outlined in the city
administrative code 1 , and shall also include the office of the mayor, the
office of the city council, the city attorney's office and any other office
outlined in the administrative code which is provided with a separate
departmental budget under the adopted city budget. The heads of such offices
shall have the same budgetary authority as department directors.
(1979 Code § 3.02.010; Ord. 94-31, 7-26-1994)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 2, chapter 4 of this code.
4-1A-2: FINANCE OFFICER; APPOINTMENT:
The mayor shall appoint, with the advice and consent of the city council, a
finance officer who shall perform the financial duties and responsibilities of
the finance director as established by state law. The finance officer shall be
bonded as required in title 2, chapter 5 of this code.
(1979 Code § 3.02.020; Ord. 94-31, 7-26-1994)
4-1A-3: BUDGETARY EXPENDITURES; AUTHORITY:
   A.   Director Of Management Services: The director of management services
may approve:
      1.   Payroll checks, prepared in accordance with the pay plan;
      2.   Payroll related expenses;
      3.   Routine, nondepartmental expenditures for the daily operations of
the city, such as utility bills, rents, building and grounds maintenance,
supplies and materials;
      4.   Payments on city approved contracts; and
      5.   Capital improvement expenditures authorized by the city council
under the capital improvement fund adopted for the current fiscal year.
   B.   Department Directors: Department directors may approve any expenditure
of funds, not exceeding thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00), which is
authorized under the approved budget for their respective departments. A
department director may authorize a division manager, officer or employee
within the department, to approve such departmental expenditures by filing a
letter of certification identifying the division manager, officer or employee
and describing the type of expenditures and the dollar limit amount for any one
expenditure; provided that any officer or employee who is not a division
manager may only be authorized to approve expenditures not exceeding one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Any departmental expenditure exceeding thirty
thousand dollars ($30,000.00) shall be approved by the mayor or the chief
administrative officer, if so designated by the mayor.
   C.   Mayor; Budget Officer: The mayor shall have such powers as designated
to the "budget officer" under the uniform fiscal procedures act and may
designate an officer of the city to act as the budget officer in the mayor's
absence.
   D.   Office Of City Council: The executive director of the city council may
approve any expenditure of funds, not exceeding thirty thousand dollars
($30,000.00), which is authorized under the approved budget for the city
council office. The executive director may authorize other council staff to
approve expenditures under five hundred dollars ($500.00) by filing a letter of
certification with the finance officer identifying the authorized staff and
describing the type of expenditures and the dollar limit amount which may be
approved by the applicable staff person. Any expenditure exceeding thirty
thousand dollars ($30,000.00) shall be approved by the chair of the city
council. Transfers of unencumbered or unexpended appropriations from one
expenditure account to another, within the departmental budget approved for the
office of the city council, shall be approved by the chair of the city council.
(Ord. 2011-24, 4-26-2011)
4-1A-4: GENERAL DUTIES, REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Procedures For Accounting Principles: The director of management
services shall establish procedures and practices, based on good and sound
accounting principles, to promptly receive, record and account for all money
collected by any city office.
   B.   Fees Collected; Accountability: All elective and appointive officers
shall be strictly accountable for all fees and monies collected by or paid to
them or to any deputy or assistant in their respective departments. Monies
collected within any department or office shall be deposited with the city
treasurer on a daily basis.
   C.   Receipt For Payment Of Fees: Receipts or other evidence of payment
shall be issued on forms provided or approved by the city treasurer or his/her
designee for all fees and monies paid into the city treasury, consistent with
the provisions of Utah Code Annotated section 10-6-142, as amended, or any
successor statute.
   D.   Recordkeeping: It shall be the duty of every employee or officer who is
authorized to receive any fees for official services, or who makes any
collections, to keep a record, such as a cash register tape, receipt book or
cash ledger, on which shall be entered an exact and full account, in detail, of
all fees, commissions, compensations or collections of whatever nature or kind,
with the date collected, the name of the payor (except where a cash register
tape is used), and the nature of the collection in each case, except where the
mayor shall determine that such records or particular informational items are
impractical or unnecessary.
(1979 Code §§ 3.02.040, 3.02.050, 3.02.060, 3.02.070; Ord. 94-31, 7-26-1994)
4-1A-5: USE OF GENERAL FUND MONIES REPAID FROM TAX INCREMENT:
All tax increment monies which are paid to the general fund to reimburse the
general fund for debt incurred in any district shall be placed in a specific
revenue account within the capital improvements plan fund and shall be used for
specific capital projects authorized in the budget to receive tax increment
funding; except that all or a portion of such monies may be allocated as part
of the city budget for contractual obligations of the city with Weber County
and Weber State University regarding the David Eccles Conference Center and the
Peery's Egyptian Theater.
(1979 Code § 3.02.080; Ord. 97-57, 6-25-1997, eff. 7-1-1997)
4-1A-6: DEBTS OWED CITY:
   A.   Reporting Required: When any proper charge against any person in favor
of the city becomes known to any city official or employee, the officer or
employee must immediately report the same to the city treasurer.
(1979 Code § 3.04.010; amd. Ord. 94-52, 10-25-1994)
   B.   Duties Of City Treasurer: The city treasurer shall keep a record of all
such notices of indebtedness and shall mail to the debtor a statement or a bill
for the sum, directing that the amounts due thereon be paid, and he shall use
all reasonable efforts to collect the same.
(1979 Code § 3.04.020; amd. Ord. 94-52, 10-25-1994)
   C.   Delinquent Accounts; City Attorney Authority: The City Treasurer shall
refer all delinquent accounts not paid within a reasonable time to the City
Attorney who shall take such action as he or she deems appropriate to effect
the collection of all such claims. The City Attorney will adopt guidelines for
the disposition of debts owed to the City which have no reasonable expectation
of being collected; provided, that any debt exceeding ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) may not be written off as uncollectible unless and until reviewed
and approved by the Mayor.
(1979 Code § 3.04.030; amd. Ord. 94-52, 10-25-1994)
   D.   Payment Procedures; Returned Checks Or Drafts; Service Charge: All
monies owed to the City under contract, license fees, assessments, fines,
forfeitures or any other payments due by any party shall be paid to the City in
legal tender of the United States of America; provided however, that the Mayor
may authorize City agents and employees to accept checks, drafts or bills of
exchange in payment, if the tendering party agrees to pay a service charge
adopted in Chapter 6 of this Title on such checks, drafts or bills of exchange
which are dishonored or returned to the City for any reason whatsoever, which
charge shall be in addition to remedies available under State law if suit is
commenced. The tendering party shall be deemed to have agreed to the foregoing
service charge by issuing such check, draft or bill of exchange. However, where
convenient and where such checks or drafts are accepted as a matter of course,
the City departments are directed to post a sign or other written notice to
advise the other party of such charge at the place where the check, draft or
bill of exchange is tendered. All City agents or employees receiving payment on
behalf of the City are directed and required to receive payments strictly in
accordance with this subsection.
(1979 Code § 3.04.040; Ord. 94-52, 10-25-1994; amd. Ord. 98-43, 6-16-1998, eff.
7-1-1998)
4-1A-7: CLAIMS AGAINST CITY; RISK MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE:
   A.   Claim Defined: Any claim or cause of action for money or damages
against the City or against an employee.
(1979 Code § 3.08.020C; Ord. 94-32, 7-26-1994)
   B.   Risk Management:
      1.   Policy: The City, by a City Council Resolution 60-91, dated November
7, 1991, adopted a formal policy committing the City to sound risk management,
and a Risk Management Committee was established to review all City accidents,
claims and losses by an Administrative Order 420-91, dated November 19, 1991.
It is now deemed desirable to reduce the establishment of the Risk Management
Committee to ordinance form, hereby repealing any and all prior orders dealing
with the same subject.
(1979 Code § 3.08.040; Ord. 94-32, 7-26-1994)
      2.   Committee Established:
         a.   There is hereby established a Risk Management Committee which
shall consist of the following members:
            (1)   The City Attorney, who shall act as the chair of the
Committee;
            (2)   The Director of Management Services;
            (3)   The City employee designated or appointed as the City Risk
Manager;
            (4)   Department directors, division managers and staff personnel
invited as appropriate.
         b.   The Risk Management Committee shall meet on a regular basis, at
least quarterly, and keep written minutes of each meeting. The Committee may
establish procedures for the operation of the Committee.
         c.   The Risk Management Committee shall review all City claims and
may review other City accidents and losses as determined to be necessary in
furtherance of the City's risk management policy.
         d.   The Risk Management Committee may either act as Ogden City's
Accident Review Committee or appoint a subcommittee to report to the Risk
Management Committee. Committee findings or concerns will be reported to the
appropriate department director or division manager.
         e.   Meetings of the Risk Management Committee will not be deemed to
be a public body with the authority to make decisions regarding the public's
business. Decisions of the Committee are mere recommendations which are by
their very nature part and parcel of the attorney-client privilege.
(1979 Code § 3.08.050; Ord. 94-32, 7-26-1994)
   C.   Filing Of Claims:
      1.   Any person having a claim against the City or against a City
employee for an act or omission occurring during the performance of the
employee's duties, within the scope of employment, or under color of authority,
shall file a written notice of claim with the City within one year after the
claim arises. The notice of claim shall conform with the requirements of the
Utah Governmental Immunity Act 1  and shall be deemed filed with the City when
duly served upon the City Recorder.
      2.   Within ninety (90) days of the filing of a claim, the City or its
insurance carrier shall act thereon and notify the claimant in writing of its
approval or denial. A claim shall be deemed to have been denied if at the end
of the ninety (90) day period the City or its insurance carrier has failed to
approve or deny the claim.
(1979 Code § 3.08.020A, 3.08.020B; Ord. 94-32, 7-26-1994)
   D.   Standards For Payment: Recommendations of the Risk Management Committee
and the settlement of disputed claims shall be based upon:
      1.   The liability of the City based on the laws of negligence, the
failure to perform prescribed duties by employees of the City, legal
obligations or defenses created by statute or ordinance, or any other viable
legal theory.
      2.   The rules or bylaws of any risk management pool of which the City is
a member.
      3.   The estimated costs of litigation as compared to the claim amount,
with due consideration given to any public policy questions involved in
settling the claim.
      4.   The attainment of an identifiable public purpose.
(1979 Code § 3.08.060; Ord. 94-32, 7-26-1994)
   E.   Payment Of Claims: The Finance Officer shall pre-audit before payment
all claims and demands against the City. Before payment, the Finance Officer
shall certify on the voucher, purchase order, or check copy, as appropriate,
that:
      1.   The claim has been pre-audited and documented;
      2.   The claim has been approved by purchase order approved in accordance
with City ordinances and applicable administrative rules and regulations of the
City;
      3.   The claim is within the lawful debt limit of the City; and
      4.   The claim does not over expend the appropriate departmental budget
established by the City Council.
(1979 Code § 3.08.010; Ord. 94-32, 7-26-1994)
   F.   Compromise Of Claims: Upon recommendation of the Risk Management
Committee and with the advice of the City Attorney, the Chief Administrative
Officer or the Director of Management Services, if so designated by the Chief
Administrative Officer, is authorized in his or her discretion to compromise
and settle disputed or doubtful claims against the City when the total amount
to be paid by the City, either in settlement of the entire claim or as a
deductible payable by the City, does not exceed ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00). Other disputed claims against the City may be compromised and
settled only with the approval of the Mayor. Claim settlements requiring the
expenditure of funds not authorized in the current budget shall require
approval of the City Council.
(1979 Code § 3.08.030; Ord. 94-32, 7-26-1994)
   G.   Cooperation In Investigations: All department directors shall cooperate
in every possible manner with the City Attorney's office and the Risk
Management Committee in assisting with factual investigation of all claims.
(1979 Code § 3.08.070; Ord. 94-32, 7-26-1994)
   H.   Reports; Attorney Work Product: Investigative reports of the department
directors or their employees prepared for the risk management committee,
minutes and recommendations of the risk management committee concerning claims,
and any writing made a part of the investigatory stage of any claim, are hereby
declared to be a part of the work product of the city attorney's office.
(1979 Code § 3.08.080; Ord. 94-32, 7-26-1994)
 
Notes
1 1. U.C.A. title 63, chapter 30.
4-1A-8: NONDEPARTMENTAL ACCOUNTS WITHIN THE GENERAL FUND:
   A.   There is created within the general fund of the city's annual budget a
group of activity accounts authorizing expenditures that are labeled as
"nondepartmental". Nondepartmental accounts reflect expenditures, which are not
applicable to any one department or office of the city, as defined in the
administrative code of the city 1 , but are definitely part of the cost of
general government.
   B.   Except as provided in subsection E of this section, approval of
expenditures from the nondepartmental accounts may only be made by:
      1.   The mayor, or, if so designated by the mayor, the chief
administrative officer or the director of management services; or
      2.   The director of management services, pursuant to subsection 4-1A-3A
of this article.
   C.   Nondepartmental accounts shall be considered to be encumbered for the
stated purpose of the account, and are not transferable to another
nondepartmental account, except by ordinance or joint resolution of the mayor
and city council.
   D.   To the extent possible and practicable all expenditures in
nondepartmental should be apportioned to the various departments and/or offices
of the city.
   E.   There is hereby created within nondepartmental an account to be known
and referred to as "fund balance". Monies appropriated to fund balance are
appropriated pursuant to section 10-6-116, Utah Code Annotated, and as such may
not be utilized for other budgetary purposes unless and until:
      1.   Fund balance, both appropriated and unappropriated, exceeds five
percent (5%) of the total revenues of the general fund; and
      2.   Such monies have been appropriated for such other purpose by further
budgetary action of the city council.
(Ord. 2001-45, 6-19-2001; amd. Ord. 2003-41, 7-15-2003)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 2, chapter 4 of this code.
ARTICLE B.  CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT FUND
SECTION:
4-1B-1: Definitions
4-1B-2: Capital Improvement Budget; Preparation
4-1B-3: Planning Commission Review
4-1B-4: Budgetary Restrictions
4-1B-5: Reporting
4-1B-6: Emergency Expenditures
4-1B-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms shall have the indicated meanings as used in this article:
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT FUND: The fund created in the city's annual budget which is
dedicated to financing capital improvement projects.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PLAN: The plan adopted and approved by the Ogden City
council for the scheduling, financing and construction of capital improvements
to be undertaken by the city in the upcoming fiscal year and projected to be
undertaken in the following four (4) fiscal years. For the 2012 fiscal year,
the capital improvement plan shall include all currently funded projects as of
September 30 of the preceding fiscal year, projects proposed for funding in the
upcoming fiscal year, and perpetual projects. In subsequent years, the plan
shall contain the following: projects funded as of September 30 of the
preceding fiscal year; projects proposed for funding in the upcoming fiscal
year; and perpetual projects. The "capital improvement plan" is not adopted as
part of the Ogden City general plan, but is intended to be in compliance with
such plan.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROJECTS: A. Projects which require debt financing or
borrowing;
   B.   Public facilities that may be financed in whole or in part by the
imposition of impact fees, in accordance with the provisions of title 7,
chapter 9 of this code;
   C.   Projects which will result in the acquisition or long term lease of
land;
   D.   Projects which anticipate the expenditure of city funds, or funds of
private donors, in excess of thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) for the
design and/or construction of any addition to the city's physical plant,
including buildings, streets, utility lines, parks, or other public facilities;
   E.   Projects which anticipate the expenditure of city funds, or funds of
private donors, in excess of thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) for the major
rehabilitation or reconstruction of an element of the city's physical plant
which substantially enhances the value or useful life of the element; or
   F.   Studies and investigations undertaken pursuant to subsection 4-1B-4F or
G of this article are not considered capital improvement projects;
   G.   Public arts projects funded through the public art program pursuant to
article C of this chapter are not considered capital improvement projects.
(Ord. 2016-23, 4-12-2016)
4-1B-2: CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT BUDGET; PREPARATION:
   A.   Policy: Beginning with the 2012 fiscal year, the capital improvement
plan shall be submitted to the city council by November 1 of such preceding
fiscal year. It is the intent of the city council that projects will not be
funded by the capital improvement fund or carried out through expenditures of
private donors, other than projects for general maintenance, unless such
project has been approved by the city council as part of an adopted plan or
plan amendment, or has been proposed in response to a previous policy decision
or direction of the city council. Although not part of the capital improvement
plan, at the time of submittal of the capital improvement plan, the
administration shall also submit a list of projects identified in an adopted
community plan or corridor plan that may be considered for inclusion in a
future capital improvement plan.
   B.   Submission To City Council; Information: Any proposed capital
improvement project, with an anticipated cost in excess of thirty thousand
dollars ($30,000.00), shall be submitted to the city council, in a form
acceptable to the city council, with an individual project brief which includes
the following information:
      1.   A statement of the purpose of the project;
      2.   A description of the project, which includes:
         a.   Sufficient narrative to facilitate prioritization of the
projects; and
         b.   A map depicting the proposed location of the project, provided
that no map shall be required for major maintenance work not connected to a
specific location;
      3.   A detailed explanation of why the project is needed. Such
explanation to include, as applicable: applicable service areas or measures for
delivery of services, specific deficiencies of existing facilities, comparison
of the operating and maintenance costs of existing versus new facilities,
current and predicted utilization, anticipated revenues and savings, and other
benefits to be derived;
      4.   A description of how the project meets existing council policies,
directives or implements adopted plans or programs of the city;
      5.   Current status of the project;
      6.   The timing requirements of the project, including the effects of
deferring the project to later years;
      7.   The anticipated schedule and estimated budget for planning and
design, land acquisition, construction and any other associated capital
improvement needs associated with the project;
      8.   Proposed source of funding and a description of other funding
resources and financing techniques which have been explored or may be
available;
      9.   The impact on the annual operating budget for the three (3) years
following the completion of the project, including an operating and maintenance
impact statement;
      10.   The numerical priority of the project as ranked among proposed
projects to be funded through general funds, enterprise funds and Weber County
recreation, arts, museums, parks (RAMP) funds;
      11.   Any other information regarding the history of the project or
anticipated impacts of the project; and
      12.   The contact person within administration who can address other
questions of the city council regarding the project.
   C.   Plan Coordination: Prior to submittal to the city council, the
management services department, in consultation with other departments as
necessary, shall undertake a final review of the capital improvement plan to
ensure accuracy and consistency with established priorities.
   D.   Plan Amendments: Proposed amendments to the capital improvement plan
shall be submitted to the city council and planning commission on a project by
project basis. Proposed amendments that do not require planning commission
review need only be accompanied by a transmittal outlining the justification
for the change and identifying changes to the original project brief, if
applicable, together with any other documentation required for the budget
opening.
   E.   Private Donations: A private donor desiring to make a donation to the
city, the total value of which exceeds ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), for a
capital improvement project as defined in this article shall deliver to the
city a signed written donation statement:
      1.   Identifying the CIP project and describing the purposes for which
the donation is given;
      2.   Identifying the total value of the donation;
      3.   Identifying the date the funds, goods or services are delivered to
the city;
      4.   Certifying that the donation is voluntary;
      5.   Certifying that the donation is made without condition; or,
outlining the conditions of the donation, if any.
A copy of the donation statement shall be attached to a copy of the project
brief and filed with the city recorder within thirty (30) days of the city's
receipt of the donation.
(Ord. 2015-57, 12-1-2015)
4-1B-3: PLANNING COMMISSION REVIEW:
The capital improvement plan shall be submitted to the planning commission to
determine compliance with the Ogden City general plan, prior to city council
adoption of the plan. It is the intention of the city council that proposed
amendments to the capital improvement plan, including new capital improvement
projects proposed by the mayor or city council, project modifications, and
reprioritization of existing but unfunded projects, be submitted to the
planning commission to determine compliance with the Ogden City general plan,
prior to city council adoption of such amendment. Proposed amendments to the
plan shall be submitted to the planning commission concurrent with submission
to the city council. The planning commission shall complete its review of the
plan and any proposed amendments and report its determination to the city
council within forty five (45) days of submission. This section does not apply
to plan amendments that, as determined by the planning manager, do not contain
substantive changes to location, land use configuration or project scope, that
are purely budgetary in nature, or that do not otherwise require planning
commission review to determine compliance with the general plan. The city
council may require the planning commission to review any plan amendment by a
majority vote of its members.
(Ord. 2012-26, 5-15-2012)
4-1B-4: BUDGETARY RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Funding: All capital improvement projects which anticipate the
expenditure of funds in excess of thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) shall be
funded by monies appropriated in the capital improvement fund or in the capital
improvement accounts of any enterprise fund. No monies appropriated in the
operating budgets of the city shall be used for capital improvement projects
above such amount.
   B.   Project Listing; Savings: Any capital improvement project which
anticipates the expenditure of funds in excess of thirty thousand dollars
($30,000.00) shall be listed separately in the capital improvement fund or in
the capital improvement accounts of any enterprise fund. Monies appropriated
for such projects may not be used for other capital improvement projects
without the approval of the city council and any savings realized in the
completion of the project shall be transferred to fund balance for future
appropriation.
   C.   Division Of Project Prohibited: Whenever the estimated cost of a
capital improvement project exceeds thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00), the
same shall not be so divided as to reduce the estimated construction cost below
the required amount.
   D.   Contingency Account: A contingency account shall be created within the
general fund category of the capital improvement fund which may be used only
for cost overruns of authorized general fund projects within the capital
improvement fund. No more than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) may
be expended from this account during a fiscal year without additional city
council approval. The amount of contingency fund monies which may be used for
any one project shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the budgeted cost of such
project, subject to the emergency expenditure provisions of section
4-1B-6 of this article.
   E.   Future Projects Account: A future projects account shall be created
within the general fund category of the capital improvement fund which is a
reserve for capital improvements for the purpose of financing future specific
capital improvement projects, under the adopted capital improvement plan. The
reserves may accumulate from year to year until the accumulated total is
sufficient to permit economical expenditure for the specified purposes.
Disbursements from this fund shall be made only by transfer to a revenue or
transfer account within the capital improvement fund, by a budget appropriation
in a budget for the fund adopted in the manner provided by the uniform fiscal
procedures act for Utah cities, chapter 6, title 10, Utah Code Annotated, 1953,
as amended. If the monies are intended for specific projects pending final
design or other condition of funding, the monies may be segregated in a
subaccount designated for such project.
   F.   Study Account: A study account shall be created within the general fund
category of the capital improvement fund which may be used only for studies and
investigations undertaken to determine the feasibility of new capital
improvement projects. Such account shall not be funded in excess of sixty
thousand dollars ($60,000.00) at any one time during a fiscal year. Such
studies and investigations include, but are not limited to, market studies,
alternatives analyses, preliminary design and engineering, and grant
applications. The mayor, or the mayor's designee, shall provide a quarterly
report to the city council regarding any expenditure from the study account,
describing the nature and purpose of the study or investigation, and any new
capital improvement projects that may be proposed as a result of such study or
investigation. In the event a project is funded after such study or
investigation, the cost of such study or investigation shall be paid from the
approved project and the expended funds shall be returned to the study account,
up to the sixty thousand dollar ($60,000.00) limit. Returned funds in excess of
the study account limit shall be deposited into the contingency account
established in subsection D of this section.
   G.   City Council Study Account: The city council may establish a study
account to undertake feasibility studies, for solely legislative purposes,
related to potential capital improvement projects. Any account established for
this purpose shall not be funded in excess of sixty thousand dollars
($60,000.00) at any one time during a fiscal year. In the event a project is
funded after such study, the cost of such study shall be paid from the approved
project and the expended funds shall be returned to the city council study
account up to the sixty thousand dollar ($60,000.00) limit. Returned funds in
excess of the account limit shall be deposited into the contingency account
established in subsection D of this section.
(Ord. 2012-26, 5-15-2012)
4-1B-5: REPORTING:
   A.   Quarterly Reports: The mayor, or the mayor's designee, shall provide a
quarterly report to the city council regarding the status of each capital
improvement project over thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) in value which
report shall be in a form approved by the city council and will include at a
minimum the following information:
      1.   Budgeted amount for the project;
      2.   Estimated total costs, as revised by final design estimates, actual
contract amounts, or cost overruns;
      3.   The costs to date;
      4.   Description and review of anticipated cost overruns;
      5.   Estimated completion date;
      6.   Whether the project is on schedule;
      7.   The status of each capital improvement project funded prior to the
2012 fiscal year, regardless of project value, until such project is completed.
   B.   Cost Overruns: The mayor, or the mayor's designee, shall as soon as
practicable inform the city council of any anticipated cost overruns, exceeding
five percent (5%) of the budgeted amount, or one hundred fifty thousand dollars
($150,000.00) whichever is lesser. In addition to describing the nature of the
cost overrun, the mayor shall describe possible options and the recommended
course of action. During the quarterly project status report, all cost overruns
anticipated to be in excess of five percent (5%) of the amount budgeted for the
project shall be reviewed.
(Ord. 2012-26, 5-15-2012)
4-1B-6: EMERGENCY EXPENDITURES:
   A.   In the event of an "emergency", as defined in subsection C of this
section, which emergency requires expenditures in excess of the budgeted amount
or amount of available contingency fund monies under subsection 4-1B-4D of this
article, the applicable department director may authorize such expenditure from
the following monies, subject to the approval of the mayor, or the mayor's
designee:
      1.   Other available and unencumbered amounts within the department;
      2.   The contingency account established in subsection 4-1B-4D of this
article;
      3.   Monies designated for other specific capital improvement projects
within the applicable department or enterprise fund; or
      4.   Monies designated for capital improvement projects not within the
applicable department or enterprise fund.
   B.   If expenditures are made for an emergency pursuant to subsection A of
this section, the mayor, or the mayor's designee, shall notify the city council
of such expenditure by the next working day following such budgetary
authorization and shall provide a written report within ten (10) working days
describing the nature of the emergency and the source of funding. The city
council will review such budgetary action at the next available city council
meeting following submission of the written report. As part of such review, the
city council will either ratify the source of funds used or take such other
budgetary actions as are determined to be appropriate in order to fund the
costs of such emergency.
   C.   As used in this section, "emergency" shall mean any circumstance or
situation not reasonably anticipated which: 1) if construction or repair of a
capital improvement were not immediately undertaken would threaten immediate
injury or damage to persons or property; 2) would delay a capital improvement
project in a manner so as to vitally affect life, property, health or
convenience of the public; or 3) would delay a capital improvement project in a
manner so as to significantly increase the costs otherwise authorized and
approved under the construction contracts for the project. Expenditures for
physical plant related maintenance of an amount less than the capital
improvement project definition threshold but otherwise meeting the definition
of "emergency" may be authorized pursuant to this section.
(Ord. 2012-26, 5-15-2012)
ARTICLE C.  PUBLIC ART PROGRAM
SECTION:
4-1C-1: Purpose
4-1C-2: Definitions
4-1C-3: Public Arts Projects
4-1C-4: Public Arts Fund
4-1C-5: Encumbering The Public Arts Fund For Public Art
4-1C-6: Limitations On Arts Projects Development
4-1C-7: Selection And Placement Of Art
4-1C-8: Guidelines For Art Funding
4-1C-1: PURPOSE:
Believing in the value that public art adds to the community, the city council
declares it to be a policy of the city that a portion of the city's budget be
set aside for the development and support of arts in the community, the
integration of art into public spaces, including in the design of public
facilities, and the acquisition and preservation of public art. This article is
enacted and intended for the purpose of establishing general policies and
procedures related to public art funded by the city. It is intended that this
policy:
   A.   Provide opportunities for the citizens of Ogden to experience public
art resulting from the creative expression of artists;
   B.   Promote economic benefits from increased tourism and increased retail
activity through the enhancement of public spaces;
   C.   Implement the city's master plan for art and culture, including, but
not limited to, projects funded under the provisions of this article;
   D.   Foster within the city an environment where the arts can thrive and
become an integral part of the city's infrastructure; and
   E.   Support and lend expertise to the efforts of the mayor, city council
and planning commission to enhance the urban design quality of the city.
(Ord. 2016-22, 4-12-2016; amd. Ord. 2019-42, 9-3-2019)
4-1C-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, unless the context indicates otherwise, words
and phrases used in this article are defined as follows:
ART:   All forms of original artistic creations and which are integrated into
major public projects or funded by appropriations under this part, including,
but not limited to, work by an artist or bid as art in the following areas:
   A.   Design work that is integrated into the construction or improvement of
a major public project, including, but not limited to:
      1.   Interior or exterior surfaces, fixtures and functional elements; and
      2.   Outdoor space design elements in areas such as plazas, arcades, and
pedestrian passageways.
   B.   Artistic design of public ways and public facilities, including
roadways, parkways, pedestrian or bicycle paths or ways, transit system
improvements, water and wastewater facilities, and publicly owned sites with
historic, archeological, and unique geological features.
   C.   Forms of visual art, including, but not limited to:
      1.   Sculpture: in the round, bas-relief, high relief, mobile, fountain,
environmental, kinetic, electronic, etc., in any material or combination of
materials;
      2.   Painting: all media, including portable and permanently affixed
works such as murals and frescoes;
      3.   Photography and film;
      4.   Graphic arts: printmaking, drawing, and calligraphy;
      5.   Art forms in clay, fiber and textiles, wood, metal, plastics, glass,
mosaics and other materials; and
      6.   Mixed media: any combination of forms or media.
   D.   Other categories or new technologies that may develop through artistic
pursuit such as computer/audio/video generated work, use of lasers, etc.
   E.   Ephemeral art.
ARTIST: A person or entity who is selected to create art that is paid for by
the public art program.
ARTS GRANT: An award of money as provided in this article to an individual or
organization to support or fund an arts based project or program within Ogden
City, such as for use in education, general support or project specific
support.
EPHEMERAL ART: Art which by its nature is fixed at a temporary place and time,
such as: live music, acting or dance; lighting not intended to remain as a
permanent installation; and art constructed of nondurable material such as
sand, chalk, ice or organic materials. Ephemeral art is generally expected to
be displayed or produced for a limited period of time, may be completely
consumed as part of a public event, and includes a broad range of opportunities
for members of the community to experience and interact with art.
MAJOR PUBLIC ARTS PROJECT: Public art paid for by an appropriation of funds
pursuant to this article with a value over thirty thousand dollars
($30,000.00).
MAJOR PUBLIC PROJECT: Any construction project with structural or landscaping
components that will have a significant or noticeable visual impact on the
public when viewed from any public street, sidewalk, park, or other public
grounds, including the construction, reconstruction, or remodeling of
buildings, decorative or commemorative structures, parking facilities, bridges,
viaducts, pedestrian overpasses, new streetscape designs, bikeways, trails,
above grade utility facilities, or parks improvements.
MINOR PUBLIC ARTS PROJECTS: Public art paid for by an appropriation of funds
pursuant to this article with a cumulative value not to exceed thirty thousand
dollars ($30,000.00) annually.
OGDEN CITY ARTS ADVISORY COMMITTEE: The advisory committee established in title
3, chapter 16 of this code.
PUBLIC ARTS PROJECT: Art that is owned by, or in the case of ephemeral art
produced at the request of, Ogden City, regardless of where the art is
displayed or presented, and where the artist, the site and the art is selected
by the city. Public art is the result of either a major public arts project or
a minor public arts project.
SPECIAL ARTS GRANT: An arts grant paid for by an appropriation of funds
pursuant to this article outside of the annual arts grant process or for which
the amount appropriated is disproportionally higher than a typical arts grant.
(Ord. 2016-22, 4-12-2016; amd. Ord. 2019-42, 9-3-2019)
4-1C-3: PUBLIC ARTS PROJECTS:
The mayor may expend funds for a public arts project for the establishment,
acquisition, and preservation of public art in the manner provided in this
article. Funds for the public art program will be appropriated by the city
council from revenue generated at the former Defense Depot Ogden, as provided
by subsection 4-3A-7H of this title.
(Ord. 2016-22, 4-12-2016; amd. Ord. 2019-42, 9-3-2019)
4-1C-4: PUBLIC ARTS FUND:
There is established a specific account designated "public arts", into which
shall be deposited all monies appropriated in furtherance of the purposes of
this article.
   A.   Disbursement from the public arts fund includes:
      1.   Annual arts grants, special arts grants and major public arts
projects authorized by the city council and approved by the mayor upon
recommendation of Ogden City arts advisory committee; or
      2.    Minor public arts projects approved by the mayor as provided in
this article.
   B.   An arts maintenance fund is established and shall be funded with a
minimum amount of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) annually.
      1.   Maintenance funds shall be retained and aggregated as an endowment
for maintenance of publicly owned art.
      2.   Maintenance funds may be expended in accordance with policies and
procedures adopted by administrative order of the mayor.
   C.   The public arts fund shall include all money previously designated for
use under the "percent for arts" program and the maintenance fund shall include
all money previously designated for "percent for arts" maintenance.
(Ord. 2016-22, 4-12-2016; amd. Ord. 2019-42, 9-3-2019)
4-1C-5: ENCUMBERING THE PUBLIC ARTS FUND FOR PUBLIC ART:
A public arts project, including major renovation or repair of art requiring
extraordinary work or expenditures in excess of those reasonably available from
the art maintenance account, may be authorized as follows:
   A.   Proposed major public arts projects shall be submitted to the city
council in conjunction with the annual budget. Each public arts project shall
have an individual information statement addressing the following items:
      1.   A description of the project, which includes:
         a.   Sufficient narrative to define the parameters of what the project
will entail; and
         b.   A map depicting the proposed location of the project together
with a general site plan showing how the project will affect other existing or
planned uses at the proposed location;
      2.   A description of how the project meets the goals and objectives of
the city's master plan for art and culture;
      3.   The anticipated schedule and estimated budget for planning and
design, land acquisition, construction, ephemeral art to accompany the
unveiling or dedication of the project and any other needs associated with the
project;
      4.   The anticipated costs for future maintenance of the project, which
may not exceed ten percent (10%) of the project's budget;
      5.   Any other information regarding the history of the project or
anticipated impacts of the project;
      6.   The ability of the public arts project to be relocated or removed in
the future if the location is conveyed, remodeled or demolished; and
      7.   The contact person within administration who can respond to
questions regarding the project.
   B.   Proposed major public arts projects shall be submitted to the planning
commission concurrent with the submission to the city council. The planning
commission shall:
      1.   Review the proposed projects to determine compliance with the Ogden
City general plan;
      2.   Review the site plan for each potential public arts project for the
project's location and anticipated dimensions;
      3.   Assess whether the placement of the potential public arts project
will interfere with the normal, regular and intended use of the affected real
property, recorded easements, or utilities installed in or over such property,
now existing or reasonably anticipated in the future; and
      4.   Report its determination to the city council within forty five (45)
days of submission.
   C.   Minor public arts projects consistent with the master plan for arts and
culture may be approved by the mayor upon the recommendation of the Ogden City
arts advisory committee, with notice to the City Council.
      1.   By administrative order, the mayor shall establish rules applicable
to the approval and use of the public arts fund for minor public arts projects;
and
      2.   Funds expended for a minor public arts project may not go toward or
support an arts grant or a special arts grant.
   D.   Once the budget for a public arts project or special arts grant has
been approved as provided in this article, the budgeted funds shall be
considered encumbered.
(Ord. 2016-22, 4-12-2016; amd. Ord. 2019-42, 9-3-2019)
4-1C-6: LIMITATIONS ON ARTS PROJECTS DEVELOPMENT:
   A.   Proposed public arts projects or special arts grants, together with
their ranking and a positive or negative recommendation by the Ogden City arts
review subcommittee, shall be submitted to the city council on or before the
third Wednesday in January of the preceding fiscal year for inclusion in the
city's annual budget.
   B.   The mayor may propose that:
      1.   A major public arts project be approved by the city council for
funding outside of the regular budget cycle if the project has followed the
same procedure required for a regular submittal, except that no ranking is
required; or
      2.   A special arts grant be approved by the city council for funding
outside of the regular budget cycle provided that the grant meets the minimum
criteria for arts grants.
   C.   A potential major public arts project or special arts grant may not be
funded from the public arts fund or carried out through expenditures of private
donors, other than projects for general maintenance, unless the project
statement and the funding for the project have been approved by the city
council.
      1.   Private Donations: A private donor desiring to make a donation to
the city, the total value of which exceeds five thousand dollars ($5,000.00),
for a public arts project shall deliver to the city a signed written donation
statement:
         a.   Identifying the public arts project and describing the purposes
for which the donation is given;
         b.   Identifying the total value of the donation;
         c.   Identifying the date the funds, goods or services are to be
delivered to the city;
         d.   Certifying that the donation is voluntary; and
         e.   Certifying that the donation is made without condition; or,
outlining the conditions of the donation, if any.
      2.   Donation Statement: If the donation is accepted, a copy of the
donation statement described in subsection C1 of this section shall be attached
to a copy of the information statement and filed with the city recorder within
thirty (30) days of the city's receipt of the donation.
   D.   The restriction described in subsection C of this section includes
solicitations by the city of proposals or artist qualifications for a potential
public arts project.
(Ord. 2016-22, 4-12-2016; amd. Ord. 2019-42, 9-3-2019)
4-1C-7: SELECTION AND PLACEMENT OF ART:
   A.   Location Of Public Arts Projects: All public arts projects shall be
located on:
      1.   Property owned, leased, used or otherwise occupied by the city or
the Ogden City redevelopment agency and within the corporate limits of the
city; or
      2.   Private property, subject to a license or easement approved by the
city attorney allowing for maintenance and public access to the art project for
the life of the project.
   B.   Selection: Art selected pursuant to the provisions of this article for
a major public project may:
      1.   Be placed in, on, or above any such project;
      2.   Be attached or detached within or about such property; and
      3.   Be either temporary or permanent.
   C.   Duties Of Mayor: The mayor shall:
      1.   Make the final decision regarding the selection of artists and art
and the placement of a public arts project funded from the public arts fund
after receiving recommendations from the Ogden City arts design subcommittee
pursuant to section
3-16-6 of this code; and
      2.   Notify the city council of the selected artist and art for each
public art project.
(Ord. 2016-22, 4-12-2016; amd. Ord. 2019-42, 9-3-2019)
4-1C-8: GUIDELINES FOR ARTS GRANT FUNDING:
   A.   Powers And Duties: The Ogden City arts advisory committee shall act
through and under the direction of the Ogden City arts coordinator in the
exercise of the following powers and duties:
      1.   Acting through the grant subcommittee, assist the director of
community and economic development to recommend a fair distribution of arts
grants to be appropriated by the city council through one or more annual grant
cycles per fiscal year.
      2.   Annually appointing a grant subcommittee as provided in subsection B
of this section.
   B.   Grant Subcommittee Appointed: The Ogden City arts advisory committee
shall appoint a grant subcommittee which shall consist of at least five (5)
voting members to oversee the recommendation of arts grants. Members of the
grant subcommittee shall include at least three (3) members of the Ogden City
arts advisory committee, the diversity affairs officer or designee from the
Ogden diversity commission, and members of the general public as appropriate.
The director of community and economic development, or the director's designee,
and a city council member or designee, shall be ex officio members of the grant
subcommittee. Consistent with the other provisions of this chapter, the grant
subcommittee shall:
      1.   Review and recommend grant applications for approval by the city
council;
      2.   Review and recommend minimum grant application requirements,
applicant ranking criteria, application deadlines, and create grant
applications, instructions and informational documentation which may be adopted
as administrative policy.
      3.   Prepare a written study and recommendation for funding, together
with a recommendation and bases for the recommendation, which study shall
satisfy the requirements of Utah Code Annotated section 10-8-2, as amended.
Subject to city council approval, up to forty percent (40%) of appropriated
funding may be allocated to general support grants for ongoing community
organizations.
      4.   Submit the recommendation to the director of community and economic
development, who, after making any necessary adjustments to adhere to grant
guidelines, shall submit the recommendation to the city council at least
fourteen (14) days prior to the public hearing to appropriate grant funds as
required by Utah Code Annotated section 10-8-2.
   C.   Minimum Criteria For Grants: While the grant subcommittee may adopt
stricter ranking criteria and applicant requirements to assist it in making its
recommendations, no grant shall be awarded unless the following minimum
criteria are met:
      1.   The substantive and procedural requirements of Utah Code Annotated
section 10-8-2, as amended, must be complied with.
      2.   General and project grants must be used to support and promote arts
development in Ogden City.
      3.   The city must receive equal value in return for any grant
expenditure, whether measured in terms of tangible or intangible benefits.
      4.   General support grants shall only be awarded to organizations. An
organization receiving a general support grant must be a 501(c)(3) nonprofit
corporation, and have its principal place of business in Ogden City.
      5.   Project support grants may be awarded to individuals, organizations,
or business entities.
      6.   The grant recipient shall as a condition of receipt, if required by
the city, enter into an agreement with the city to use grant monies for the
specific purpose for which the grant is awarded.
   D.   Criteria for Special Arts Grant: In addition to the criteria described
in subsection C., upon positive recommendation of the mayor and either the
grant subcommittee or the arts advisory committee, the City Council may award a
special arts grant if the council finds that there is significant community-
wide benefit associated with the grant project and that the funding awarded
will not materially affect the city's ability to complete anticipated public
arts projects. Special arts grants:
      1.   May not be used to provide general support to an arts organization;
      2.   Are not a separate grant category from a project grant;
      3.   Are not expected to be awarded on a regular or recurring basis, but
only under unique circumstances such as project timing that could not have been
otherwise anticipated, project participation by multiple community partners or
a local project that integrates with an art project having regional, statewide
or national scope; and
      4.   Should be evaluated to determine if such grant project should be
conducted as a public arts project rather than an arts grant.
   E.   Authority: Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the city
council's authority to make grant determinations without subcommittee
recommendations, to adopt additional criteria for the determination of specific
grants, or revise a written study presented by the administration.
   F.   The mayor may adopt policies to implement this Chapter.
(Ord. 2019-42, 9-3-2019; amd. Ord. 2020-4, 2-11-2020)
CHAPTER 2
CONTRACTS
ARTICLE A.  CITY CONTRACTS AND PURCHASING
SECTION:
4-2A-1: Purchasing Agent
4-2A-2: Informal Written Bids; Procedure
4-2A-3: Contract Validity And Execution
4-2A-4: Insurance And Bonds
4-2A-5: Competitive Bidding
4-2A-6: Notice Inviting Bids
4-2A-7: Lowest Responsible Bidder
4-2A-8: Rejection Of Bids; Conditions Of Acceptance
4-2A-9: Contracts For Public Improvements
4-2A-10: Emergency Purchases
4-2A-11: General Requirements, Rules And Regulations
4-2A-12: Financial Interest By Officer Or Employee
4-2A-13: Exemptions From Article; Federal Law
4-2A-1: PURCHASING AGENT:
   A.   Defined: "Purchasing agent" means the director of the department of
management services or an employee of the department designated by the director
to perform the duties of the purchasing agent.
(1979 Code § 3.10.040A; Ord. 94-42, 9-6-1994)
   B.   Authority To Award Contracts: The purchasing agent shall have the
authority to award contracts within the purview of his/her authority as
provided in this article.
(1979 Code § 3.10.100; Ord. 94-42, 9-6-1994)
   C.   Duties And Powers:
      1.   Order And Purchase Supplies: The city's purchasing agent shall order
and purchase supplies and contractual services needed by the city or any of its
departments, offices or divisions, including the office of the mayor, in
accordance with the ordinances of the city and such rules and procedures
adopted by the purchasing agent for the internal management and operation of
such purchasing function. Any purchase order or contract made contrary thereto
shall be void and not binding against the city.
      2.   Adopt Rules And Regulations: The purchasing agent shall have the
authority to adopt rules and procedures, consistent with this article,
governing the internal management and operation of the purchasing functions
performed by the city and governing the general administration of this article.
(1979 Code § 3.10.040B,C; Ord. 94-42, 9-6-1994)
      3.   Adopt Procedures For Small Purchases: The purchasing agent shall
adopt operational procedures to make small purchases of five thousand dollars
($5,000.00) or less.
(1979 Code § 3.10.060; Ord. 94-42, 9-6-1994; amd. Ord. 2002-70, 11-19-2002)
4-2A-2: INFORMAL WRITTEN BIDS; PROCEDURE:
Except as otherwise herein provided, all purchases of and contracts for
supplies or contractual services in an amount less than twenty five thousand
dollars ($25,000.00) and in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), may be
made in the open market, without advertising, in a manner calculated to ensure
the best interest of the public and after solicitation of bids by mail,
telephone or otherwise. All such informal bids shall be in writing, unless
otherwise directed by the mayor or the mayor's designee. The purchasing agent
shall, whenever possible, obtain at least three (3) competitive bids.
(1979 Code § 3.10.070; Ord. 94-42, 9-6-1994; amd. Ord. 2002-70, 11-19-2002)
4-2A-3: CONTRACT VALIDITY AND EXECUTION:
   A.   Liability Limited: No liability against the city shall or may be
created and no expenditure of public funds may be made which is not for a
public purpose.
   B.   Valid Contract Requirements: No contract may become valid or is binding
against the city until:
      1.   The contract has been reduced to writing;
      2.   The city has received certification from the department of
management services that funds are lawfully available within budgeted
appropriations to fulfill the city's financial obligations thereunder;
      3.   Where appropriate, there is appropriate certification of compliance
with federal contract or grant assurances and the documents are approved as to
form by the city attorney or an assistant city attorney;
      4.   The contract has been executed by the mayor or the mayor's designee
authorized to sign in a prior adopted written executive order; and
      5.   The signature has been attested by the city recorder or a deputy
city recorder.
   C.   Contracts Authorized By Resolution: Contracts for solely legislative
purposes, which have been approved or authorized by resolution of the city
council, may be executed by the chair of the city council and do not require
execution by the mayor or the mayor's designee under subsection B4 of this
section.
      1.   The executive director of the city council is authorized to enter
into a contract for solely legislative purposes on behalf of the city council,
without a resolution of the city council, provided the contract involves fees
that do not exceed thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00). Such contracts do not
require execution by the mayor or the mayor's designee under subsection B4 of
this section. The executive director shall notify the city council within ten
(10) days of entering into any agreement for solely legislative purposes.
(Ord. 2011-30, 6-21-2011)
4-2A-4: INSURANCE AND BONDS:
   A.   Requirements: When directed by the mayor, city council, city attorney
or required by state statute or city ordinance, insurance certificates and
permits, performance and materialmen's bonds shall be provided to the city
recorder in a form and in amounts approved by the city attorney. Such
documents, when required, are conditions precedent to the city executing a
contract. Such bonds or insurance shall:
      1.   Name the city as an additional insured;
      2.   Where cancelable, provide that no cancellation thereof may be made
without first giving the city at least thirty (30) days' prior written notice;
and
      3.   Be in sums sufficient to fully protect the city and its interests.
All corporate guarantors or sureties shall be licensed to do business in the
state and shall be sound and reputable firms, as determined acceptable to the
city attorney.
   B.   Materialmen's And Performance Bonds:
      1.   General Requirements: The contractor under any contract for public
construction work shall be required to post performance and materialmen's
bonds; provided however, that if the estimated construction cost is under
twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), and in the opinion of the city
engineer or the purchasing agent, and the city attorney, the cost of requiring
the bond will exceed the risk or benefit to the city, the city may waive the
bonding requirement.
      2.   Services Or Supplies: The purchasing agent shall have the authority
to require:
         a.   A bid security bond, or other guarantee satisfactory to the city
attorney, for competitive sealed bids or proposals for construction contracts;
and
         b.   A performance bond, before a contract is entered into to purchase
or acquire supplies or services, in such amount as the purchasing agent shall
find reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the city.
(1979 Code §§ 3.10.020, 3.10.030; Ord. 94-42, 9-6-1994)
4-2A-5: COMPETITIVE BIDDING:
   A.   Required; Exceptions: All purchases of and contracts for obtaining
supplies or contractual services shall be made on a competitive basis to the
maximum practicable extent. However, when not in conflict with state law, the
purchasing agent may waive this competitive bidding requirement when:
      1.   The cost of the supplies or services is negligible in relation to
the costs of purchase by bid;
      2.   The supplies or services are available from a single source or
bidding procedures are otherwise deemed unlikely to produce a competitive bid;
or
      3.   Circumstances indicate that bidding on the supplies or services will
not be in the best interest of the city.
   B.   Professional Services Exceeding Ten Thousand Dollars: Notwithstanding
the above, all contracts for professional services, for which the cost is
estimated to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), shall be solicited and
awarded in conformance with the provisions of article B of this chapter.
(1979 Code § 3.10.050; Ord. 94-42, 9-6-1994)
4-2A-6: NOTICE INVITING BIDS:
   A.   Newspaper Publication: Notice inviting competitive sealed bids shall be
published once in at least one newspaper with general circulation in the city
and at least five (5) calendar days preceding the last day for the receipt of
bids.
   B.   Description: The newspaper notice required herein shall include a
general description of the articles to be purchased, shall state where bid
blanks and specifications may be secured, and the time and place for opening
bids.
   C.   Bidders' List: The city may establish a "bidders' list" exclusively for
the benefit of the city. The city may include names of businesses on the
bidders' list exclusively within its own discretion. The purchasing agent may
solicit sealed bids from the businesses whose names appear on the bidders' list
by sending them a copy of such newspaper notice or such other notice as will
acquaint them with the proposed purchase.
   D.   Notice Available In Department: In addition to the above requirements,
the purchasing agent shall also advertise pending purchases by making the
notice available at the office of the department of management services.
(1979 Code § 3.10.090; Ord. 94-42, 9-6-1994)
4-2A-7: LOWEST RESPONSIBLE BIDDER:
   A.   Formal Bid Procedure: Except as otherwise herein provided, all
purchases of and contracts for supplies or contractual services in amounts of
twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) or greater shall be let, after notice
inviting competitive sealed bids or proposals, to the lowest responsible
bidder.
(1979 Code § 3.10.080; Ord. 94-42, 9-6-1994; amd. Ord. 2002-70, 11-19-2002)
   B.   Award Of Contract; Considerations: Except as otherwise provided herein,
contracts shall be awarded to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder. In
determining lowest responsible bidder, in addition to price, the city may
consider:
      1.   The quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies or
contractual services offered;
      2.   The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the
contract or provide the supplies or service required;
      3.   Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the supplies
promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or interference;
      4.   The sufficiency of the bidder's financial resources and the effect
thereof on his ability to perform the contract or provide the supplies or
services;
      5.   The quality of bidder's performance on previous orders or contracts
for the city or others;
      6.   Litigation by or against the bidder or previous orders or contracts
with the city;
      7.   Any previous or existing noncompliance by the bidder with laws and
ordinances relating to the subject of the contract;
      8.   The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service;
      9.   The reputation and maintenance history of the product, the repair
parts and service cost, inventory, maintenance expertise and ease of
maintenance.
   C.   Pending Litigation Against Bidder: Not in limitation of the criterion
above mentioned, no low bidder will be considered the lowest responsible
bidder, if at the time the bid is submitted there is pending or threatened
litigation involving said bidder in which a claim is made that said bidder
provided or furnished materially defective workmanship or materials to the City
or that the bidder failed to substantially comply with bid specifications of
contract terms and conditions, and either:
      1.   On construction projects, the City Engineer certified that in the
opinion of said Engineer there exists reasonable cause to believe the claims
against the bidder are correct; or
      2.   On other contractual matters, the Purchasing Agent certifies that
there exists, in the opinion of said agent, reasonable cause to believe that
the claims against the bidder are correct.
(1979 Code § 3.10.110; Ord. 94-42, 9-6-1994)
   D.   Award To Other Than Low Bidder: When the award is not given to the
lowest bidder, a statement of the reasons therefor shall be prepared by the
involved department director and sent to and approved by the Purchasing Agent
or the City Engineer, or their respective designees as appropriate, and filed
with the other papers related to the transaction.
(1979 Code § 3.10.120; Ord. 94-42, 9-6-1994)
4-2A-8: REJECTION OF BIDS; CONDITIONS OF ACCEPTANCE:
   A.   Authority: The Purchasing Agent shall have the authority to reject all
bids, parts of bids, or any bid for any one or more supplies or contract
services included in the proposed contract, when the public interest will be
served thereby.
   B.   Liability For Expense: The City reserves the right to reject any and
all bids. No bidder shall have any right, legal or equitable, or claim against
the City for any expense or cost incurred by him/her in the preparation or
submission of a bid, which is rejected, regardless of the reasons of the
rejection.
   C.   Irregularities: The City expressly reserves the right to waive minor or
slight irregularities in a bid which in the Purchasing Agent's judgment are in
the best interest of the City. The Purchasing Agent's decision on
irregularities on a bid shall be final and conclusive and shall create no right
to any bidder.
(1979 Code § 3.10.130; Ord. 94-42, 9-6-1994)
4-2A-9: CONTRACTS FOR PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS 1 :
   A.   Publication: Except as provided in subsection D of this Section, any
new public improvement to be paid for out of the General Fund, which has been
estimated by the City Engineer to cost twenty five thousand dollars
($25,000.00) or greater, shall be made by contract let to the lowest
responsible bidder after publication of notice at least twice in a newspaper of
general circulation printed and published in the City at least five (5) days
prior to the opening of bids. The cost of such improvement shall not be so
divided as to permit the making of such improvement in several parts, except by
contract. The City has the right to reject any or all bids presented, and all
notices calling for bids shall so state. If all bids are rejected and the City
decides to make the improvement, it shall advertise anew in the same manner. If
after twice advertising no bid is received that is satisfactory, the City may
proceed under its own discretion to make the improvement.
   B.   Withholding Payment: If any payment on a contract for public
improvements with a private person, firm or corporation is retained or
withheld, it shall be placed in an interest- bearing account and the interest
shall accrue for the benefit of the contractor and subcontractors to be paid
after the project is completed and accepted by the City. It is the
responsibility of the contractor to ensure that any interest accrued on the
retainage is distributed by the contractor to subcontractors on a pro rata
basis.
   C.   Performance By City Personnel: It is the policy of the City to reserve
to itself all legal prerogatives to perform services and work with its own
personnel and equipment; therefore, nothing in this Article shall be construed
to require bids to be called for or contracts let for:
      1.   The conduct or management of any of the departments, businesses or
property of the City;
      2.   The lowering or repairing of water mains or sewers, or making
connections with water mains or sewers; or
      3.   Grading, repairing, or maintaining streets, sidewalks, bridges,
culverts or conduits.
   D.   Construction On Class C Roads: The construction of any improvement
project by the City on a Class C road shall comply with the requirements of
Utah Code Annotated section 27-12-108.1, or any successor provision.
(1979 Code § 3.10.210; Ord. 94-42, 9-6-1994)
 
Notes
1 1. U.C.A. § 10-7-20.
4-2A-10: EMERGENCY PURCHASES:
   A.   Defined: For purposes of this Section, an emergency is any fact,
circumstance or situation which threatens injury or damage as a result of riot,
mob action, civil disturbance, social disruption, attack, natural phenomena,
technological hazard or happening or any circumstance which would delay the
work of the City in a manner as to vitally affect life, property, health or
convenience of the public.
   B.   Authority: In case of an actual or apparent emergency which requires
immediate procurement of supplies or contractual services, the Mayor, Chief
Administrative Officer, department directors or other personnel authorized by
the Mayor or authorized under a City emergency plan, may approve at the lowest
obtainable price, the purchase of any supplies or contractual services
regardless of the amount of the expenditure. If required by the Purchasing
Agent, a full report of the circumstances of an emergency purchase shall be
filed by the department with the Purchasing Agent and shall be open to public
inspection.
   C.   Rules And Regulations: The Purchasing Agent shall prescribe by rules
and regulations the procedure under which emergency purchases may be made.
(1979 Code § 3.10.140; Ord. 94-42, 9-6-1994)
4-2A-11: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS, RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   Refusal To Receive Bid; Authority: The Mayor may promulgate rules,
procedures and regulations to preclude contractors or suppliers from submitting
bids where said proposed bidder has not completely satisfied prior notices to
comply with construction documents, drawing and or other specifications or has
otherwise failed to perform any work for the City or other jurisdiction in a
timely and satisfactory manner. If adopted, such rules and procedures shall
provide for reasonable notice to the contractor and opportunity for hearing.
(1979 Code § 3.10.150; Ord. 94-42, 9-6-1994)
   B.   Cooperative Purchasing: It is the policy of the City to maximize the
public benefit and minimize costs, which results are often served by joint
purchasing. Therefore, the Purchasing Agent shall have the authority and is
encouraged to join with other units of government in cooperative purchasing
plans, when the best interests of the City would be served thereby.
(1979 Code § 3.10.160; Ord. 94-42, 9-6-1994)
   C.   Suppliers Prequalified: Prospective suppliers may be prequalified for
particular types of supplies, services and construction. Qualifications may
include but are not limited to capabilities for production, distribution and
completion of the project.
(1979 Code § 3.10.170; Ord. 94-42, 9-6-1994)
   D.   Dividing Purchases: No contract or purchase shall be subdivided to
avoid the requirements of this Article.
(1979 Code § 3.10.190; Ord. 94-42, 9-6-1994)
4-2A-12: FINANCIAL INTEREST BY OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE:
   A.   Prohibited; Exception: No purchase order or contract within the purview
of this Article or Article B of this Chapter in which the Purchasing Agent or
any officer or employee of the City is financially interested shall be approved
by the City, except that the Mayor shall have the authority to waive compliance
with this Section if the Mayor finds such purchase order or contract to be in
the best interest of the City and justifies in writing the reasons therefor.
The waiver and written justification shall be filed with the City Recorder and
the City Council and shall become a public record.
   B.   Financially Interested Defined: For purposes of this Section
"financially interested" shall mean that the officer or employee, or the spouse
or child of the officer or employee, is:
      1.   The vendor or contractor under the proposed purchase order or
contract; or
      2.   An officer, director, agent, employee or owner of a substantial
interest in any business which is the vendor or contractor under the proposed
purchase order or contract. "Substantial interest" for purposes of this
subsection means the ownership, either legally or equitable, by the employee or
the officer of at least ten percent (10%) of the outstanding shares of a
corporation or ten percent (10%) interest in any other business entity.
   C.   Violation: Any purchase order or contract violating this Section shall
be voidable, at the option of the City.
(1979 Code § 3.10.200; Ord. 94-42, 9-6-1994)
4-2A-13: EXEMPTIONS FROM ARTICLE; FEDERAL LAW:
   A.   Provisions: The provisions of this Article shall not prevent the City
from complying with the terms and conditions of any grant, gift, or bequest
that is otherwise consistent with law.
   B.   Mandatory Regulations: When a purchase or contract involves the
expenditure of Federal assistance or contract funds, the Purchasing Agent shall
comply with mandatory applicable Federal law and regulations not reflected in
this Article.
(1979 Code § 3.10.180; Ord. 94-42, 9-6-1994)
ARTICLE B.  CONTRACTING FOR PROFESSIONAL SERVICES
SECTION:
4-2B-1: Policy
4-2B-2: Professional Services Defined
4-2B-3: Competitive Sealed Proposals
4-2B-4: Selection And Evaluation Process
4-2B-5: Negotiations
4-2B-6: Contract Fees
4-2B-7: Contract Review And Award
4-2B-8: Contracts For Legislative Purposes
4-2B-9: Exceptions To Article Provisions
4-2B-1: POLICY:
It shall be the policy of the City to negotiate agreements for professional
services on the basis of demonstrated competence and qualification for the type
of services required, at fair and reasonable fees. It shall further be the
policy of the City to publicly solicit proposals for professional services when
it is estimated that the total cost for such services will be in excess of ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00).
(1979 Code § 3.12.010; Ord. 94-43, 9-20-1994)
4-2B-2: PROFESSIONAL SERVICES DEFINED:
Professional services means services rendered by an independent contractor who
has specialized knowledge, training and experience in a particular field. The
term professional implies attainments in special knowledge resulting from
prolonged and specialized intellectual training, as distinguished from mere
skills. Such services may include, but are not limited to, research,
development, design, construction and alterations, as well as incidental
services that members of those professions and those in their employ may
logically or justifiably perform, including but not limited to: studies,
investigations, surveys, evaluations, consultation, planning, programming,
conceptual designs, plans and specifications, development, cost estimates,
inspections and other related services.
(1979 Code § 3.12.020; Ord. 94-43, 9-20-1994)
4-2B-3: COMPETITIVE SEALED PROPOSALS:
   A.   Scope Of Work Statement: The City shall prepare a scope of work
statement, detailing as completely as possible the specific project or services
contemplated, all work to be performed by the selected applicant and the time
frame within which the work is to be accomplished.
(1979 Code § 3.12.040; Ord. 94-43, 9-20-1994)
   B.   Solicitation: Prior to the award of any contract for such professional
services for which the cost is estimated to exceed ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00), the City shall publicly solicit and encourage qualified
individuals or firms (hereinafter "applicants") engaged in the lawful practice
of the desired professional services to submit statements of current
qualifications and performance data for consideration for contract award.
   C.   Notice Of Work Opportunity: For each project in which a contract for
such professional services is contemplated, the City shall make a solicitation
and give a notice of the work opportunity to those professionals reasonably
identified as having the expertise to provide the solicited services. The
Purchasing Agent and the City Engineer, within their own discretion, may
establish lists of professionals who may be interested in receiving notices of
requests for proposals for certain types of work.
   D.   Publication: In addition, the City will publish at least once in one
newspaper of general circulation in the County a notice and invitation to
submit a statement of qualifications and interest, not less than five (5)
calendar days prior to the date such statement is due. The statement shall
provide the information identified in subsection A of this Section, or its
successor.
(1979 Code § 3.12.030; Ord. 94-43, 9-20-1994)
4-2B-4: SELECTION AND EVALUATION PROCESS:
   A.   Committee Established: A selection committee shall, unless waived by
the Mayor in writing, be utilized for consultation and screening of submitted
proposals. The committee shall be comprised of the following:
      1.   The department director responsible for implementation of the
project, or the director's designee for the project, who shall chair the
committee;
      2.   At least two (2) other City employees who shall be appointed by the
department director, however, employees of other departments shall be appointed
with the concurrence of the affected department director;
      3.   Any additional representatives as designated by the department
director responsible for the project, which may include persons not employed by
the City but who provide familiarity and experience in the professional service
outlined in the request for proposals; and
      4.   The City Engineer or the Engineer's designee when the professional
services to be selected are for architectural, engineering or construction
related planning services.
   B.   Factors: In making a selection for negotiating purposes, the following
factors and any other factors deemed relevant by the scope of work statement
shall be considered:
      1.   The extend of the specialized experience of the individual or firm
in the type of work required;
      2.   The degree and depth of professional qualifications available
through the applicant for performance of the services required;
      3.   Past performance of the applicant on similar projects, in general,
and City projects in particular;
      4.   Location and accessibility of the offices of the professional
submitting the proposal;
      5.   The proposed schedule for completing the scope of work;
      6.   The facilities and equipment at the disposal of the professional
submitting the proposal; and
      7.   The projected work hours and costs associated with providing the
services outlined in the scope of work.
   C.   Preference Ranking: After completing the foregoing evaluation, a
preference ranking shall be established from among applicants submitting
proposals. The preference ranking shall be submitted to the Chief
Administrative Officer and Purchasing Agent for review and approval. Upon
approval, negotiations for contract purposes may be initiated with the top
ranked applicant.
(1979 Code § 3.12.050; Ord. 94-43, 9-20-1994)
4-2B-5: NEGOTIATIONS:
Negotiations shall initially be commenced by the department director
responsible for the project, with the top ranked applicant only. Should
satisfactory terms fail to be reached within a reasonable time, as determined
at the sole discretion of the affected department director, negotiations with
that applicant shall be terminated and others initiated with the second and
then third respective applicants, until satisfactory terms are negotiated.
(1979 Code § 3.12.060; Ord. 94-43, 9-20-1994)
4-2B-6: CONTRACT FEES:
   A.   Fixed Rate: Fixed-rate contracts with a maximum compensation ceiling
are to be used unless justification exists for an alternate method of
compensation. Contract fees shall be arrived at on the basis of:
      1.   A definitive scope of work, as approved by the City;
      2.   The proposed period of performance; and
      3.   Attendant manpower, material and service estimates.
   B.   Fee Schedules For Comparative Purposes: Industry or professional fee
schedules or curves, either formally or informally developed, are to be used
for comparative purposes only; they shall not be used as a basis of
justification of any fees proposed by the applicant. Professional contract fees
shall not be established on the basis of an estimated percentage of completion
costs; such fees may be established on a cost-plus basis only when the definite
data set out in this article is developed and included in the contract and a
maximum fee ceiling established.
   C.   Time Frame Remedies: Executed contracts shall include prescribed time
frames for accomplishing the work to be performed and may provide for
appropriate remedies in the event such time frames are not adhered to due to
the fault of the professional service provider involved.
(1979 Code § 3.12.070; Ord. 94-43, 9-20-1994)
4-2B-7: CONTRACT REVIEW AND AWARD:
   A.   Designated By Mayor: All awards for professional service contracts,
including those involving fees under ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), shall
be made as designated by the mayor, upon recommendation of the responsible
department director and after such contracts have been reviewed and approved as
to form by the city engineer if the services are for architect, engineering or
construction related planning services or the purchasing agent for other
professional services, and by the city attorney, or his/her designee. However,
no contract shall be valid or binding on the city until the applicable
formalities provided in city ordinances and state law have been completed.
   B.   Under Ten Thousand Dollars: For all professional service contracts for
which the estimated cost is less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), the
department director or division manager requesting the professional services
shall, in conjunction with the purchasing agent or city engineer, establish a
selection process to obtain the needed professional services at a reasonable
cost to the city. The selection procedure shall be reviewed and approved by the
director of management services prior to solicitation for the professional
services. The director of management services shall be responsible for
certifying to the mayor, or the mayor's designee, that the selection process
and its implementation have procured the necessary professional services for
the city at a reasonable cost.
(1979 Code §§ 3.12.090, 3.12.100; Ord. 94-43, 9-20-1994)
4-2B-8: CONTRACTS FOR LEGISLATIVE PURPOSES:
   A.   Compliance With Article: Professional services contracts for solely
legislative purposes shall be solicited, evaluated, ranked, selected and
negotiated in substantial compliance with the provisions of this article;
provided, that the city council, or the executive director of the city council
when authorized by this section, shall:
      1.   Determine the composition of the selection committee;
      2.   Approve or authorize the approval of the preference ranking; and
      3.   Provide authority to negotiate.
   B.   Approval Procedures: Additionally, all awards for professional services
contracts for legislative purposes, including those involving fees under ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00), shall be made as designated by the city council
and after such contracts have been reviewed, approved and executed as required
under section
4-2A-3 of this chapter.
   C.   Executive Director: The executive director of the city council is
authorized to enter into a professional services contract for solely
legislative purposes on behalf of the city council, without a resolution of the
city council, provided the contract involves fees not exceeding thirty thousand
dollars ($30,000.00), in compliance with the following procedures:
      1.   For professional services contracts involving fees from ten thousand
dollars ($10,000.00) to thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00), the executive
director shall determine the composition of the selection committee, approve or
authorize the approval of the preference ranking, and negotiate or delegate
authority to negotiate the contract.
      2.   For professional services contracts involving fees under ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00), the executive director shall establish a
selection process to obtain the needed professional services at a reasonable
cost to the city.
      3.   The executive director shall notify the city council within ten (10)
days of entering into any professional services agreement for solely
legislative purposes.
(Ord. 2011-30, 6-21-2011)
4-2B-9: EXCEPTIONS TO ARTICLE PROVISIONS:
Unless otherwise specifically provided, the requirements of this article do not
apply to the following types of contracts:
   A.   Less Than Ten Thousand Dollars: Contracts involving fees of less than
ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00);
   B.   Administered By Another Agency: Contracts administered by another
agency, or government entity, to which the city is a subcontractor or signatory
on a contract;
   C.   Emergency: Contracts of an emergency nature;
   D.   Obligations Or Grant Provisions: Contractual obligations or applicable
grant provisions, which preclude any or all of these procedures;
   E.   Expert Witnesses: Contracts for expert witnesses, advisors or outside
counsel for the city attorney's office;
   F.   Investigatory Services For Police Department: Contracts for special
investigatory or similar services for the police department where
confidentiality is necessary, if approved by the mayor upon recommendation from
the purchasing agent;
   G.   Waiver By Mayor; Justification: The mayor, with cause specified in
writing, may also waive any or all these requirements for specific contracts.
The waiver and written justification shall be signed by the mayor on or before
the date of execution of a contract and filed with the office of city council
within ten (10) days after execution of a contract;
   H.   Independent Legal Services: Contracts for independent legal services
for the city council;
   I.   Waiver For Legislative Purposes: The city council may, for good cause,
waive by resolution any or all of the substantive requirements of this article
for specific contracts proposed for solely legislative purposes.
(Ord. 2011-45, 8-23-2011)
CHAPTER 3
PROPERTY MANAGEMENT
ARTICLE A.  REAL PROPERTY 1
SECTION:
4-3A-1: Acquisition
4-3A-2: Deed Recording
4-3A-3: Duties Of Officials
4-3A-4: Identification Of Surplus Real Property
4-3A-5: Conveyance Of City Real Property
4-3A-6: Sale Of Property Acquired By Condemnation
4-3A-7: Conveyance Of DDOU Property
4-3A-8: Conveyance To Ogden City Redevelopment Agency
4-3A-9: Validity Of Actions
 
Notes
  1. Prior ordinance history: 1979 Code §§ 3.14.010, 3.14.020, 3.14.030,
1 3.14.040, 3.14.050, 3.14.060, 3.14.070, 3.14.080, 3.14.090, 3.14.100,
  3.14.110, 3.14.120, 3.14.130; Ord. 94-62, 11-22-1994; Ord. 95-60, 9-5-1995;
  Ord. 97-80, 10-21-2997; Ord. 2001-12, 2-20-2001.
4-3A-1: ACQUISITION:
   A.   Authority; Mayor: Interests in real property shall be purchased or
otherwise acquired for the city by the mayor, or the mayor's designee, and no
other officer or employee shall be authorized to purchase or acquire real
property for or on behalf of the city. Agreements to purchase or otherwise
acquire an interest in real property shall comply with the requirements of
section
4-2A-3 of this title.
   B.   Planning Commission Review: The acquisition of real property for the
establishment of a public use shall conform with the Ogden City general plan
and shall be reviewed by the planning commission for its determination as to
such compliance. The planning commission may adopt guidelines authorizing staff
review of such acquisitions for compliance with the plan. For purposes of this
subsection, "public use" includes any street, park, or other public way,
ground, place or space, any city owned building or structure, and any city
owned utility. It shall not include real property acquired by the city for a
specific project or purpose involving the future conveyance of the property to
a third party for other than a public use. Compliance with this subsection is
intended to implement the provisions of Utah Code Annotated section 10-9-305.
(Ord. 2003-20, 8-5-2003)
4-3A-2: DEED RECORDING:
   A.   Property Conveyed: Whenever any interest in real property is conveyed
to the city, the deed or other instrument of conveyance shall immediately be
delivered to the city recorder, who shall forthwith cause the same to be
recorded in the office of the county recorder of the county in which the real
property is situated. After such deed or other instrument has been so recorded,
the original deed or other instrument shall be filed with the city recorder,
and a copy provided to the property manager designated pursuant to subsection
4-3A-3A of this article.
   B.   Property Transferred: Whenever any interest in real property is
transferred by the city, a copy of the deed or other instrument of transfer
shall be filed at length in the office of the city recorder and the property
manager designated pursuant to subsection 4-3A-3A of this article.
(Ord. 2003-20, 8-5-2003)
4-3A-3: DUTIES OF OFFICIALS:
   A.   Property Manager:
      1.   Designated: The mayor shall designate an officer or employee of the
city to perform the functions of property manager as provided in this chapter.
      2.   Maintain Properly Indexed Record: The property manager shall keep a
complete, accurate, and properly indexed record of all transfers of real estate
to or from the city and of all other transactions which affect the title of
real estate belonging to the city. Such record shall be made available to the
city engineer upon request.
      3.   List Of Real Estate; Inventory: The property manager shall deliver
to the director of management services during July of each year a revised list
of all real estate belonging to the city as of June 30 of that year, together
with an estimate of the current value of such parcels and a list of all parcels
conveyed or acquired during the prior fiscal year. A copy of such list shall
also be provided to the city engineer, who shall maintain a map depicting the
city's inventory of real estate. A copy of such list shall also be provided to
the city council. A distinct or separate list may be established for properties
acquired by the city for specific projects or purposes involving the future
conveyance of the property to a third party for other than a public use, so as
not to confuse such properties with other city property.
   B.   City Recorder: The city recorder shall notify the property manager of
all transactions coming to the recorder's attention which pertain to the
purchase, sale, transfer, lease or encumbrance of any real estate in which the
city has an interest.
   C.   Transition Provision: For the year 2003, the revised real property list
to be provided pursuant to subsection A3 of this section shall be delivered by
August 31, 2003.
(Ord. 2003-20, 8-5-2003)
4-3A-4: IDENTIFICATION OF SURPLUS REAL PROPERTY:
   A.   Identification And Reporting: Department directors shall periodically
identify potential surplus real property within the control of their
departments and report such property to the property manager for consideration
as possible surplus property. The property manager shall also periodically
review such reports to determine whether excess properties are on hand, and
recommend to the mayor its sale or other disposition. The director of any
department holding properties acquired by the city for specific projects or
purposes involving the future conveyance of the property to a third party for
other than a public use shall be responsible for making recommendations to the
mayor regarding its sale or other disposition, rather than the property
manager.
(Ord. 2003-20, 8-5-2003)
4-3A-5: CONVEYANCE OF CITY REAL PROPERTY:
   A.   Highest And Best Economic Return:
      1.   Every sale, lease, encumbrance, or other conveyance of city owned
real property shall be made by the mayor, or under the mayor's express written
authority. All conveyances or encumbrances of such property shall be based on
the highest and best economic return to the city, except that consideration for
property conveyed may be based on other public policy factors if the city
council makes a legislative determination that the consideration is adequate.
      2.   The highest and best economic return to the city, as referred to in
this article, shall be for cash, or its equivalent, and for not less than fair
market value as estimated by one or more of the following methods:
         a.   Evaluation by qualified and disinterested appraiser; or
         b.   An information market survey conducted by the director of
management services, or under his/her express written authority, in the case of
items of real property possessing readily discernable market value.
      3.   The mayor may reject any proposed conveyance or encumbrance of real
property, if determined in the mayor's sole discretion not to be in the best
interests of the city.
   B.   Public Uses; Planning Commission Review: The sale of any public use
property owned by the city shall not be sold if such conveyance would not
conform with the Ogden City general plan, and any proposed conveyance of such
property shall be reviewed by the planning commission for its determination as
to such compliance. The planning commission may adopt guidelines authorizing
staff review of such conveyances for compliance with the plan. For purposes of
this section, "public use property" includes any real property:
      1.   Acquired, dedicated, or used as a park, recreation facility, public
street, trail, trailhead, or other public way;
      2.   Acquired, dedicated or used for the delivery of municipal services
to the public;
      3.   Associated with, or contiguous to, the municipal block, the Ogden
City cemetery, the El Monte and Mount Ogden golf courses, the community
services building, the Marshall White Center, the Ogden-Hinckley airport, the
public safety building, the public works complex, Union Station, and the
intermodel hub; and
      4.   Within one hundred feet (100') of the Ogden River or the Weber River
or undeveloped property located in the foothills along the eastern boundaries
of the city.
"Public use property" shall not include property acquired by the city for a
specific project or purpose involving the future conveyance of such property to
a third party for other than a public use.
   C.   Disclosure To City Council And Opportunity For Public Comment:
      1.   Before any sale, lease, trade or other encumbrance of any
"significant parcel" of real property of the city, as defined herein, the mayor
shall deliver a notice of the pendency of such transaction to the office of the
city council and allow an opportunity for public comment on the proposed
disposition at a public hearing, after fourteen (14) days' notice in a
newspaper of general circulation in the city.
      2.   For purposes of this subsection, "lease" shall not include the
rental of property on a month to month basis or for a term of less than one
year. "Lease" shall also not include airport leases governed by the provisions
of title 8 of this code.
      3.   For purposes of this subsection, "significant parcel" means:
         a.   "Public use property" as defined in subsection B of this section;
         b.   A parcel of real property, or a combination of contiguous
parcels, having an appraised or estimated value in excess of seventy five
thousand dollars ($75,000.00); or
         c.   A parcel of real property, or a combination of contiguous
parcels, having a size in excess of one acre.
      4.   "Significant parcel" shall not include:
         a.   "DDOU property", as defined in section
4-3A-7 of this article, or property in the Ogden commercial and industrial park
as provided in subsection E of this section; or
         b.   Property being conveyed as part of the following programs so long
as such properties would not otherwise be considered to be "public use
property" as defined in subsection B of this section:
            (1)   Infill housing program,
            (2)   Homestead program,
            (3)   East Central revitalization program,
            (4)   HUD asset control area program,
            (5)   Twenty Fifth Street infill program, and
            (6)   Any other federally funded program for which the city council
has adopted program guidelines.
      5.   The public hearing requirement imposed herein is not intended to
apply if the conveyance is subject to a different notice and public hearing
requirement under the provisions of state law or these ordinances.
   D.   Notice: The notice required in subsection C of this section shall
specify the following:
      1.   A general description of the property to be conveyed or encumbered;
      2.   The nature of the proposed conveyance or encumbrance whether the
property is to be sold, traded or encumbered, including the nature of the
conveyance if the property is to be sold, or if a trade or lease of property is
contemplated, a brief summary of the proposed transaction;
      3.   Persons to whom interests are to be conveyed;
      4.   Any consideration tendered;
      5.   The name of the person, department or entity requesting such action;
and
      6.   The date, time and place of the public hearing.
   E.   Exception: The sale of city owned lots within the Ogden commercial and
industrial park, as such park has been subdivided and recorded in the official
records of Weber County, state of Utah, is exempt from the requirements of
subsections C and D of this section, provided any such lot sale is for the
established market value price as periodically reviewed and established by city
administration, such sales are made subject to outstanding industrial park
protective covenants, and are for lots properly subdivided in accordance with
applicable city ordinances. Any proposed sales of city owned industrial park
lots desiring a discount from the established market value price, requesting
seller assisted financing via installment sale, second mortgage position, or
any other form of incentive from the city shall require notification to the
city council in accordance with subsections C and D of this section.
   F.   Sales Proceeds: The sale proceeds, less closing costs and real estate
commissions, from lot sales within the Ogden commercial and industrial park
shall be deposited into the city's CIP account and shall be earmarked for
payment of outstanding purchase obligations of the city for park property (the
Stratford property), park infrastructure improvements, and acquisition of
additional park property.
(Ord. 2003-20, 8-5-2003; amd. Ord. 2005-70, 12-6-2005)
4-3A-6: SALE OF PROPERTY ACQUIRED BY CONDEMNATION:
Real property acquired by the city, after July 1, 1983, by condemnation, or
threat of condemnation, may not be sold on the open market unless the
requirements of Utah Code Annotated section 78-34-20, or its successor, have
been met.
(Ord. 2003-20, 8-5-2003)
4-3A-7: CONVEYANCE OF DDOU PROPERTY:
   A.   Policy: The sale, lease, sublease, or other conveyance of real or
personal property acquired by Ogden City, acting as the local redevelopment
authority, as part of the closure of the defense distribution depot Ogden,
Utah, shall conform to the standards and procedures provided in this section.
Such conveyances shall not be subject to the requirements of section
4-3A-5 of this article.
   B.   Definitions: As used in this section, the following terms shall have
the designated meanings:
   ARMY: The United States of America, acting through the secretary of the
army.
   DDOU ENTERPRISE FUND: The enterprise fund established in the city's annual
budget for the acquisition, administration, operation, maintenance, and
development of the DDOU property.
   DDOU EXCHANGE PROPERTY: Real property received in exchange for DDOU
property.
   DDOU PERSONAL PROPERTY: Any personal property conveyed to Ogden City, acting
as the local redevelopment authority, as part of the closure of the defense
distribution depot Ogden, Utah, under the terms of the purchase contract.
   DDOU PROPERTY: Any real property conveyed to or leased by Ogden City, acting
as the local redevelopment authority, as part of the closure of the defense
distribution depot Ogden, Utah, under the terms of the purchase contract or the
LIFC.
   DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT: That certain master development agreement between
Ogden City and Boyer ORBIC, LC, for development of the Ogden Regional Business
and Industrial Center, dated December 29, 1999.
   LIFC: That certain lease in furtherance of conveyance, between the city and
the army, effective October 1, 1999, for the lease of a substantial portion of
the DDOU property yet to be conveyed to Ogden City under the purchase contract.
   LEASE AGREEMENT: That certain lease agreement for existing facilities and
grant of option to lease future development land, between Ogden City and Boyer
ORBIC, LC, dated December 28, 1999.
   PROJECTED COSTS: 1. The city's cost of acquiring and leasing the DDOU
property under the purchase contract and the LIFC;
      2.   The city's cost of constructing, installing and financing the
infrastructure and improvements necessary for the development of the DDOU
property; and
      3.   The present and future costs of developing, owning, possessing,
subleasing, maintaining and managing the DDOU property, including the costs of
overseeing the lease and development agreement.
   PROJECTED REVENUES: The reasonably projected revenues from sales, rent, real
property taxes, privilege taxes, personal property taxes, sales taxes, or other
revenue sources.
   PURCHASE CONTRACT: That contract of purchase between the department of the
army and Ogden City, Utah, dated May 5, 1999, and as amended by the third
addendum agreement, dated November 21, 2000.
   C.   Standards: Any sale, lease, sublease or other conveyance of DDOU
property or DDOU personal property by the city, or the approval by the city of
any sublease of DDOU property under the lease and development agreement, shall
comply with the following standards:
      1.   The favorability of any conveyance shall be determined based on
economic development criteria and not merely the "highest and best economic
return" that could be realized by the city by the sale, lease, or sublease of
the particular piece of property. Such economic development criteria shall
include, but not be limited to:
         a.   Job creation or retention to an extent which meets the goals,
parameters and assumptions of the DDOU reuse plan, considering the number of
jobs and wage ranges projected per land use area; and
         b.   A measurable positive impact to the tax base, considering revenue
to be generated by the proposed use as compared to the project cost of
municipal services.
      2.   The proposal includes sufficient investment by the lessee or buyer
to promote overall development of the DDOU property and to further the goals of
the DDOU reuse plan.
      3.   The proposed buyer, lessee or sublessee demonstrates the intention
and capability to enhance the area in accordance with the design guidelines
established in furtherance of the DDOU reuse plan.
      4.   Any city resources required to accommodate the proposal, if
applicable, are adequately offset by the return to be received under the
conveyance.
      5.   The term of any lease or sublease is of sufficient length to
facilitate appropriate reuse.
      6.   Any sublease of DDOU property possessed by the city under the LIFC
shall comply with all requirements of the LIFC.
      7.   Any conveyance of DDOU property or DDOU personal property owned by
the city shall comply with the requirements of the applicable deed of
conveyance or bill of sale from the United States of America to the city.
      8.   Any DDOU property being conveyed shall be made subject to the
declaration of conditions, covenants, and restrictions established and recorded
pursuant to the lease and development agreements.
      9.   The proposed property use shall be compatible with the approved DDOU
reuse plan and the applicable zoning ordinances of the city.
      10.   The city shall receive adequate consideration, as described in
subsection D of this section.
      11.   DDOU personal property determined to be unnecessary for the reuse
of DDOU shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of article B of
this chapter, subject to restrictions on the use of proceeds under the purchase
contract and the requirements of subsection H of this section.
   D.   Adequate Consideration: It is the intention of the city council that
the development of the DDOU property be self- supporting, and that use of the
general fund and other revenues of the city be minimized to the greatest extent
possible. It is also the intention of the city council that the development of
the DDOU property should eventually become revenue generating after meeting the
present and future costs to be incurred in implementing the DDOU reuse plan. In
furtherance of such intentions, any conveyance of DDOU property shall be for
cash, or its equivalent, and for not less than fair market value, unless it is
determined by the mayor, and approved by resolution of the city council, that:
      1.   The proposed development of the property in question merits economic
incentives;
      2.   The city otherwise receives adequate consideration for the property;
and
      3.   The provision of such economic incentives will not unreasonably
affect projected costs or projected revenues.
   E.   Subdivision Approvals Required: No portion of the property shall be
sold unless and until the subdivision of such property has been approved in
accordance with the ordinances and requirements of the city. The granting of
any lease with an option to buy shall contain a provision that the future
conveyance and the description of the property to be conveyed under such option
shall be subject to future subdivision approval, in accordance with Ogden City
ordinances.
   F.   Mayor To Submit Quarterly Report: The mayor shall provide to the city
council a quarterly report on all sales, leases, subleases or other conveyances
of real property, including any subleases approved under the lease agreement.
Such quarterly report shall include the following:
      1.   The status of any pending negotiations for the sale, lease, or
sublease of DDOU property, and the general terms and conditions involved, to
the extent such disclosure would not prevent the city from completing the
transaction on the best possible terms.
      2.   Completed or approved transactions, including the general terms and
conditions. General terms and conditions shall include: the name of the lessee/
buyer, identification of property, price and/or other consideration, any
unusual obligations assumed by the city.
      3.   Whether the proposal will require further action by the city council
or the RDA.
   G.   Exercise Of "Put" Under Lease And Development Agreements: The city has
the right to require the tenant to purchase certain portions of the DDOU
property under paragraph 26 of the lease agreement (the "put"). Because the
exercise of the "put" could have a significant impact upon projected costs and
projected revenues, the mayor may not exercise the "put" unless approved by
resolution of the city council.
   H.   Proceeds:
      1.   Except as provided in subsection H2 of this section, proceeds
received by the city for the sale or lease of DDOU property or DDOU personal
property shall be deposited in a restricted trust account within the DDOU
enterprise fund, and subjected to such controls as are reasonably determined by
the finance officer to be necessary to ensure compliance with the purchase
contract, lease agreement, and development agreement.
      2.   At such time as proceeds received by the city from the sale or lease
of DDOU property or DDOU personal property are no longer subject to
restrictions in use under the purchase contract, lease agreement or development
agreement, such proceeds shall be appropriated in the following order of
priority:
         a.   Payment of amounts pledged toward bonded indebtedness.
         b.   One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) to be used in FY2016 to fund
project area economic development.
         c.   Two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) annually beginning in
FY2017 through FY2021 for citywide home improvement loans.
         d.   Two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) annually for public
arts, with one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) appropriated annually for
arts grants as provided in section 3-16-5, and one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) appropriated for public arts projects as provided in chapter 1,
article C of this title, provided that the balance of unencumbered funds in the
arts fund at the beginning of a fiscal year, shall not exceed five hundred
thousand dollars ($500,000.00).
         e.   After consideration of the deductions for the appropriations
described in subsections H2a through H2d of this section:
            (1)   No less than fifty percent (50%) of the proceeds received
annually shall be used for the funding of capital improvement projects; and
            (2)   Up to ten percent (10%) of the proceeds received annually,
but not exceeding one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000.00), shall be
appropriated to a community plan capital improvement account to allow the
accumulation of funds for future appropriation for capital improvement projects
identified in adopted community plans.
         f.   Early retirement of city debt that is to be paid from the city's
general fund, as deemed appropriate.
         g.   Funding of other projects or programs, as deemed appropriate.
   I.   Proceeds Received From Properties Received In Exchange: The following
standards shall apply to DDOU exchange property:
      1.   Proceeds from the sale of DDOU exchange property are considered to
be proceeds from the sale or lease of DDOU property and subject to the
requirements of subsection H of this section.
      2.   In no event shall DDOU exchange property, subject to the
reinvestment requirements under the purchase contract, be sold for less than
fair market value, unless the city council takes such budgetary action as is
necessary to reimburse the DDOU enterprise fund for the difference between the
sales price and the fair market value amount.
      3.   The finance officer, with the assistance of the city attorney and
the director of the community and economic development department, shall
maintain a list of all DDOU exchange property.
   J.   Applicability Of Section: The provisions of this section shall not
affect the validity or enforceability of:
      1.   Any sale, contract of purchase, or option to purchase approved in
writing, prior to February 20, 2001, and in accordance with the ordinances
existing on the date of approval; or
      2.   Any sublease of DDOU property approved in writing, prior to February
20, 2001, and in accordance with the ordinances existing on the date of
approval.
(Ord. 2003-20, 8-5-2003; amd. Ord. 2003-82, 12-20-2003; Ord. 2005-65, 11-22-
2005; Ord. 2007-44, 6-12-2007; Ord. 2011-37, 7-5-2011; Ord. 2015-35, 7-7-2015;
Ord. 2016-23, 4-12-2016; Ord. 2019-23, 6-11-2019)
4-3A-8: CONVEYANCE TO OGDEN CITY REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY:
Notwithstanding the provisions contained in this article, real property
conveyed by the city to the Ogden City redevelopment agency may also be subject
to the public notice requirements imposed under Utah Code Annotated section
17B-4-103, or its successor.
(Ord. 2003-20, 8-5-2003)
4-3A-9: VALIDITY OF ACTIONS:
No provision of this article shall be construed to require or to invalidate any
conveyance or encumbrance by the city nor to vest rights or action of any kind
against the city, its officers, agents or employees.
(Ord. 2003-20, 8-5-2003)
ARTICLE B.  CITY-OWNED PERSONAL PROPERTY
SECTION:
4-3B-1: Finance Officer; Duties
4-3B-2: Department Directors; Responsibility
4-3B-3: Fire Department; Loan Procedures
4-3B-4: Access To Offices
4-3B-5: Property Records
4-3B-6: Personal Property Of Employees
4-3B-7: Acquisition
4-3B-8: Surplus
4-3B-9: Conveyance For Value
4-3B-10: Removal Of Property
4-3B-11: Negligence Or Misuse
4-3B-12: Validity Of Actions
4-3B-1: FINANCE OFFICER; DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the Finance Officer, as defined by Section
4-1A-2 of this Title, or its successor, to maintain a complete record and
valuation of all permanent personal property belonging to the City and the
Finance Officer shall, subject to the approval of the Director of Management
Services, devise appropriate methods and prescribe the forms of records to be
kept and the operating procedure to be followed in maintaining the proper
accounts pertaining thereto. The Finance Officer shall also keep a record of
all new or used permanent personal property acquired by the City and of its
disposition. The Finance Officer shall adopt guidelines defining permanent
personal property.
(1979 Code § 3.16.010; Ord. 94-33, 8-2-1994)
4-3B-2: DEPARTMENT DIRECTORS; RESPONSIBILITY:
Each department director or office head shall be held responsible for the
receipt, proper custody, appropriate labeling, use and disposition of all
personal property purchased for or used by his or her department, in accordance
with the property accounting procedure. He or she shall be held responsible for
such exercise of due care and proper use of property within his or her
department as is consistent with the powers of his or her office and with City
facilities available for its protection. Department directors may designate
members of their department to assist them in caring for departmental property.
(1979 Code § 3.16.050; Ord. 94-33, 8-2-1994; amd. 1999 Code)
4-3B-3: FIRE DEPARTMENT; LOAN PROCEDURES:
Notwithstanding any provision of this Article to the contrary, the Fire
Department is authorized to lend items of personal property belonging to the
City on a short-term basis when such loan is made for the purpose of saving or
preserving life and/or property in emergency situations. Whenever practical,
the Fire Department shall obtain a signed receipt for and an agreement to
return any item of personal property so loaned.
(1979 Code § 3.16.090; Ord. 94-33, 8-2-1994)
4-3B-4: ACCESS TO OFFICES:
The Finance Officer or his/her duly authorized agent shall have access to all
offices, laboratories, storerooms, shops, lockers, storage cabinets and all
other places where property belonging to the City is kept, for the purpose of
locating, inspecting and labeling City property.
(1979 Code § 3.16.030; Ord. 94-33, 8-2-1994)
4-3B-5: PROPERTY RECORDS:
   A.   Verification And Reports: Within the first quarter of each fiscal year
and at such other times as it is deemed advisable or necessary, the proper
accounting for personal property shall be verified by means of a physical
inventory of all personal property which shall be checked against the personal
property records. The Director of Management Services shall establish, in
writing, internal guidelines which shall be available to all departments
stating the month in which the annual inventory shall be conducted. A report of
all items which are unaccounted for by physical check shall be compiled for
each department, together with a statement of observations regarding the
orderliness and adequacy of storage facilities and the care and use of
property. A copy of this report shall also be submitted to the director of
management services.
(1979 Code § 3.16.020; Ord. 94-33, 8-2-1994)
   B.   Staff Assistance: It shall be the duty of the department directors or
other heads of city offices and designated employees to cooperate with the
designated property agents in the location, identification, marking and
maintaining required property records for new acquisitions and during periodic
spot audits.
(1979 Code § 3.16.040; Ord. 94-33, 8-2-1994)
4-3B-6: PERSONAL PROPERTY OF EMPLOYEES:
   A.   Declaration Of Ownership: All persons who, for their personal use and
convenience, bring personally owned property to their place of employment,
shall declare to their respective department directors the ownership of such
property and shall file with the department director a statement of all such
personally owned property used on the premises. In addition, the ownership of
such personally owned property should be clearly indicated on each item. The
record kept on file with the department director, together with the name of the
owner appearing on the item, shall be deemed sufficient evidence to overcome
the presumption that all property on the premises is property of the city.
Small personal effects which are not usually provided by the city and which are
not likely to be confused with similar items belonging to the city shall not be
subject to this regulation.
(1979 Code § 3.16.060; Ord. 94-33, 8-2-1994; amd. 1999 Code)
   B.   Identification And Control: The use on the premises of personal
property belonging personally to employees of the city, though not prohibited,
shall nevertheless be subject to regulation in an effort to facilitate
identification of employee owned personal property as distinguished from city
owned personal property and in order to allow for the movement of personally
owned property to and from the premises in a manner which will not interfere
with the city's ability to control and protect its property.
(1979 Code § 3.16.070; Ord. 94-33, 8-2-1994)
   C.   Insurance Protection: The city, except by written agreement, will not
provide insurance protection against loss of personally owned property, nor
will the city be otherwise responsible for loss in case of fire, theft or
destruction; nor will the city be responsible for the use or misuse of
personally owned property by its officers or employees.
(1979 Code § 3.16.080; Ord. 94-33, 8-2-1994)
4-3B-7: ACQUISITION:
   A.   Direct Purchase: The acquisition of permanent property by the city
shall be ascertained from the finance records of the city. A record thereof
shall be kept in appropriate form by the purchasing agent for each department
of the city. Upon receipt of the invoice and payment therefor, all property
shall be permanently identified and labeled by the receiving department, and
shall be subject to inspection and verification by city personnel responsible
for property management.
   B.   Other Methods: The acquisition of permanent property in some manner
other than by direct purchase, e.g., fabrication by departments, donations,
gifts and the like, shall be reported to the purchasing agent by the director
of the department receiving the property. Appropriate acknowledgement and
acceptance of donations and gifts should be made and a copy of the memorandum
of the acceptance should be filed with the purchasing agent, and also in the
files of the department director.
   C.   Acquisition For Ogden's Union Station Museum Collections: The director
of management services may authorize the acquisition of personal property for
Ogden's Union Station museum collections identified by Ogden Union Station
Foundation and shall adopt policies regarding such acquisition.
(1979 Code §§ 3.16.100, 3.16.110; Ord. 94-33, 8-2-1994; Ord. 2007-59, 10-2-
2007)
4-3B-8: SURPLUS:
   A.   Identification And Review: Department directors shall periodically
identify surplus personal property within the possession of their departments
and report such property to the director of management services for
consideration and approval. The director of management services shall also
periodically review such reports to determine whether excess properties are on
hand which need to be disposed of.
   B.   Methods Of Disposition: Personal property determined to be surplus
under the criteria set forth in this article may be disposed of by one or more
of the following means:
      1.   Interdepartmental Transfer: The director of management services
shall maintain a system for determining whether interdepartmental transfers of
property shall be made and the means by which transfers are to be effected.
      2.   Trade In: The director of management services may authorize surplus
personal property to be traded for other property or equipment being purchased.
      3.   Sale Or Irrevocable Transfer: The director of management services
shall adopt specific written guidelines establishing requirements for notice,
bidding or other conditions of sale or other transfer of personal property.
      4.   Salvage, Discard Or Destruction: Inventoried city personal property
shall not be salvaged, discarded or destroyed without the express written
authorization of the director of management services or a designated
representative.
   C.   Personal Property Managed By Ogden Union Station Foundation: The
director of management services may authorize the sale or other disposition of
personal property associated with Ogden's Union Station museum collections
identified by the Ogden Union Station Foundation and shall adopt policies
regarding such sale or disposition. The proceeds of any sale or disposition of
surplus personal property managed by the Ogden Union Station Foundation shall
be deposited in a trust account for Union Station and shall be used solely for
acquisitions to Union Station collections or for maintenance of objects in
Union Station museum collections. Expenditure of funds from this account shall
follow Ogden City procurement policies.
(1979 Code §§ 3.16.120, 3.16.130; Ord. 94-33, 8-2-1994; Ord. 2007-59, 10-2-
2007)
4-3B-9: CONVEYANCE FOR VALUE:
   A.   Considerations: Every transfer of inventoried, city owned, personal
property shall be conducted by the director of management services, or under
his/her express written authority. All conveyances of such property shall be
based upon the highest and best economic return to the city, except that
consideration for property conveyed may be based on other public policy factors
when conveyed to units of government or other public or quasi-public
organizations, or to nonprofit corporations which meet each of the following
criteria:
      1.   Have obtained an exemption pursuant to internal revenue code section
501(C)(3), from the internal revenue service.
      2.   Exist primarily to serve the needs of the public.
      3.   The property is used for bona fide public purposes with only
incidental benefit to the nonprofit entity.
   B.   Economic Return: The highest and best economic return to the city, as
referred to in this article, shall be estimated by one or more of the following
methods:
      1.   Sealed competitive bid;
      2.   Public auction;
      3.   Evaluation by qualified and disinterested consultant;
      4.   Other professional publications and valuation services; or
      5.   An informal market survey by the purchasing agent in the case of
items of personal property possessing readily discernible market value.
   C.   Sealed Bids; Public Auction: Sales of city personal property shall be
based, whenever possible, upon competitive sealed bids or at public auction.
The purchasing agent may, however, waive this requirement when the value of the
property has been estimated by an alternate method specified under this
subsection, and:
      1.   The value of the property is considered negligible in relation to
the costs of sale by bid or at public auction;
      2.   Sale by bidding procedures or at public auction are deemed unlikely
to produce a competitive offer; or
      3.   Circumstances indicate that bidding or sale at public auction will
not be in the best interests of the city.
   D.   Disposition Of Proceeds: All monies derived from the sales of personal
property shall be credited to the general fund of the city, unless the property
was purchased with monies derived from an enterprise fund or an internal
service fund, in which case the monies shall be deposited in the general
revenue account of the enterprise or internal service fund which made the
original purchase. Monies derived from the sales of personal property subject
to specific restrictions imposed by any grant or donation shall be credited as
required under the grant or donation.
(1979 Code §§ 3.16.140, 3.16.160; Ord. 94-33, 8-2-1994)
4-3B-10: REMOVAL OF PROPERTY:
   A.   Restricted: The removal of personal property from city premises for
recognized activities shall be restricted to those situations in which
employees shall be personally responsible for and shall have custody and
exercise immediate supervision over the property at all times, or in the
absence of custody and immediate supervision, it shall be limited to occasions
where due precautions have been taken to ensure its protection.
   B.   Special Permission Required: The removal of property from the city
premises for any purpose whatsoever which is inconsistent with the recognized
activities of the city and its departments is strictly prohibited unless
special permission is given by the mayor.
   C.   Procedure: Any removal of property shall be subject to the procedure
prescribed by the finance officer and approved by the director of management
services and the mayor.
   D.   Priority Established: Notwithstanding the above, the use of property
for institutional and departmental purposes shall not be impeded by removal
from city premises for other than recognized activities of the city.
   E.   Loans Of Ogden's Union Station Museum Collections: The director of
management services may authorize the temporary loan of personal property that
is considered part of Ogden's Union Station museum collections identified by
Ogden Union Station Foundation and shall adopt policies regarding such loans.
(1979 Code § 3.16.170; Ord. 94-33, 8-2-1994; Ord. 2007-59, 10-2-2007)
4-3B-11: NEGLIGENCE OR MISUSE:
Failure of the department director to account properly for all personal
property charged to a given department or to make satisfactory explanation as
to the use and disposition of any item shall be deemed cause for investigation
by the director of management services or his or her designees. If
investigation determines that the loss of property is due to negligence or
misapplication on the part of the department director, or some employee in the
director's department, in violation of the provisions of this article, then
those persons acting negligently or malfeasantly shall be held personally
liable for all loss resulting therefrom.
(1979 Code § 3.16.180; Ord. 94-33, 8-2-1994)
4-3B-12: VALIDITY OF ACTIONS:
No provision of this article shall be construed to require or to invalidate any
conveyance of the city nor to vest rights or action of any kind against the
city, its officers, agents or employees.
(1979 Code § 3.16.150; Ord. 94-33, 8-2-1994)
ARTICLE C.  DISPOSAL OF PROPERTY RECEIVED BY POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
4-3C-1: Definitions
4-3C-2: Custodial Property
4-3C-3: Unclaimed Personal Property
4-3C-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Article the following words shall have the meaning as defined
in this Section:
CUSTODIAL PROPERTY: Tangible property:
   A.   That comes into the possession of a peace officer through execution of
a search warrant;
   B.   That comes into the possession of a peace officer pursuant to an arrest
of a person, with or without a warrant;
   C.   That a peace officer received or took as evidence in connection with
any public offense.
DEPARTMENT: The Ogden City Police Department.
INTANGIBLE PROPERTY: A. Money, checks, drafts, deposits, interest, dividends
and income;
   B.   Credit balances, customer overpayments, gift certificates, security
deposits, refunds, credit memos, unpaid wages, unused airline tickets and
unidentified remittances;
   C.   Stocks and other intangible ownership interests in business
associations;
   D.   Money deposited to redeem stocks, bonds, coupons and other securities
or to make distributions;
   E.   Amounts due and payable under the terms of insurance policies; and
   F.   Amounts distributable from a trust or custodial fund established under
a plan to provide health, welfare, pension, vacation, severance, retirement,
death, stock purchase, profit sharing, employee savings, supplemental
unemployment insurance or similar benefits.
TANGIBLE PROPERTY: All personal property that is not intangible property.
UNCLAIMED PROPERTY: A. Tangible property that comes into the possession of a
peace officer or the Police Department:
      1.   That remains unclaimed by any person identifying himself or herself
as the owner of the tangible property; or
      2.   For which no owner can be found after a reasonable and diligent
search.
   B.   Unclaimed property includes tangible property coming into the
possession of the Police Department as evidence or by delivery from persons
claiming to have found the property.
   C.   Unclaimed property does not include tangible property governed by Utah
Code Annotated title 77, chapter 24.
(1979 Code § 3.18.010; Ord. 94-34, 8-2-1994)
4-3C-2: CUSTODIAL PROPERTY:
   A.   Safekeeping; Records Required: Each peace officer shall hold custodial
property in safe custody until it is received into evidence or, if it is not
used as evidence, until it can be disposed of as provided in this Article.
While in the custody of such peace officer, a proper record shall be maintained
reflecting the ownership of the property, if known, and the case or cases for
which it was taken or received and is being held.
(1979 Code § 3.18.020; Ord. 94-34, 8-2-1994)
   B.   Not Needed As Evidence; Return:
      1.   Procedure: Custodial property which is not needed as evidence shall
be returned to the owner if the owner may lawfully posses it. When it appears
to the peace officer or the Department that the custodial property is not
needed as evidence, the prosecuting attorney shall be so advised, giving a
description and details of ownership. When the prosecuting attorney, by such
notice or otherwise, becomes aware that the property is not needed, he or she
shall give written notice to the owner. Upon proof of ownership and of
lawfulness of possession satisfactory to the prosecuting attorney, the
prosecuting attorney shall give the owner written authorization which shall
entitle the owner to receive the property from the person having custody of it.
When custodial property is received in evidence, it shall be retained by the
clerk of the court last receiving it or shall be returned by the clerk of the
court to the custody of the peace officer until all direct appeals and retrials
are final, at which time the property shall be returned in accordance with this
Section. In the event that the prosecuting attorney considers it necessary to
retain control over the evidence, in anticipation of possible collateral
attacks upon the judgment or of use in some potential prosecution, he or she
may decline to authorize return.
(1979 Code § 3.18.030; Ord. 94-34, 8-2-1994)
      2.   Receipt: Whenever property is returned to the owner, a receipt shall
be taken from him listing in detail the property returned. The receipt shall be
retained as a permanent record in the files of the Police Department or the
court where the case is finally resolved.
(1979 Code § 3.18.040; Ord. 94-34, 8-2-1994)
   C.   Disposition:
      1.   Authority To Appropriate Or Sell: If the custodial property is not
claimed by the owner before the expiration of three (3) months from the receipt
of notice, or if the owner is unknown and no claim of ownership has been made,
the Department, if it has possession of the property, shall either appropriate
the property for public interest use as provided in subsection C3 of this
Section, or sell it at public auction, as provided by law, and with the
proceeds pay:
         a.   The necessary expenses incurred in the preservation of such
property and its sale; and
         b.   Any balance to the Director of Management Services for the City's
General Fund.
      2.   Public Interest Use Defined: As used in this Section, "public
interest use" includes use by a governmental agency or donation to a bona fide
charity.
      3.   Permission To Appropriate Required: Before appropriating the
custodial property for public interest use, the Department shall obtain from
the City Council permission to appropriate the property and the designation and
approval of the public interest use of the property.
(1979 Code § 3.18.050; Ord. 94-34, 8-2-1994; amd. 1999 Code)
   D.   Property Seized; Duplicate Receipts: When tangible or intangible
property is seized with or without a warrant, the peace officer seizing it
shall at the time deliver a receipt to the person from whom it is taken and
file a duplicate in the Department. If the custody of the property is
transferred to another law enforcement agency or the property is placed in
evidence, a copy of the receipt shall accompany it until disposition of the
property is made in accordance with applicable law.
(1979 Code § 3.18.060; Ord. 94-34, 8-2-1994)
4-3C-3: UNCLAIMED PERSONAL PROPERTY:
   A.   Received By Department: All unclaimed property coming into the
possession of a peace officer or the Department shall be turned over to, held
and disposed of only by the law enforcement agency whose authority extends to
the area where the item was found.
(1979 Code § 3.18.070; Ord. 94-34, 8-2-1994)
   B.   Statement Of Finder: A person finding unclaimed property and delivering
it to the Department shall sign a statement included in a form provided by the
Department, stating how the property came into the finder's possession,
including the time, date, and place, and stating that he or she does not know
who the owner of the property is, that the property was not to his or her
knowledge stolen, that the finder's possession of it is not unlawful, and
providing any information the finder is aware of which could lead to a
determination of the owner. Other information may be requested by the
Department as necessary.
(1979 Code § 3.18.080; Ord. 94-34, 8-2-1994)
   C.   Locating Owner: The Department shall take reasonable steps to determine
the identity and location of the owners, and notify him or her that the
property is in custody. The owner may obtain the property only by making
identification of himself or herself and of the property, and paying any costs
incurred by the Department, including costs for advertising or storage.
(1979 Code § 3.18.090; Ord. 94-34, 8-2-1994)
   D.   Disposition:
      1.   Notification: If the owner of any unclaimed property cannot be
determined or notified, or if the owner is determined and notified and fails to
appear and claim the property after three (3) months of its receipt by the
Police Department, the Police Department shall:
         a.   Publish at least one notice of the intent to dispose of the
unclaimed property in a newspaper of general circulation within the County; and
         b.   Post a similar notice in a public place designated for notice
within the Police Department.
      2.   Contents: The notice shall:
         a.   Give a general description of the item; and
         b.   The date of intended disposition.
      3.   When Disposal Authorized: The Police Department may not dispose of
the unclaimed property until at least eight (8) days after the date of
publication and posting.
      4.   Notification To Finder: If no claim is made for the unclaimed
property within nine (9) days of publication and posting, the agency shall
notify the person who turned the property over to the Police Department, by
mailing notice to the last address provided by the finder, if it was turned
over by the person under subsection B of this Section. Except as provided in
subsection D6 of this Section, if that person has complied with the provisions
of this Article, he may take the unclaimed property if he:
         a.   Pays the costs incurred for advertising and storage; and
         b.   Signs a receipt for the item.
      5.   Failure To Claim; Disposal: If the person who found the unclaimed
property fails to take the property under the provisions of this Article, the
Police Department shall dispose of that property and any other property that is
not claimed under this Article as provided by subsection 4-3C-2C of this
Article.
      6.   Exception: Any person employed by a law enforcement agency who finds
tangible property may not claim or receive property under this Section.
(1979 Code § 3.18.100; Ord. 94-34, 8-2-1994)
CHAPTER 4
ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEEDINGS
ARTICLE A.  ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS
SECTION:
4-4A-1: Procedure
4-4A-2: Exceptions
4-4A-1: PROCEDURE:
Unless another procedure is provided by statute, ordinance or adopted rules and
procedures, any administrative action or proceeding by the city for which a
hearing is required shall conform to the following:
   A.   Conducting Of Hearing: Administrative hearings shall be conducted by
the mayor or by one or more hearing officers appointed by the mayor. Hearings
shall be considered to be a public meeting, and held either during the regular
office hours of the city or during times regularly scheduled for the hearing of
appeals. Hearings are intended to be informal in nature. Formal rules of
evidence and discovery do not apply; however, an informal exchange of discovery
may be required, if requested in writing. Failure to request discovery shall
not be a basis for a continuance. Complainant information is protected and
shall not be released unless the complainant is a witness at the hearing.
Except as otherwise provided herein, the procedure and format of the hearing
shall be determined by the hearing officer.
   B.   Notice Of Hearing: Reasonable notice stating time, place and subject
matter shall be given to the parties involved, prior to any hearing. No
hearing, or the result thereof, shall be invalidated by any defect in giving
notice to the parties involved, unless a denial of due process is caused
thereby.
   C.   Witnesses, Evidence, Minutes And Findings: At the request of any party,
witnesses shall be sworn by the hearing officer. Each party shall have the
opportunity to cross examine witnesses and present evidence in support of his
or her case. A written declaration signed under penalty or perjury may be
accepted in lieu of a personal appearance. Testimony may be given by telephone
or other electronic means. Minutes of the hearing shall be kept by the city
recorder, a deputy city recorder designated by the city recorder, or other
secretary appointed by the mayor or the hearing officer. At the request and
expense of any party, a hearing may be recorded by a certified shorthand
reporter. Hearings may be tape recorded only under the direction and with the
consent of the hearing officer. The hearing officer shall adopt written
findings and enter a written order or decision, which shall be filed with the
city recorder.
   D.   Burden Of Proof: In any hearing challenging an administrative
determination that a city ordinance has been violated, the city bears the
burden of proof to establish the existence of the violation. The standard of
proof to be used by a hearing officer in deciding the issues at any hearing is
whether such finding is supported by a preponderance of the evidence.
   E.   Final Decision: A written order or decision of a hearing officer shall
constitute a final decision from which an appeal (for purposes of review and
not a trial de novo) may be taken to a court of law, in the time and manner
otherwise provided by law.
(Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
4-4A-2: EXCEPTIONS:
The above provisions shall not apply to administrative hearings and decisions
of public bodies, including, but not limited to, the planning commission, the
landmarks commission, the board of zoning adjustment, and the board of building
and fire code appeals. The hearings of such bodies shall be conducted in
accordance with their duly adopted rules and procedures.
(Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005; amd. Ord. 2017-1, 1-24-2017)
ARTICLE B.  SUBPOENAS
SECTION:
4-4B-1: Purpose
4-4B-2: Executive Branch
4-4B-3: Legislative Branch
4-4B-4: Issuance
4-4B-5: Proof Of Service
4-4B-6: Payment Of Costs
4-4B-7: Penalty; Enforcement
4-4B-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this Article to provide for the issuance of City subpoenas
by both the executive branch and the legislative branch of government for any
reasons to the full extent authorized by State law, including, but not limited
to, Utah Code Annotated section 10-3-610.
(1979 Code § 3.26.010; Ord. 94-10, 3-8-1994)
4-4B-2: EXECUTIVE BRANCH:
The executive branch may authorize subpoenas to compel the attendance of
witnesses located within the State to give testimony or to produce records and
documents or other items.
   A.   Authorized By Mayor: A subpoena may be authorized upon signature of the
Mayor or his or her designee or by a department director.
   B.   Endorsed By City Attorney: All executive subpoenas must also be
endorsed by the City Attorney or Assistant City Attorney. The Attorney's
signature shall be an affirmation the subpoena is an appropriate exercise of
administrative power prior to the City Recorder issuing the subpoena.
(1979 Code § 3.26.020; Ord. 94-10, 3-8-1994; amd. 1999 Code)
4-4B-3: LEGISLATIVE BRANCH:
The City Council may authorize subpoenas upon a majority vote of the Council.
Such subpoenas shall be signed by the chair of the City Council. Upon such vote
and signature, the subpoena shall be reviewed and approved "as to form" by the
City Attorney or Assistant City Attorney and shall then be issued by the City
Recorder.
(1979 Code § 3.26.030; Ord. 94-10, 3-8-1994)
4-4B-4: ISSUANCE:
   A.   City Recorder; Records Maintained: All City subpoenas, whether
executive or legislative, shall be issued by the City Recorder's office. The
City Recorder's office shall keep a record containing: 1) the date of issuance;
2) the matter for which the subpoena was issued; and 3) returns of all
subpoenas.
   B.   Distribution: All subpoenas shall be issued with an original and a
copy. The original, together with proof of service, shall be returned to the
City Recorder's office and a copy left with the person upon whom it is served.
   C.   Contents: Every administrative subpoena shall:
      1.   Be issued in the name of the City, shall be entitled "City Subpoena"
and shall state on its face whether it is before the legislative branch or the
executive branch;
      2.   State the title of the matter being heard;
      3.   Set forth the possible penalties for failure to respond; and
      4.   Command each person to whom it is directed to attend and give
testimony at a time and place specified in the body, which date and time shall
not be less than three (3) days from the date of service of the City subpoena.
(1979 Code § 3.26.040A, 3.26.040B, 3.26.040D; Ord. 94-10, 3-8-1994)
   D.   Production Of Records Or Documents: Any party may subpoena public
records or documents from the City. No party, including the City, may require
documents to be produced by a City subpoena which are classified by the City as
private, controlled, or protected under the Government Records Access and
Management Act 1  (the "Act") and Chapter 5 of this Title.
(1979 Code § 3.26.050; Ord. 94-10, 3-8-1994)
   E.   Other Parties' Request: Any person who is subject to an administrative
hearing before the City may, upon the payment of the costs of the City Recorder
for issuing subpoenas, have the City Recorder's office issue subpoenas to
compel the attendance of persons or the production of nonprivileged,
nonconfidential documents at the hearing. The person shall make his or her own
arrangements for service of the subpoena.
(1979 Code § 3.26.070; Ord. 94-10, 3-8-1994)
 
Notes
1 1. U.C.A. title 63, chapter 2.
4-4B-5: PROOF OF SERVICE:
   A.   Persons Authorized: Service of City subpoenas may be made by any City
employee or by any person who meets the requirements of rule 4 of the Utah
Rules of Civil Procedure.
   B.   Rules Of Procedure: Service shall be in accord with rule 4 of the Utah
Rules of Civil Procedure.
(1979 Code § 3.26.060; Ord. 94-10, 3-8-1994)
   C.   Filing: A certificate with a statement as to the date, place and manner
of service shall be filed with the City Recorder's office by the person serving
the subpoena within five (5) days of the date of service, however, failure to
file this proof of service shall not affect the validity of the service.
(1979 Code § 3.26.040C; Ord. 94-10, 3-8-1994)
4-4B-6: PAYMENT OF COSTS:
   A.   City: All costs of service and witness fees for subpoenas issued on
behalf of the City shall be paid by the department (including the Mayor's
office or the City Council) on whose behalf the subpoena was issued, unless or
until a fund is created to pay for these costs. These costs shall include
witness fees and mileage.
   B.   Other Parties: All costs of service and witness fees for subpoenas
issued on behalf of any person other than the City shall be paid by the person
requesting issuance of the subpoena.
   C.   Witness Fees: Witness fees shall be the same as authorized in Utah Code
Annotated section 21-5-4, as amended from time to time, or its successor
statutes.
(1979 Code § 3.26.080; Ord. 94-10, 3-8-1994)
4-4B-7: PENALTY; ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Violation: Any party who wilfully fails to comply with a City subpoena,
or who, having appeared, refuses to answer any question pertinent to the matter
under inquiry, except in accord with privileges granted by law, shall be guilty
of a Class B misdemeanor, punishable as set forth in Title 1, Chapter 4 of this
Code.
   B.   Enforcement: In addition to criminal penalties, the subpoenaing party
may also have the right of access to the court for judicial enforcement of
administrative subpoenas.
(1979 Code § 3.26.090; Ord. 94-10, 3-8-1994)
CHAPTER 5
RECORDS ACCESS AND MANAGEMENT
SECTION:
4-5-1: Purpose
4-5-2: Fees
4-5-3: Records Management
4-5-4: City Records Review Board
4-5-5: Appeal
4-5-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   It is the purpose of this chapter to provide, consistent with
applicable state and federal law, guidelines and procedures relating to records
practices of Ogden City.
   B.   The provisions of the Utah Government Records Access and Management Act
(hereinafter referred to as "the act"), Utah Code Section 63G, Chapter 2 et
seq., or its successor provisions shall directly govern.
   C.   Intent: It is the intent of the city:
      1.   That all records of the city, which are defined by the act as public
records, shall be made available to citizens within a reasonable time after
request and at a reasonable cost as set forth in this chapter;
      2.   To establish and maintain an active, continuing program for the
economical and efficient management of the city's records;
      3.   To favor public access when, in the application of this chapter,
countervailing interests are of equal weight.
(1979 Code § 3.28.010; Ord. 92-40, 8-4-1992; Ord. 2007-55, 7-17-2007; Ord.
2019-16, 5-7-2019)
4-5-2: FEES:
   A.   Authority: The city recorder and departments releasing copies of public
records in accordance with this chapter, shall charge a reasonable fee to cover
the city's actual cost of duplicating a record, compiling a record in a form
other than that maintained by the city, postage, the cost of providing a
certified copy of a record, or any other fee reasonably related to the city's
cost of fulfilling the request for the record consistent with this chapter and
the act.
   B.   Standard Fees: Standard fees to be charged under this section shall be
adopted pursuant to chapter 6 of this title, or any successor provision.
(1979 Code § 3.28.080; Ord. 92-40, 8-4-1992; Ord. 2007-55, 7-17-2007; Ord.
2019-16, 5-7-2019)
4-5-3: RECORDS MANAGEMENT:
   A.   Duty Of City Recorder: The city recorder shall oversee and coordinate
records access and management for the city. Each department director or the
head of any city office shall appoint a records officer to assist with and be
directly responsible for the implementation of this chapter within their
respective department or office.
   B.   Records Committee Created: There is hereby created the city records
committee, hereinafter referred to as the "committee", to be chaired by the
city recorder. Members of the committee shall include the records officer of
each city department or office, a representative from the mayor's office and
the staff of the city council. The records committee shall meet periodically as
needed, as determined by the city recorder. The city attorney shall provide
assistance to the committee as needed. The minutes and other records of the
records committee shall be maintained and staff provided by the city recorder's
office.
   C.   Records Retention, Classification, Access: The records committee shall:
      1.   Develop standards for the management and retention of the records of
the city;
      2.   Develop policies and procedures for the classification and
designation of the records of the city as public, private, controlled or
protected in accordance with this chapter and the act;
      3.   Develop access policies and procedures to govern and implement the
provisions of the act and this chapter; and
      4.   Approve classifications or designations applied to record series
maintained by the city and provide a statement explaining the purposes for
which a record series designated private or controlled are collected and used
by the city.
   D.   Maintenance Procedures: Records maintenance procedures shall be
developed to ensure that due care is taken to maintain and preserve city
records safely and accurately over the long term. The committee shall be
responsible for monitoring the application and use of technical processes in
the creation, duplication and disposal of city records. They shall monitor
compliance with required standards of quality, permanence and admissibility
pertaining to the creation, use and maintenance of records. Policies and
regulations regarding types and formats of papers, inks, electronic media and
other records and information storage media, materials, equipment, procedures
and techniques shall be developed.
   E.   General Policy For Retention: It is the general policy of the city to
follow the model retention schedule prepared by the Utah department of
administrative services and approved by the state records committee or its
successor. If it is determined that there is a need to retain records of the
city beyond the minimum length of time recommended by the state or, if the
record in question is not addressed in the above retention schedule, the mayor,
upon the recommendation of the records committee, may approve longer or
additional retention schedules.
(1979 Code § 3.28.180; Ord. 92-40, 8-4-1992; amd. Ord. 93-55, 10-12-1993; Ord.
2007-55, 7-17-2007; Ord. 2019-16, 5-7-2019)
4-5-4: CITY RECORDS REVIEW BOARD:
   A.   Established: The records review board shall consist of three (3)
individuals appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city
council as outlined in the act.
   B.   Terms: The initial board members shall be appointed to staggered terms
so that one is appointed to a one year term, one is appointed to a two (2) year
term and one is appointed to a three (3) year term. The successors of the
initial board shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years, except when a
vacancy occurs in the membership for any reason, the replacement shall be
appointed for the remaining unexpired term. Members of the board may be removed
by the mayor for cause. Board members serve until replaced.
   C.   Chairperson; Rules And Procedures: The board shall elect a chairperson
who shall preside at all hearings conducted by the board. The board may adopt
reasonable rules and procedures for the conduct of appeals heard before the
board.
(1979 Code § 3.28.270; Ord. 92-40, 8-4-1992; amd. 1999 Code; Ord. 2007-55, 7-
17-2007; Ord. 2019-16, 5-7-2019)
4-5-5: APPEAL:
   A.   Chief Administrative Officer:  Persons aggrieved by the city's
classification or designation of a record, or of an access decision or by a
response to a record request may appeal the determination to the Chief
Administrative Officer.
   B.   Written Appeal To Chief Administrative Officer; Content: The appellant
shall set forth in writing the date of the request, attaching a copy of the
request and denial form, if available, mailing address, daytime phone number
and the relief sought.  A short statement of facts, reasons, and legal
authority in support of the appeal may be included.
   C.   Time Limitation; Filing: An appeal under this Section shall be brought
within thirty (30) calendar days of the date of the action aggrieved, or of the
date when the person appealing reasonably should have become aware of the
action.  All appeals shall be filed in the city recorder's office.   
   D.   Authority Of Chief Administrative Officer: The Chief Administrative
Officer may, upon consideration and weighing of the various interests and
public policies pertinent to the classification and disclosure or
nondisclosure, order the disclosure of information properly classified as
private or protected if the interests favoring access are greater than or equal
to the interests favoring restriction of access.  If the Chief Administrative
Officer fails to make a decision on an appeal within the time specified in
Subsection E the failure is the equivalent of a decision affirming the access
denial.
   E.   Determination: The Chief Administrative Officer shall make a
determination of any appeal within ten (10) business days after the chief
Administrative Officer's receipt of the notice of appeal and the city shall
send written notice of the decision.
   F.   Records Review Board: Persons aggrieved by the determination of the
Chief Administrative Officer may appeal the determination to the records review
board.
   G.   Written Appeal To The Records Review Board; Content: The appellant
shall set forth in writing the date of the request, attaching a copy of the
request and denial for, if available, mailing address, daytime phone number and
the relief sought.  A short statement of facts, reasons, and legal authority in
support of the appeal may be included.
   H.   Hearing Scheduled: No later than ten (10) business days after receiving
a notice of appeal, the city recorder shall schedule a hearing before the
records review board which shall be held no sooner than fifteen (15) calendar
days and no later than thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the filing of
the appeal, unless agreed to by the parties.
   I.   Testimony; Comments: At the hearing, the records review board shall
allow the parties to testify, present evidence and comment on the issues. The
records review board may allow other interested persons to comment on the
issues.
   J.   Authority Of Board: The records review board may, upon consideration
and weighing of the various interests and public policies pertinent to the
classification and disclosure or nondisclosure, order the disclosure of
information properly classified as private or protected if the interests
favoring access are greater than or equal to the interests favoring restriction
of access. In making such disclosure the records review board may limit the
requester's use and further disclosure of a record as provided in section 63G-
2-403(11)(c), or successor, of the act.
   K.   Determination; Court Order: The records review board shall make a
determination on any appeal within ten (10) business days after the hearing.
The records review board shall issue a signed order either granting the
petition, in whole or in part, or upholding the initial determination of the
city. The order of the records review board shall include:
      1.   A statement of reasons for the decision;
      2.   A description of the record or portions of the record to which
access was ordered or denied; provided, that the description does not disclose
private, controlled or protected information;
      3.   A statement that any party to the appeal may appeal the decision of
the records review board to the state records committee or district court
within thirty (30) days after the date of the order;
      4.   A brief summary of the appeal and a notice that, in order to protect
its right on appeal, the party may wish to seek advice from an attorney.
   L.   Appeal To State Records Committee Or District Court: Appeal of any
final decision may be made to the state records committee or district court, in
accordance with the act and the Utah rules of civil procedure.
(1979 Code § 3.28.260; Ord. 92-40, 8-4-1992; Ord. 2007-55, 7-17-2007; Ord.
2019-16, 5-7-2019)
A description of the record or portions of the record to which access was
ordered or denied; provided, that the description does not disclose private,
controlled or protected information;
      3.   A statement that any party to the appeal may appeal the decision of
the records review board to district court within thirty (30) days after the
date of the order;
      4.   A brief summary of the appeal and a notice that, in order to protect
its right on appeal, the party may wish to seek advice from an attorney.
   H.   Appeal To District Court: Appeal of any final decision may be made to
the district court, in accordance with the act and the Utah rules of civil
procedure.
(1979 Code § 3.28.260; Ord. 92-40, 8-4-1992; Ord. 2007-55, 7-17-2007)
CHAPTER 6
FEES
SECTION:
4-6-1: Charges Imposed For Special Services
4-6-2: Collection
4-6-3: Deposits
4-6-1: CHARGES IMPOSED FOR SPECIAL SERVICES:
In addition to other fees provided in this code, the following charges are
imposed for special services which are not ordinarily needed, requested or
supplied to the general public, in order that the cost of such special service
is paid by the person or persons receiving the benefit of the service and not
by the general public:
 
A. Community And Economic Development Department:
  1. Petitions:
   Rezoning of property                                                             $550.00
   Rezoning of property which requires a development agreement                      800.00
   Development agreement amendment                                                  550.00
   Zoning ordinance text amendment                                                  600.00
   Annexation                                                                       600.00
   Vacation of street, public alley, easement; vacation/amendment of subdivision    300.00
     plat:
     Street name change                                                            500.00
   General plan amendment                                                           625.00
   Agriculture protection area                                                      625.00
  2. Administrative reviews:
   Board of zoning adjustment                                                       100.00
   Zoning administrator                                                             50.00
   Conditional use permit applications:
     No site plan required                                                         175.00
     Site plan required                                                            400.00
   Lot split or combination applications                                            25.00
     Expedited:
       2 - 4 days                                                                 100.00
       5 - 10 days                                                                75.00
     Zoning letters                                                                25.00
   Site plan review:
     Single-family, duplex and minor additions to all types of development         100.00
     Resubmitted residential development plans, due to inaccurate drawings, each   150.00
        resubmittal
     New development, major additions, planning commission site plan reviews       250.00
     Resubmitted commercial/manufacturing plans, due to inaccurate drawings,       175.00
        each resubmittal
     MU site plan review                                                           800.00
     PUD group dwelling review                                                     600.00
     NCU expansion                                                                 150.00
   Subdivision reviews:
                                                                                      $600.00 plus
     General, PRUDs, condominium                                                   $150.00 per
                                                                                      lot or unit
                                                                                      $600.00 for
                                                                                      subdivision
                                                                                      plus
                                                                                      $1,000.00 for
                                                                                      geologic
                                                                                      report review
                                                                                      plus any
     In sensitive overlay zone                                                     additional
                                                                                      billable cost
                                                                                      for third
                                                                                      party review
                                                                                      of geologic
                                                                                      report plus
                                                                                      $150.00 per
                                                                                      lot or unit
                                                                                      $100.00 plus
     Condominium conversions per project                                           $5.00 per
                                                                                      unit
     Subdivision amendment                                                         $400.00
  3. Plan reviews under title 16 of this code                                        See title 16
                                                                                      of this code
  4. Business licenses                                                               See title 5
                                                                                      of this code
  5. Building permit fees (i.e., building, plumbing, electrical, mechanical,
   demolitions, etc.):
   a. Technical code base fee schedule:
     Total Permit Valuation                                                        Fee 1
   $1.00 to $1,200.00                                                               $70.50
                                                                                      $70.50 for
                                                                                      the first
                                                                                      $1,200.00
                                                                                      plus $2.78
                                                                                      for each
   $1,201.00 to $2,000.00                                                           additional
                                                                                      $100.00 or
                                                                                      fraction
                                                                                      thereof, to
                                                                                      and including
                                                                                      $2,000.00
                                                                                      $92.75 for
                                                                                      the first
                                                                                      $2,000.00
                                                                                      plus $16.00
                                                                                      for each
   $2,001.00 to $25,000.00                                                          additional
                                                                                      $1,000.00 or
                                                                                      fraction
                                                                                      thereof, to
                                                                                      and including
                                                                                      $25,000.00
                                                                                      $460.75 for
                                                                                      the first
                                                                                      $25,000.00
                                                                                      plus $11.50
                                                                                      for each
   $25,001.00 to $50,000.00                                                         additional
                                                                                      $1,000.00 or
                                                                                      fraction
                                                                                      thereof, to
                                                                                      and including
                                                                                      $50,000.00
                                                                                      $748.25 for
                                                                                      the first
                                                                                      $50,000.00
                                                                                      plus $8.00
                                                                                      for each
   $50,001.00 to $100,000.00                                                        additional
                                                                                      $1,000.00 or
                                                                                      fraction
                                                                                      thereof, to
                                                                                      and including
                                                                                      $100,000.00
                                                                                      $1,148.25 for
                                                                                      the first
                                                                                      $100,000.00
                                                                                      plus $6.30
                                                                                      for each
   $100,001.00 to $500,000.00                                                       additional
                                                                                      $1,000.00 or
                                                                                      fraction
                                                                                      thereof, to
                                                                                      and including
                                                                                      $500,000.00
                                                                                      $3,668.25 for
                                                                                      the first
                                                                                      $500,000.00
                                                                                      plus $5.25
                                                                                      for each
   $500,001.00 to $1,000,000.00                                                     additional
                                                                                      $1,000.00 or
                                                                                      fraction
                                                                                      thereof, to
                                                                                      and including
                                                                                      $1,000,000.00
                                                                                      $6,293.25 for
                                                                                      the first
                                                                                      $1,000,000.00
                                                                                      plus $4.00
   $1,000,001.00 and up                                                             for each
                                                                                      additional
                                                                                      $1,000.00 or
                                                                                      fraction
                                                                                      thereof
   b. Additional inspections not included in technical code base fee schedule       $47.00 per
                                                                                      hour
                                                                                      65% of the
                                                                                      technical
                                                                                      code base fee
                                                                                      schedule or,
   c. Plan review fee:                                                              if a lesser
                                                                                      amount, the
                                                                                      actual cost 1
                                                                                      of performing
                                                                                      the review
     Over the counter plan review                                                  $47.00
     Additional plan review required by changes, additions or revisions to plans   $47.00 per
                                                                                      hour
     Plan review fee for identical buildings as defined in section                 $47.00 per
        16-1-4 of this code                                                           hour
   d. Fees for outside consultants for plan checking and inspections, or both       Actual cost 1
  6. Sign fees:
   a. Review fee:
     For signs up to $1,200.00 in value that are reviewed over the counter         $11.00
                                                                                      65% of the
                                                                                      technical
                                                                                      code base fee
        For signs $1,201.00 in value and higher or for all signs that require more    schedule or,
     than over the counter review                                                  if a lesser
                                                                                      amount, the
                                                                                      actual cost
                                                                                      of performing
                                                                                      the review
   b. Permit fee:
     For signs not requiring an inspection                                         No fee
     For signs up to $1,200.00 in value requiring a single inspection              $47.00
                                                                                      100% of the
     For signs $1,201.00 in value and higher and for all signs requiring           technical
        multiple inspections                                                          code base fee
                                                                                      schedule
                                                                                      Fees are
                                                                                      equal to
                                                                                      those
   c. Remodeling or moving of sign                                                  described in
                                                                                      subsections
                                                                                      A6a and A6b
                                                                                      of this
                                                                                      section
                                                                                      See section
  7. Board of building and fire code appeals                                         16-1-7 of
                                                                                      this code
   
  8. Engineering:
      
   a. Inspection fees                                                               $30.00 each
      
   b. Permit fees:
      
                                                                                      $0.30 per
                                                                                      linear foot
     Curb and gutter                                                               plus
                                                                                      inspection
                                                                                      fee
      
                                                                                      $0.30 per
                                                                                      linear foot
     Sidewalk                                                                      plus
                                                                                      inspection
                                                                                      fee
      
                                                                                      $0.33 per
                                                                                      linear foot
     Sewer and water lines                                                         plus
                                                                                      inspection
                                                                                      fee
      
     Street excavation permit:
      
                                                                                      $150.00 up to
                                                                                      100 linear
                                                                                      feet, over
        Surface 0 to 3 years old                                                100
                                                                                      additional
                                                                                      $2.00 per
                                                                                      linear foot
      
                                                                                      $75.00 up to
                                                                                      100 linear
                                                                                      feet, over
        Surface over 3 years old                                                100
                                                                                      additional
                                                                                      $1.00 per
                                                                                      linear foot
      
                                                                                      $22.00 plus
        Unimproved streets or parking strips                                    $1.10 per 100
                                                                                      linear feet
      
                                                                                      $0.20 per
                                                                                      linear foot
     Utility lines                                                                 plus
                                                                                      inspection
                                                                                      fee
      
   c. Subdivision fees:
      
                                                                                      2% of the
                                                                                      estimated
     Inspection fee                                                                value of the
                                                                                      improvements
                                                                                      subject to
                                                                                      inspection
      
   d. Charges for copies of plats, maps, etc. (by paper size and document type):
      
        Letter or legal size                                                    None
        Sewer plats                                                             $  2.00 each
        Water plats                                                             2.00 each
        Bible sheets                                                            2.00 each
        Construction drawings                                                   2.00 each
        Large City maps (xerox)                                                 3.00 each
        City maps (plotter)                                                     10.00 each
      
  9. Airport:
      
   Meeting rooms at the airport:
      
     1 use per week                                                                250.00 per
                                                                                      year
     Private parties                                                               50.00 per use
     Outdoor pavilion                                                              50.00 per use
      
                                                                                      See title 8,
   All other airport fees                                                           chapter 5 of
                                                                                      this Code
      
  10. Landmarks Commission:                                                           
                                                                                   
   Appeals to Board of Building and Fire Code pursuant to section                  $100.00
     17-5-7 of this Code
                                                                                   
   Request for determination of economic hardship pursuant to section              336.00
     17-5-5 of this Code
                                                                                   
     Request for certificate of appropriateness for demolition of a historic
   resource pursuant to section                                                    378.00
     17-3-3 of this Code
                                                                                   
  11. Union Station:                                                                  
                                                                                   
   a. Museum admissions:                                                             
                                                                                 
        Adults                                                                 7.00
                                                                                 
        Seniors (over 65)                                                      5.00
                                                                                 
        Teens (13 - 17)                                                        4.00
                                                                                 
        Children (under 12)                                                    3.00
                                                                                 
        Infants (under 2)                                                      Free
                                                                                 
        Family day pass (up to 2 adults and up to 6 children)                  20.00
                                                                                 
                                                                                      Free
                                                                                      admission
                                                                                      with valid
                                                                                      current
        Blue Star Museum participant                                           active
                                                                                      military ID
                                                                                      from Memorial
                                                                                      Day through
                                                                                      Labor Day
                                                                                   
        All active military and veterans are offered a 10% discount on           
        admissions
                                                                                   
   b. Annual memberships:                                                            
                                                                                   
        Individual membership                                                  $30.00
                                                                                 
        Dual membership (valid for 2 people)                                   50.00
                                                                                 
        Family membership (valid for 2 adults and up to 6 children age 17 and  60.00
        under per visit)
                                                                                 
        Senior individual membership (over 65)                                 20.00
                                                                                 
        Senior dual membership (both over 65)                                  30.00
                                                                                 
        Student membership (current college ID)                                20.00
                                                                                 
        All active military and veterans are offered a 10% discount on           
        memberships
                                                                                 
   c. Tours:                                                                       
                                                                                 
        Field trip per student                                                 3.00
                                                                                   
        Groups of 10 or more - Utah students (pre K to grade 12, after school, youth, and daycare
        groups) - pay $3.00 per individual when reserving at least 2 weeks in advance. We require 1
     adult for every 10 students in grade 5 and above. For groups in grades pre-K to 4 we
        require 1 adult for every 5 children. Teachers and chaperones are free. Each adult
        exceeding these ratios will be charged $4.00.
                                                                                   
        Adult group tour per individual                                        $4.00
                                                                                   
     The adult group tour discount applies to groups of 10 or more adults reserving at least 2
        weeks in advance. To receive discount all individuals must pay as a group.
                                                                                   
   d. Rentals:                                                                       
                                                                                   
     Browning Theater Annex (includes use of Browning kitchen):                     
        Banquet setup for 200 people or theater seating for 250:               
           Monday - Thursday                                                $1,095.00
           Friday - Saturday                                                1,495.00
           Breezeway addition                                               200.00
                                                                                   
     North End package (includes Browning Theater, West Annex, breezeway, and       
        kitchen):
        Banquet setup for 500 people or theater seating for 425:                 
           Monday - Thursday                                                1,995.00
           Friday - Saturday                                                2,955.00
                                                                                   
     Gallery 51:                                                                    
        Banquet setup for 200 people or theater seating for 150:                 
           Monday - Thursday                                                695.00
           Friday - Saturday                                                895.00
                                                                                   
     Grand Lobby (includes use of Gallery 51):                                      
        Banquet setup for 400 people or theater seating for 500:                 
           Monday - Thursday                                                995.00
           Friday - Saturday                                                1,695.00
                                                                                   
     Fountain Plaza:                                                                
        Theater seating for 150:                                                 
           Monday - Thursday                                                1,295.00
           Friday - Saturday                                                1,595.00
           Room rental addition (150 seats)                                 200.00
           Room rental addition (300 seats)                                 400.00
     Old Timers Room:                                                               
        Banquet setup for 200 people or theater seating for 250:                 
           Monday - Thursday                                                895.00
           Friday - Saturday                                                1,195.00
                                                                                   
     Wattis Dumke Room:                                                             
        Banquet setup for 50 people or theater seating for 80:                   
           Monday - Thursday                                                395.00
           Friday - Saturday                                                495.00
                                                                                   
     Myra Powell Gallery:                                                           
        Banquet setup for 50 people or theater seating for 80:                   
           Monday - Thursday                                                395.00
           Friday - Saturday                                                495.00
           Room rental addition                                             200.00
                                                                                   
     Railroad Patio:                                                                
        Theater seating for 50:                                                  
           Monday - Thursday                                                395.00
           Friday - Saturday                                                495.00
           Room rental addition                                             200.00
                                                                                   
     Accessories:                                                                   
        Tables (each additional)                                               10.00
        Chairs (each additional)                                               1.00
        Stage risers (each)                                                    25.00
                                                                                   
        Event rental times are from 10:00 A.M. - 10:00 P.M. Rental included setup and takedown of
     Union Station tables and chairs. Customer to complete decorating, event, and cleanup within
        this time. Events that exceed 10:00 P.M. will be charged at $300.00 an hour, not to exceed
        12:00 midnight.
                                                                                   
     Browning Theater projector and/or more than 1 microphone requires advanced booking with an
        audiovisual contractor. Pricing subject to contractor costs.
                                                                                   
        Security is required for all events with alcohol service. A security officer is required
     for every 150 people. The charge is $150.00 per officer. Bar service is not available for
        events where the celebrant is under 21 years old.
                                                                                   
     All rentals require cleaning/damage deposits as follows:
                                                                                   
        Room only                                                              $150.00
        Room with food                                                         250.00
        Room, food, and alcohol                                                400.00
                                                                                   
     Museums can be reserved from 6:00 P.M. - 7:00 P.M. for $300.00 or used during business
        hours in conjunction with a room rental for $2.00 per capita (or person).
                                                                                   
   e. Library/archive fees:                                                          
                                                                                   
        Research service (per hour after first 15 minutes of service per staff $ 25.00
                                                                                   
        Photocopying or scanning:                                                
           Published materials (per page)                                   0.25
           Archival, unpublished (per page)                                 0.50
           Fee of $25.00/hour will be added after first 20 pages              
                                                                                   
        Image licensing for scholarly/ non-profit use:                           
           Inside of book/magazine/ journal                                 50.00
           Cover of book/magazine/ journal                                  100.00
           Electronic book/journal                                          25.00
           Television/film/video/multime dia                                50.00
           Website/internet                                                 25.00
           Exhibit (non-web based)                                          Determined
                                                                                      per project
                                                                                   
        Image licensing for commercial use for print runs up to 5,000:           
           Inside of book/magazine/ journal                                 $100.00
           Cover of book/magazine/ journal                                  200.00
           Electronic book/journal                                          50.00
           Television/film/video/multime dia                                100.00
           Website/internet                                                 150.00
           Exhibit (non-web based)                                          Determined
                                                                                      per project
                                                                                   
        Image licensing for commercial use for print runs over 5,000:            
           Inside of book/magazine/ journal                                 $150.00
           Cover of book/magazine/ journal                                  300.00
           Electronic book/journal                                          75.00
           Television/film/video/multime dia                                150.00
                                                                                   
B. Public Services Department:
                                                                                 
  1. Reserved                                                                       
                                                                                 
  2. Cemetery:                                                                      
                                                                                 
   Grave spaces:                                                                   
     Resident                                                                     600.00
     Nonresident                                                                  750.00
        (40% of purchase price shall be placed in the Perpetual Care Fund)     
                                                                                 
   Interment:                                                                      
                                                                                 
     Adult resident (3' x 8' or over)                                             500.00
     Adult nonresident (3' x 8' or over)                                          750.00
                                                                                 
     Child resident (3' x 5')                                                     300.00
     Child nonresident (3' x 5')                                                  350.00
                                                                                 
     Baby and urn resident (2' x 2')                                              250.00
     Baby and urn nonresident (2' x 2')                                           300.00
                                                                                 
     Cremains                                                                     100.00
                                                                                 
     Additional charge for Saturday overtime                                      300.00
                                                                                 
     Additional charge for weekday overtime (after 4:00 P.M.)                     200.00 per
                                                                                      hour
                                                                                 
   Marker setting fee:                                                             
     Upright                                                                      100.00
     Bevel                                                                        50.00
 
 
  Disinterment (costs will be higher if moved to
  location inside the cemetery):
                                                 Outside   Inside
   Adult (3' x 5' or over)                       $1,000.00 $1,500.00
   Child or baby (less than 3' x 5')             400.00    650.00
 3. Tiffany Memorial Pet Cemetery:
                                                 Residents   Nonresidents
  Grave sites:
   3' x 5'                                       $ 50.00   $100.00
   2' x 3'                                       30.00     100.00
  Interment                                      50.00     50.00
   Additional charge for Saturday overtime       100.00    100.00
  Disinterment                                   200.00    200.00
 
 
 4. El Monte And Mount Ogden Golf Courses*:
                                                 
  9 holes (regular weekday)                        $ 15.00
                                                   
  9 holes (regular weekend)***                     16.00
                                                   
  18 holes (regular weekday)                       30.00
                                                   
  18 holes (regular weekend)***                    32.00
                                                   
  18 holes (with cart) (Monday - Thursday)         40.00
                                                   
  El Monte A.M. rate (before 9:00 A.M., excluding  9.00
    holidays)
                                                    
  Cart rental:                                      
   Per 9 holes                                    7.00 per rider
   Per 18 holes                                   14.00 per rider
   Trail fee for private carts                    3.00 per 9 holes
                                                 
  Adult cart pass                                  700.00
                                                   
  Driving range (El Monte):                        
   Small bucket                                   4.00
   Large bucket                                   8.00
   Range season pass                              500.00
                                                 
  Senior rate (Monday - Friday, excluding          
    holidays):
   Per 9 holes                                    13.00
   Per 18 holes                                   26.00
                                                   
  Senior rate (per 18 holes, with cart) (Monday -  36.00
    Thursday)
                                                   
  College student discount (per 9 holes, Monday -  13.00
    Friday, excluding holidays)
                                                   
  Military (per 9 holes, Monday - Friday,          13.00
    excluding holidays)
                                                   
  Junior rate (per 9 holes)                        9.00
                                                   
  Junior punch pass (per 10 rounds)                80.00
                                                   
  Junior summer pass (June - August)               200.00
                                                   
   Baker's dozen (good anytime, 13 9-hole round     176.00
    punch ticket)
                                                   
  Senior citizen (weekdays only, 20 9-hole round   227.00
    punch ticket)
                                                   
  City employee (20 9-hole round punch ticket)     175.00
                                                   
  City employee (10 9-hole punch ticket)           88.00
                                                   
  High school pass (20 9-hole rounds high school   140.00
    team)
                                                   
  Mount Ogden Golf Course pass (20 9-hole rounds   380.00
    with cart)
                                                   
  7 day season pass                                975.00
                                                   
  7 day season pass (seniors - 60 and over)        875.00
                                                   
  5 day season pass (Monday - Friday, excluding    775.00
    holidays, seniors - 60 and over)
                                                   
  5 day season pass (Monday - Friday, excluding    350.00
    holidays, juniors - under 18)
                                                   
  7 day season pass (juniors - under 18)           450.00
                                                   
  High school team fee** (in lieu of punch         1,400.00 per school
    passes)
                                                   
  High school team member season pass (Monday -    300.00
    Friday, sold to qualifying team members only)
                                                   
  Couples/family season pass (for couples or 2     1,450.00 per 2
    related adults living at same address)
                                                 
   Additional family members living at same       $100.00 per family member
      address (17 and under)
                                                 
   Additional family members living at same       $300.00 per family member
      address (18 and over)
                                                   
  Corporate voucher system:                        
   9 holes with cart per voucher:                 
                                                 
         Vouchers Used Per Month            
                                                 
      0 - 10                                   5% discount
      11 - 20                                  15% discount
      21 - 30                                  25% discount
      31+                                      35% discount
                                                   
  Executive package season pass:                   
   9 holes with cart:                             
      Up to 6 players                          $3,000.00
      Up to 7 players                          3,450.00
      Up to 8 players                          3,875.00
      Up to 9 players                          4,275.00
      Up to 10 players                         4,650.00
      Up to 11 players                         5,000.00
      Up to 12 players                         5,300.00
 
*All fees include State Sales Tax. (Green fees may be waived for the Ogden City
Amateur Tournament, the Corporate Sports Challenge, or for other tournaments
sponsored or cosponsored by the City that generate interest, exposure, and
improve the quality of the programs at the golf courses. Green fees may also be
waived for members of the PGA and members of the Golf Course Superintendent's
Association of America.)
**This is only valid for the high school competitive season to cover cost of
hosting the region event and all organized practice rounds. Each school will be
responsible for a $1,400.00 fee for both the boys' and girls' teams unless they
elect to purchase the punch cards at $140.00 per 20 rounds.
***Weekend green fee time frame is 6:00 A.M. to 2:00 P.M. Rate rolls back to
weekday pricing after 2:00 P.M. on Saturday and Sunday.
 
 5. Parks Pavilion Reservations*:                                   
                                                                 
  a. Big D Sports Park                                            $200.00
                                                                 
  b. MTC Park/Rose Garden Complex:                                 
                                                                 
       Small pavilion and gazebo                              150.00
                                                                 
       Large pavilion                                         200.00
                                                                 
       Complex (including large pavilion, small pavilion and  350.00
       gazebo)
                                                                 
       Alcoholic beverage permit                              50.00
                                                                 
  c. Lorin Farr Park:                                              
       North end                                              100.00
       South end                                              100.00
       Entire pavilion                                        150.00
                                                                 
  d. Other                                                        50.00
 
*Fee reserves a pavilion on either a morning or afternoon schedule. Morning
begins 1 hour before sunrise and continues until 2:00 P.M. Afternoon begins at
3:00 P.M. and continues to 1 hour after sunset. Reservations requiring or
affecting use within both time frames will be charged a double fee.
 
 6.    Ogden City Stadium:          
                                      
  Events charging an admission fee  $1,000.00 per day
   With the cabin                  1,250.00 per day
                                    
  No admission fee events           500.00 per day
   With the cabin                  750.00 per day
                                    
  Rodeo cabin only                  250.00 per day
 
All sales of food or beverages require a concession agreement, with the City
receiving 20 percent of gross sales.
 
 7. Dinosaur Park:                                           
                                                            
  Regular admissions:                                     
                                                          
   Adults (ages 18 - 61)                                 $ 7.00
                                                          
   Senior citizens (ages 62 and over)                    6.00
                                                        
   Student (ages 13 and over):                           
         With ID                                   5.00
         Without ID                                6.00
                                                          
   Child (ages 2 - 12)                                   5.00
    
   Toddler (ages 1 and under) when accompanied by adult   Free
      or senior paying regular admission
                                                          
  Group rates: (Available for groups of 15 and over,        
    with 24 hour advance reservation)
                                                          
   Adult                                                 4.00
   Student                                               3.50
   Child                                                 3.00
   Public school (field trips)                           3.00 per person
                                                          
                                                            Effective
                                                                January 1, 2006
  Yearly memberships:                                     
    
   Individual pass                                        $25.00
    
   Duo (2 person) pass                                    40.00
    
   Family pass (2 parents and their children)             55.00
    
   Grandparent pass (2 grandparents and up to 6           55.00
      grandchildren)
    
   Family plus pass (same as a family pass but adding 2   65.00
      grandparents)
    
   Pavilion rental, per 4 hours                           20.00
    
   Alcoholic beverage permit                              50.00
 
After hours, private parties require a minimum of 100 people. A nonrefundable
security deposit covering admission for 100 attendees is required to secure a
reservation.
Admission fee adjustments may be made as part of programs or agreements
approved by the department director for promotional purposes. Any program or
agreement providing for adjustments to fees shall be designated and intended to
increase regular attendance at the park, considering the expected return and
how it will be measured.
Fees for birthday party packages may be established by the department director,
provided such fees include the price of admission to the park.
 
 8. Lorin Farr Pool And Rampage Water Slide:         
                                                  
  Daily passes:                                   
                                              
   All day/all area (ages 4 and older)         $  3.00
    
   Toddlers (under 4)                           Free
                                              
   Spectator                                   1.00
                                              
      Youth groups of 5 or more (ages 8 - 17) as
   part of a youth program of a bona fide      2.00 per person
      nonprofit organization
                                                  
  Season passes:                                  
                                              
   Individual                                  40.00
                                              
   Family (all immediate family members        100.00
      residing at the same address)
                                                  
  Individual punch pass:                          
   5 punches                                   13.00
   10 punches                                  25.00
                                                  
  Group rentals (7:00 to 10:00 P.M.):             
   Pool (1 - 100 people)                       90.00 per hour
   Each additional person                      1.50
   Swim lessons, per session                   30.00
   Private swim lessons                        $15.00 per 30 minute lesson
 
 
   Equipment rentals:                  All Day Per Hour
                                            
     Umbrella                          $10.00  $2.00
     Table                             5.00    1.00
     Combination table and umbrella    12.00   2.50
     Life jacket                       5.00    1.00
     Fins                              5.00    1.00
     Mask                              5.00    1.00
     Combination life jacket, fins and 8.00    2.50
        mask
     Locker                            0.50    -
 
      9.   Marshall White Community Center:
   a. Building/Facility Rentals: (Prices vary according to whether the rental
occurs during or after the operating hours of the center.)
 
                             Operating Hours After Hours 
                                            
  Meeting rooms               $10.00/hour     $20.00/hour
  Gym:                                        
     Half court              15.00/hour      20.00/hour
     Full court              30.00/hour      40.00/hour
  Kitchen                     15.00/hour      20.00/hour
  Pool                        35.00/hour      45.00/hour
  Long term pool (3 months or 30.00/hour      35.00/hour
      more)
  Sound system                50.00/hour      50.00/hour
  Equipment setup             50.00/hour      50.00/hour
 
Groups renting the gym for any activity or program involving the charging of a
fee or admission by the participants shall pay the above stated fees plus 50
percent of the rental rate. A gym rental deposit of $150.00 is required for
rentals by groups of 50 or more people and rentals for 4 or more hours. A gym
rental deposit of $50.00 is required for groups of fewer than 50 people under 4
hours.
Security officers are mandatory for after hour rentals and must be approved by
MWC.
 
  b. MWC Programs/Activities:             
                                        
    Youth daily pass (swim, weight     $2.00
       room, and gym ages 5 - 17)
                                      
    Youth daily gym only (ages 5 -     Free
       17)
                                      
    Adult daily pass (swim, weight     3.00
       room and gym, ages 18 and older)
                                      
    Senior daily pass (swim, weight    2.00
       room and gym, ages 55 and older)
                                      
    Veterans daily pass (swim, weight  Free
       room and gym)
                                      
       Senior/youth (ages 5 - 17)
    monthly pass (swim, weight room,   
       and gym):
                                      
       1 month                      18.00
       3 months                     45.00
       6 months                      75.00
       12 months                    160.00
                                      
    Adult monthly pass (swim, weight   
       room and gym ages 18 and over):
                                      
       1 month                      20.00
       3 months                     50.00
       6 months                     95.00
       12 months                    180.00
                                      
       Family monthly pass (swim, weight
    room and gym for up to 6 people    
       at same address):
                                      
       1 month                      40.00
       3 months                     110.00
       6 months                     205.00
       12 months                    350.00
                                      
    Additional family members at same  
       address (per person):
                                      
       1 month                      5.00
       3 months                     15.00
       6 months                     25.00
       12 months                    45.00
                                      
    20 punch card                      30.00
                                      
    20 punch card (senior/youth)       25.00
                                      
    Individual pool only pass:         
                                      
       3 months                     30.00
       6 months                     55.00
       12 months                    95.00
                                      
    Family pool only pass (up to 4     
       people at same address):
                                      
       3 months                     60.00
       6 months                     110.00
       12 months                    205.00
                                      
       Additional family members at same
    address for pool only pass (per    
       person):
                                      
       3 months                     10.00
       6 months                     10.00
       12 months                    10.00
                                      
    Swim lessons, per session          30.00
                                      
    Private swim lessons               $15.00 per 30 minute lesson
                                        
    Kayak polo                         $5.00 per individual per session
                                      $75.00 annual pass (nontransferable)
                                        
    USTA junior tennis program         $  4.00
                                      
    Tennis instruction:                  
       13 years and older           20.00
       Ages 7 - 12                  15.00
       6 years and younger          10.00
                                          
 10. Youth And Adult Sports Programs:      
                                        
  Adult basketball                      400.00 per team
                                        
  Adult volleyball                      200.00 per team
                                        
  Adult flag football                   425.00 per team
                                        
  Adult softball leagues                $360.00 plus $20.00 USSSA sanction
                                           fee
                                        
  Adult fall softball                   $225.00
                                        
  Adult softball tournament:            
    3 game guarantee                   250.00
    2 game guarantee                   200.00
                                        
  Softball leagues double header        $530.00 plus $20.00 USSSA sanction
                                           fee
                                          
  Pickleball league (youth and adult)   $25.00 per participant
                                          
  Tennis lessons:                         
    Youth (ages 9 - 17)                $  30.00*
    Adult (ages 18 and over)           35.00
                                        
  Ski school:                             
    Youth (ages 8 - 18)                40.00
    Adult (ages 19 and over)           45.00
                                        
  Summer park program (per              15.00*
    participant)
                                        
  Youth flag football (per              25.00*
    participant)
                                        
  Youth 7 on 7 football tournament      150.00 per team
                                          
  Youth junior jazz basketball (per       
    participant):
    3rd - 4th grades                   30.00*
    5th - 12th grades                  35.00*
    Youth basketball tournament        85.00 per team
                                        
  Youth baseball/softball/T-ball (per     
    participant):
    T-ball                             15.00*
    Machine pitch                      25.00*
    Babe Ruth boys baseball:             
       Minors (ages 9 - 10)         30.00 per player*
       Majors (ages 11 - 12)        30.00 per player*
       Prep (ages 13 - 15)          40.00 per player*
       Seniors (ages 16 - 18)       45.00 per player*
    Girls softball:                      
       Ages 7 - 8 coach pitch       25.00*
       Ages 9 - 12 fast pitch       30.00*
       Ages 13 - 16 fast pitch      35.00*
    Youth competitive baseball league    
       per 10 game league:
       7th/8th grade                625.00 per team
       5th/6th grade                625.00 per team
       3rd/4th grade                625.00 per team
                                        
    Youth competitive baseball league  1,200.00 per team
       per 20 game league (all grades)
                                        
    Instructional baseball league      $225.00 per participant
                                        
    Utah state high school all-star    $50.00 per participant
       underclassman
                                        
    High school baseball tournament    $625.00 to $725.00 per team
                                           dependent on number of games offered
                                        
    All-Star Baseball Showcase         $100.00 per player
       Pitchers                     $150.00
                                      
    Youth baseball tournament 8U       $200.00 to $450.00 per team
       through 16U                         dependent on number of games offered
                                        
  American Amateur Baseball Congress    
    Of Utah:
    AABCU                              $  25.00 per team
                                        
  Outdoor volleyball - UOVA (Utah         
    Outdoor Volleyball Association):
    UOVA members, in advance             15.00**
    UOVA members, day of event         20.00**
    Nonmembers, in advance             25.00**
    Nonmembers, day of event           30.00**
                                        
  Sand volleyball leagues:              
    Double                             50.00 per team
    Four                               120.00 per team
    Six                                180.00 per team
                                        
  AAU basketball tournament             225.00 per team
                                          
  AAU girls national basketball         325.00 per team
    championships
                                        
  AAU girls basketball tournament       150.00 per team
                                        
  AAU girls basketball state            175.00 per team
    tournament
                                        
  3 on 3 outdoor basketball               
    tournament:
    Adult team (ages 19 and over)      80.00
    Youth team                         80.00
                                        
  Team tennis                           200.00 per team
                                          
  Tennis tournament:                      
    First event                        15.00 per player
    Additional events within same      10.00 per player
       tournament
                                        
  Fishing club                          15.00
 
*Youths participating in the youth programs marked above by an asterisk (*),
who are not residents of Ogden City, shall be subject to an additional fee of
30 percent of the stated fee.
**The fees for outdoor volleyball shall be those rates set forth in the
guidelines established by the Utah Outdoor Volleyball Association and are
subject to any increases set forth in those guidelines.
 
 11. Golden Hours Senior Center:        
  a. Activities:                       
    Dances                          $3.00 per person
    Classes with paid instructor*:    
       Ceramics                  $1.00 per class per person
       Porcelain                 $1.00 per class per person
       Crafts                    $1.50 per class per person
       Art                       $1.00 per class per person
       Low impact aerobics       $0.50 per class per person
       Computer                  $25.00 per session per person
       Stained glass             $45.00 plus supply costs
       Machine quilting          $25.00 plus supply costs
    Kiln firing fee                  1/2 price of the greenware per firing
    Supplies                         City cost
 
*Provision of class depending upon class size and availability of instructor.
   b. Building/Room Rental* **:
            (1)   No fee charged for admission:
 
Onetime Rentals      Open Hours        After Hours
                                            
Meeting rooms        $ 10.00 per hour  $ 15.00 per hour
Gymnasium/hall:                                
  Full area         20.00   per hour  25.00   per hour
  Half/third        10.00   per hour  15.00   per hour
Kitchen              10.00   per hour  15.00   per hour
Gym/kitchen          25.00   per hour  30.00   per hour
combined
                                             
Monthly Rentals***   Open Hours     After Hours
                                              
Meeting rooms        $ 25.00 per month $ 50.00 per month
Gymnasium/hall:                                
  Full to third area62.50   per month 125.00  per month
Kitchen              25.00   per month 50.00   per month
Craft room           25.00   per month 50.00   per month
Gym/kitchen          75.00   per month 150.00  per month
combined
 
            (2)   Groups charging admission fees to participants:
 
Onetime Rentals      Open Hours        After Hours
                     
Meeting rooms        $ 15.00 per hour  $ 22.50 per hour
Gymnasium/hall:
  Full area         30.00   per hour  37.50   per hour
  Half/third        15.00   per hour  22.50   per hour
Kitchen              15.00   per hour  22.50   per hour
Gym/kitchen          37.50   per hour  45.00   per hour
combined
 
Monthly Rentals***   Open Hours        After Hours
 
Meeting rooms        $ 50.00 per month $ 75.00 per month
Gymnasium/hall:
  Full to third area125.00  per month 187.00  per month
Kitchen              50.00   per month 75.00   per month
Craft room           50.00   per month 75.00   per month
Gym/kitchen          150.00  per month 225.00  per month
combined
 
*All requests for rentals are evaluated on a first come, first serve basis and
are based on availability. Rentals of the Golden Hours facilities must be by
persons 60 years and older or by groups for the benefit of persons 60 years and
older. Groups renting the facility are responsible for providing their own
supplies and cleaning up after the event.
**Qualified, nonprofit senior organizations (for persons 60 years and older)
may use the meeting rooms at no charge during operating hours (if available)
and the gymnasium at half the above price if the organization does not charge
any of the participants. Groups renting the gymnasium after hours or during
operating hours for any activities or programs involving the charging of a fee
or admission by the participants shall pay the above stated fee, plus 50
percent of the rental fee.
***Monthly rental costs are for 25 hours a month. Additional hours will be
prorated.
 
 12. Fields And Courts*:
  Monroe softball field, Bonneville baseball fields,
  Serge Simmons baseball field and Marv Casteel softball
  field:
   League and tournament requests per use for the
   diamond preparation; diamonds will be prepared by     $  20.00per use
   city recreation
   League and tournament requests per use for diamond    25.00    per hour
   lights
   Tournament fee; onetime use fee, per day for each     20.00    per use per
   field used                                                     day
  Fourth Street softball fields:
   League and tournament requests per use for the
   diamond preparation; diamonds will be prepared by     20.00    per use
   city recreation
   League and tournament requests per use for diamond    10.00    per hour
   lights
   Tournament fee; onetime use fee, per day for each     25.00    per use per
   field used                                                     day
  Mt. Ogden Soccer fields:
   League and tournament requests:
   Youth leagues (U-18 and under):
      Competitive (per participant per season)        3.00
      Recreational (per participant per season)       1.00
   Adult leagues per hour, per field                     15.00    per hour per
                                                                  field
  Soccer fields (except Mt. Ogden): Lyons 23rd Street,
  4th Street Romrell, 4th Street South, 9th Street,
  Grandview, Marshall White, Orchard, Ron Clair,
  Jefferson, Monroe, Big D Sports Park, Mt. Eyrie,
  Jaycee and West Stadium:
   League and tournament requests:
      Youth leagues (U-18 and under) competitive and           No charge
   recreational
      Adult leagues per hour, per field               15.00    per hour per
                                                                  field
  Tennis courts: Liberty, Mt. Erie, Mt. Ogden and
  Monroe:
   Organized play or practice requests                   5.00     per match
   Organized play or practice requests                   20.00    per day, per
                                                                  court
  Pickleball courts: Mt. Ogden:
   Organized play or practice requests                   5.00     per match
   Organized play or practice requests                   20.00    per day, per
                                                                  court
  Fourth Street sand volleyball courts:
   League and tournament requests                        4.00     per match per
                                                                  court
   Tournament fee; onetime use per day for each court    20.00
   used
   Deposit; a refundable deposit for city volleyball     100.00   per set
   nets and lines per set
 
*Note: The above fees are imposed in addition to any other fees in subsection
B10 of this section.
The recreation division reserves the right to limit field use, relocate or
cancel games due to field conditions or capacity issues.
Reservations are required for organized games. Unauthorized play may result in
loss of field privileges.
 
 13. Special Events:
  Permit application and processing fee:
   Class I special event:
      Commercial filming               $200.00
      Other                                    No charge
   Class II special event                         No charge
 
(Permit application and processing fees do not include charges for city
services pursuant to section
6-5-5 of this code)
 
 14. Ogden Amphitheater:
   Front stage                      $  75.00per hour
                                    500.00   per day
   Back stage                       40.00    per hour
                                    250.00   per day
   Extended seating area (plaza)    250.00   per day
   Use of sound/light board         10.00    per hour
                                    75.00    per day
   Staffing:
   Sound/light board operator       50.00    per hour
   Facility (parks division) staff  25.00    per hour per employee
   Stage/house manager              50.00    per hour
   Alcoholic beverage permit        50.00
 
Fee for use of the front stage includes: a) use of the fixed seating area and
grass; b) use of up to 4 microphones; c) stage chairs; d) music stands; and e)
exterior electrical.
Usage based on hourly rates requires a 4 hour minimum per day, provided on a
consecutive basis, for each area or service. Extended area seating not
available on an hourly basis.
Use of 5 or more microphones requires the use of the sound board.
Local, nonprofit organizations with a 501(c)(3) status shall pay 35 percent of
the above fees, except the fee for alcoholic beverage permits, for any event
which is open to the public with no admission charge. A nonprofit organization
shall be considered to be "local" if its principal place of business is located
in the city.
      15.   Miscellaneous Recreation Classes: The director of the department
may from time to time establish fees for recreation classes not otherwise
established in this section, which fees shall at a minimum cover the cost of
instructors, class materials, and any additional costs identified by the
department as directly related to the class. The fee shall also include a
reasonable amount to cover all or part of the indirect costs incurred by the
city in sponsoring such class or activity. In no event shall the instructor
receive more than 80 percent of the fee collected for such class. Prior to
establishing such fees, a budget plan will be established for each activity and
be used to monitor the cost of each class.
      16.   City Events: It is not the intent of this subsection to require the
imposition of fees imposed in this subsection B applicable to special events or
the use of any facility on a contractor or agent of the city conducting a "city
event", as defined in title 6, chapter 5 of this code, within such facility
pursuant to such contract, unless otherwise required under the terms of the
contract.
      17.   Reserved.
      18.   Water Utility:
 
  Service restoration fees (see section                             
    9-1-11 of this code)
                                                                   
  Water hookup fees (see section                                    
    9-2-4 of this code)
                                                                   
  Water rates (see section                                          
    9-1-6 of this code)
                                                                   
  Disconnect or abandoned line (see subsection 9-2-10D of           
    this code)
                                                                    
  Trip charge-return (charged for turning water on and off   $10.00  
    for test, tap open, return trips, etc.)
                                                            
  Missing or destroyed locks (removed when tampering):       
   Padlock                                                  10.00  each
   Hinged lock                                              40.00  each
                                                            
  Printout of accounts:                                      
   From computer                                            5.00    
   From microfiche                                          7.00   per year
                                                                    
  Rethaw of frozen lines after notice issued to let water    25.00  per hour
    run (street side of lines only)
                                                                    
  Rebilling charge for irrigation (rental of shares)         5.00    
                                                                   
    Temporary service for new construction, onetime, flat fee
  based on size of tap serving the premises (see subsection         
    9-1-6G2 of this code):
                                                                    
      Tap Size (IncheFee                                   
                                                                  
         1       $100.00                                     
         11/ - 2 150.00                                      
         3 -     200.00                                      
         6       250.00                                      
         8       300.00                                      
 
      19.   Sanitary Sewer Utility And Storm Sewer Utility:
   (see section
9-5-3 of this code)
   a. Sanitary Sewer Service Charges: The monthly service charge for sanitary
sewer services shall be charged each customer to whom water service is
available based on meter size serving the premises, regardless of whether any
water is used, as follows:
 
 Water  Meter SizeBase Rate From July 1, 2012 Through June 30, 2013 (Including
                   2012 CPI Increase And Central Weber Sewer Increase)
 3/4" or smaller   $  27.50  
 1"                45.51      
 11/2"             63.53      
 2"                101.94     
 3"                284.56     
 4"                357.97     
 6"                796.68     
 8" and larger     1,460.03   
  Current year rate = (previous year rate* + current year rate increase) x
  (1 + current year CPI)
  Sample calculation: 2013 rate calculation for 3/4" meter assuming 2013
  CPI = 2%: $28.05 = ($27.50 + $0.00) x (1 + .02)
 
*Previous year rate is the rate in effect on the day immediately before the
current year rate is calculated.
The following monthly usage charges apply to water usage over the stated
volumes:
 
                 Allowance Over Which Additional  Rate Per 1,000 Gallons Over
Water Meter Size Charge Imposed                   Allowance (Including 2012 CPI
                                                  Increase)
1" and smaller   Average monthly winter usage     $0.35
                 over 6,000 gallons per month 1
Larger than 1"   No minimum allowance - all usage 0.35
                 charged
 
   Note:
      1.    Winter usage is the average monthly amount of water used between
November and April. For accounts with meters that are not read during the
winter, the average use is determined from the last actual meter reading of the
calendar year and the first actual meter reading of the succeeding calendar
year if the actual reading occurs before November or after April. Winter usage
is updated on July 1 of each year. For new accounts where winter usage is not
known, only the base rate will be charged until the July 1 after the
information is available.
   b. Storm Sewer Service Fees: The monthly service charge for storm sewer
services shall be based on equivalent service units ("ESUs") contained in the
parcel pursuant to section
9-5-3 of this code. The amount charged for each ESU is as follows:
 
                      Base Through June 30, July 1, 2012 Current Base Through
Storm Sewer Rates     2012                  2.8% CPI     June 30, 2013
                                            Increase
Residential Each unit $6.91                 $0.19        $7.10
Business    Each unit 6.91                  0.19         7.10
Current year rate = (previous year rate* + current year rate increase) x (1 +
current year CPI)
Sample calculation: 2013 rate calculation assuming 2013 CPI = 2%: $7.24 =
($7.10 + $0.00) x (1 + .02)
 
*Previous year rate is the rate in effect on the day immediately before the
current year rate is calculated.
   c. Sanitary Sewer Hookup Fees:
 
For direct connection to a sewer line or manhole for which city
employees perform the work (includes the approximate average    $334.00 per tap
cost of material, labor, equipment, administration)
For direct connection to a sewer line or manhole for which the
person requesting the connection performs the work (includes    92.25 per tap
the approximate average cost of inspection and administration)
 
   d. Increases: In addition, the specified sanitary sewer service and usage
charges and storm sewer service fees shall be increased annually on July 1 in
perpetuity by the percentage change in the west region consumer price index for
all items derived for urban consumers (west region CPI-U), without any seasonal
adjustment, for the prior calendar year and produced by the United States
bureau of labor statistics (CPI). If the CPI falls below zero for the prior
calendar year, no CPI adjustment will be made.
   e. Stormwater Pollution Prevention Permits:
 
Sites 5 acres or larger           $100.00, plus $50.00 per month of
                                  construction activity under the permit
Sites over 1 acre but under 5     $100.00, plus $50.00 per month of
                                  construction activity under the permit
Sites 1 acre or less              $50.00, plus $50.00 per month of construction
                                  activity under the permit
Permit/plan modifications (formal $50.00
applications only)
 
      20.   Refuse Collection And Disposal Charges:
 
Refuse Rates* Base Through June 30, July 1, 2012      Current Base Through June
              2012                  2.8% CPI Increase 30, 2013
Rate code 01:                                 
 1st cart             90 gallon  $17.79 $0.50 $18.29
 Each additional cart 90 gallon  15.52  0.44  15.96
Rate code 02:                                 
 1st cart             90 gallon  17.79  0.50  18.29
 Each additional cart 60 gallon  11.77  0.33  12.10
Rate code 03:                                 
 1st cart             60 gallon  14.08  0.39  14.47
 Each additional cart 90 gallon  15.52  0.44  15.96
Rate code 04:                                 
 1st cart             60 gallon  14.08  0.39  14.47
 Each additional cart 60 gallon  11.77  0.33  12.10
Rate code 40:                                 
 1st cart             350 gallon 47.21  1.32  48.53
 Each additional cart 350 gallon 44.89  1.26  46.15
Cart replacement fees:                        
 60 gallon            -          58.14  1.63  59.77
 90 gallon            -          68.70  1.92  70.62
Pick up/delivery of carts:                    
 Each trip            -          20.84  0.58  21.42
 
*Charges are based on the number of carts provided for the collection of
garbage and nonrecyclable refuse. Charges for the collection and disposal of
recyclable materials, regardless of the number of carts provided for recyclable
materials, are included in the costs of the first cart provided for the
collection of garbage and nonrecyclable refuse.
A $2.50 per month discount off of the total cost for refuse services is given
to any user who, as owner of the property, is each year granted an abatement
for taxes on their dwelling in Weber County under Utah Code Annotated sections
59-2-1106 through 59-2-1108, or its successor provision.
In addition, the refuse collection and disposal charges shall be increased
annually on July 1 in perpetuity by the percentage change in the west region
consumer price index for all items derived for urban consumers (west region
CPI-U), without any seasonal adjustment, for the prior calendar year and
produced by the United States bureau of labor statistics (CPI). If the CPI
falls below zero for the prior calendar year, no CPI adjustment will be made.
   21. Green Waste Materials:
 
Compost                      $15.00 per yard
                            3.00   per bag
Rock chips                   5.00   per yard
Wood chips (fine and large)  10.00  per yard
Firewood split               80.00  per cord
                            3.00   per bundle
Firewood cut                 60.00  per cord
Uncovered load fee           10.00   
Mulch                        7.00   per yard
 
      22.   Promotional Activities: Short term adjustments or rebates to
current fees set forth in this subsection B may be made for promotional
purposes. Promotional activities must be approved in advance by the Mayor or
the Mayor's designee.
   C.      Fire Department:
 
Ambulance charges                         See title 12, chapter 9 of this Code
HAZMAT response                           Actual cost
Disposable medical supplies               Actual cost
Burning permits                          $  5.00 
Incident/medical report (other than
arson investigation reports), provided
that there will be no charge for the     15.00    
first copy provided to a patient or
property owner involved in the incident
Arson investigation report, without      25.00    
photos
Arson investigation report, with photos   $25.00, plus $5.00 per disk or actual
                                          reproduction charge for prints
CPR class (per person)                   $35.00   
CPR recertification (per person)         35.00    
Fire safety training trailer             35.00   per first hour
                                        25.00   per each additional hour
Heartsaver CPR class                     50.00
 
   D.      Police Department:
 
Animal services division     See title 13 of this Code
Burglary and robbery alarms  See title 5, chapter 6 of this Code
 
 
                                                      Black And White Color   
Crime scene photos:                                                  
 4 inches x 5 inches                                 $  4.50       $  5.50
 5 inches x 7 inches                                 5.00           7.00
 8 inches x 10 inches                                7.00           10.00
Fingerprints per card                                               10.00
Fingerprints for persons applying as a volunteer with               2.00
a charitable, nonprofit organization
Police reports                                        25.00           
Photographs for licenses                              5.70            
Landlord training program                             40.00   per individual*
Sex offender registration                             25.00   per registration
Towing rotation:
 Original application                                200.00
 Annual renewal                                      100.00
   
*Any landlord planning to send more than 4 of its officers, directors, managers
or employees to the landlord training program may pay a group rate of $160.00
per calendar year.
   E.      Public Works: Repealed.
   F.      Citywide Fees:
 
1. Dishonored checks-service charges
and collection costs as authorized by  $20.00 plus applicable collection costs
Utah Code Annotated section
7-15-1, as amended
2. City records (see section
4-5-8 of this title). (See applicable department fee schedule for charges
pertaining to specific type of records. Standards for fees, fee waivers,
payment of past fees, and prepayments are covered in section
4-5-8 of this title. Notwithstanding the charges designated below, the City
reserves the right to charge the actual cost of duplicating a record, compiling
a record in a form other than that maintained by the City, postage, or other
cost reasonably related to the City's cost of fulfilling the request for copies
of records.)
 
 
Copy, per page (if no other charge is   $0.25 plus
designated):
  Certified copy                       5.00
  Notarized copy                       5.00 per signature
Drawings, aerial photos                 Actual costs
Fax                                     $2.00 for first page plus $1.00 for
                                         each additional page
                                        
Municipal Code                          $300.00 plus $70.00 for annual updates
                                        
Tapes                                   Actual costs
                                        
3. Recording fee to record an
affidavit of heirship, quitclaim deed   $  7.50 per document
or trust deed pertaining to Ogden City
Cemetery property
                                        
4. Preparation of duplicate lien        10.00
releases
                                        
5. Hearing Officer appeals under
section                                 25.00
1-4B-10 of this Code
 
   G.      City Attorney's Office:
 
Attorney fee for civil matters  181.00 per hour
Discovery up to 50 pages        10.00 each
Discovery 51 pages and over     $10.00 plus $0.25 per page after 50 pages
CD/DVD                          $25.00 each
 
(1979 Code § 4.20.010; amd. Ord. 93-56, 10-12-1993; Ord. 93-68, 12-21-1993;
Ord. 94-17, 4-5-1994; Ord. 94-22, 5-24-1994; Ord. 94-24, 6-7-1994; Ord. 94-25,
6-7-1994; Ord. 94-26, 6-7-1994; Ord. 94-27, 6-7-1994; Ord. 94-51, 10-18-1994;
Ord. 94-61, 11-22-1994; Ord. 95-3, 1-10-1995; Ord. 95-12, 3-7-1995; Ord. 95-14,
3-21-1995; Ord. 95-37, 6-20-1995; Ord. 95-38, 6-20-1995; Ord. 95-39, 6-20-1995;
Ord. 95-44, 6-27-1995; Ord. 95-64, 9-26-1995; Ord. 96-15, 4-9-1996; Ord. 96-24,
5-7-1996; Ord. 96-28, 6-25-1996; Ord. 96-35, 7-16-1996; Ord. 96-36, 7-16-1996;
Ord. 96-38, 7-16-1996; Ord. 96-59, 11-19-1996; Ord. 97-48, 6-17-1997, eff. 7-1-
1997; Ord. 97-49, 6-17-1997, eff. 7-1-1997; Ord. 97-50, 6-17-1997, eff. 7-1-
1997; Ord. 97-51, 6-17-1997, eff. 7-1-1997; Ord. 97-52, 6-17-1997; Ord. 97-53,
6-17-1997, eff. 7-1-1997; Ord. 97-54, 6-17-1997, eff. 7-1-1997; Ord. 97-63, 8-
26-1997; Ord. 98-41, 6-16-1998, eff. 7-1-1998; Ord. 98-42, 6-16-1998, eff. 7-1-
1998; Ord. 98-43, 6-16-1998, eff. 7-1-1998; 1999 Code; Ord. 99-30, 6-22-1999,
eff. 7-1-1999; Ord. 2001-3, 1-2-2001; Ord. 2001-11, 2-20-2001; Ord. 2001-38, 6-
12-2001, eff. 1-1-2002; Ord. 2001-42, 7-3-2001, eff. retroactive to 7-1-2001;
Ord. 2001-43, 6-19-2001, eff. 7-1-2001; Ord. 2001-59, 9-25-2001; Ord. 2001-70,
12-18-2001; Ord. 2002-30, 5-7-2002; Ord. 2002-38, 6-18-2002, eff. 7-1-2002;
Ord. 2002-49, 8-6-2002; Ord. 2002-57, 9-17-2002; Ord. 2002-63, 9-24-2002; Ord.
2003-4, 1-14-2003; Ord. 2003-14, 3-18-2003; Ord. 2003-28, 6-17-2003, eff. 7-1-
2003; Ord. 2003-43, 8-5-2003; Ord. 2003-45, 8-19-2003; Ord. 2004-42, 6-15-2004,
eff. 7-1-2004; Ord. 2004-43, 6-15-2004, eff. 7-1-2004; Ord. 2004-48, 6-15-2004,
eff. 7-1-2004; Ord. 2004-72, 10-12-2004; Ord. 2005-17, 3-22-2005; Ord. 2005-29,
5-24-2005; Ord. 2005-39, 6-14-2005, eff. 7-1-2005; Ord. 2006-33, 6-13-2006;
Ord. 2006-34, 6-13-2006, eff. 7-1-2006; Ord. 2006-45, 7-25-2006; Ord. 2006-76,
11-21-2006; Ord. 2006-80, 11-28-2006, eff. 1-1-2007; Ord. 2007-21, 5-22-2007;
Ord. 2007-41, 6-12-2007; Ord. 2007-42, 6-12-2007; Ord. 2007-76, 11-13-2007;
Ord. 2007-79, 12-18-2007; Ord. 2008-24, 6-10-2008, eff. 7-1-2008; Ord. 2008-25,
6-10-2008, eff. 7-1-2008; Ord. 2008-26, 6-10-2008, eff. 7-1-2008; Ord. 2008-27,
6-10-2008, eff. 7-1-2008; Ord. 2008-28, 6-10-2008, eff. 11-1-2008; Ord. 2008-
47, 10-7-2008; Ord. 2008-53, 10-14-2008; Ord. 2009-41, 6-2-2009; Ord. 2009-42,
6-16-2009, eff. 7-1-2009; Ord. 2009-43, 6-16-2009, eff. 7-1-2009; Ord. 2010-21,
6-22-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; Ord. 2010-22, 6-22-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; Ord. 2010-23,
6-22-2010; Ord. 2010-24, 6-22-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; Ord. 2011-31, 6-21-2011,
eff. 7-1-2011; Ord. 2011-32, 6-21-2011, eff. 7-1-2011; Ord. 2011-34, 6-21-2011,
eff. 7-1-2011; Ord. 2011-53, 12-20-2011; Ord. 2011-54, 12-20-2011; Ord. 2012-
23, 8-21-2012; Ord. 2012-50, 12-18-2012; Ord. 2013-14, 4-2-2013; Ord. 2013-29,
6-18-2013; Ord. 2013-30, 6-18-2013; Ord. 2013-44, 10-15-2013; Ord. 2013-46, 12-
3-2013, eff. 1-1-2014; Ord. 2013-47, 12-3-2013, eff. 1-1-2014; Ord. 2014-24, 6-
17-2014; Ord. 2014-47, 3-17-2015; Ord. 2015-28, 6-16-2015; Ord. 2015-29, 6-16-
2015; Ord. 2015-30, 6-16-2015, eff. 7-1-2015; Ord. 2015-51, 12-8-2015; Ord.
2016-34, 6-21-2016; Ord. 2016-65, 1-3-2017; Ord. 2018-13, 6-26-2018; Ord. 2018-
14, 6-26-2018; Ord. 2018-15, 6-26-2018; Ord. 2018-36, 12-18-2018; Ord. 2018-37,
12-18-2018)
 
Notes
  1. This fee does not include the 1 percent surcharge on all building,
1 electrical, mechanical and plumbing permits collected in accordance with the
  Utah uniform building standards act and which shall be imposed on the total
  fee collected under this schedule.
1 1. Actual cost includes administrative and overhead costs.
1 1. Actual cost includes administrative and overhead costs.
4-6-2: COLLECTION:
   A.   The charges imposed by this chapter shall be collected by the city
employee or official involved prior to or at the time the service is rendered.
   B.   If an attorney who is an employee of the city assists in an enforcement
or collection action involving a citation for a civil violation of this code,
then an attorney fee in the amount set forth in section
4-6-1 of this chapter shall be assessed against the individual or entity that
received the citation. This attorney fee shall be assessed in addition to any
other fees that may lawfully be assessed in such circumstances.
   C.   The attorney fee set forth in subsection B of this section shall not be
imposed where the imposition of the attorney fee:
      1.   Conflicts with federal, state or local law; or
      2.   Conflicts with a binding contract between the city and the entity or
individual required to make payments to the city.
(Ord. 2015-30, 6-16-2015, eff. 7-1-2015)
4-6-3: DEPOSITS:
The city may charge refundable cleaning and security deposits in addition to
the above charges for the use of city facilities, if determined to be necessary
to protect city property.
(1979 Code § 4.20.030; amd. Ord. 93-56, 10-12-1993)
CHAPTER 7
AGRICULTURE PROTECTION AREA
SECTION:
4-7-1: Procedures For Filing Proposal To Create An Agriculture Protection Area
4-7-2: Reserved
4-7-3: Completeness Of Petition; City Recorder Duties
4-7-4: Compliance With State Law
4-7-1: PROCEDURES FOR FILING PROPOSAL TO CREATE AN AGRICULTURE PROTECTION AREA:
A proposal for the creation of an agriculture protection area (the "Proposed
Area") under chapter 41, title 17, Utah Code Annotated, 1953, as amended, shall
be commenced by filing a petition with the city recorder. The petition shall:
   A.   Be signed by a majority in number of all owners of real property and
owners of a majority of the land area in agricultural production within the
proposed area, and presented in such a manner that the signatures are
identified with the printed name of the owner;
   B.   For each parcel of land:
      1.   Identify the names and mailing address of all owners of record of
the land proposed to be included within the proposed area,
      2.   The tax parcel number identifying each parcel, and
      3.   The number of acres of each parcel;
   C.   Provide a current copy of the Weber County ownership plats depicting
the property proposed for creation of an agriculture protection area;
   D.   Provide a legal description describing the boundaries of the proposed
area, prepared by a licensed surveyor;
   E.   Identify the existing types of agriculture production occurring within
the proposed area;
   F.   Identify any limits on the types of agriculture production to be
allowed within the proposed area;
   G.   Describe and identify existing roadway, dwelling sites, parks, or other
nonagricultural uses located within the proposed area;
   H.   Include the fee to cover the reasonable costs of reviewing an
agriculture protection area, as established in chapter 6 of this title;
   I.   Provide the name, address, and phone number of a contact person.
(Ord. 2001-59, 9-25-2001, eff. 10-18-2001)
4-7-2: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2001-59, 9-25-2001, eff. 10-18-2001)
4-7-3: COMPLETENESS OF PETITION; CITY RECORDER DUTIES:
   A.   If the city recorder, with the assistance of the city attorney and the
community and economic development department, determines that the petition is
complete, the city recorder shall:
      1.   Provide notice as required under section 17-41-302, Utah Code
Annotated, 1953, as amended, or its successor provision;
      2.   After fifteen (15) days from the date of the notice provided in
subsection A1 of this section:
         a.   Refer the petition to the planning commission for review and
recommendation, for their review, comments, and recommendations, in accordance
with the requirements of section 17-41-303 Utah Code Annotated, and
         b.   Refer the petition to the agriculture protection area advisory
board established by the Weber County commission for their review, comments,
and recommendations, in accordance with the requirements of section 17-41-303
Utah Code Annotated; and
      3.   Provide a copy of the proposal to the city council.
   B.   If the proposal is determined to be incomplete, the city recorder will
notify the contact person of the deficiencies.
(Ord. 2001-59, 9-25-2001, eff. 10-18-2001)
4-7-4: COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW:
A proposed area shall be reviewed, and approved or denied, in accordance with
the requirements of chapter 41, title 17, Utah Code Annotated, 1953, as
amended, or its successor provisions.
(Ord. 2001-59, 9-25-2001, eff. 10-18-2001)
CHAPTER 8
CONSTITUTIONAL TAKING
SECTION:
4-8-1: Purpose
4-8-2: Applicability
4-8-3: Definitions
4-8-4: Review Of Decision By Mayor
4-8-5: Review Procedures
4-8-6: Reviewing Guidelines
4-8-7: Time For Final Decision
4-8-8: Results Of Review
4-8-9: Guidelines Advisory
4-8-10: Appeal By Property Owner Not Required
4-8-11: Use Of Other Appeals Or Administrative Remedies
4-8-1: PURPOSE:
Private property owners should be treated fairly and should not be
unconstitutionally deprived of real property interests without just
compensation. This chapter shall be construed to provide for the objective and
fair review of claims by persons asserting constitutional taking issues.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to limit the ability of
the city to lawfully fulfill its duties and functions.
(Ord. 2003-11, 2-18-2003)
4-8-2: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter is not intended to apply when the city formally exercises its
power of eminent domain.
(Ord. 2003-11, 2-18-2003)
4-8-3: DEFINITIONS:
CONSTITUTIONAL TAKING: Actions involving the physical taking or exaction of
private real property by the city that might require compensation to a private
real property owner because of:
   A.   The fifth or fourteenth amendment of the constitution of the United
States;
   B.   Article I, section 22 of the Utah constitution; or
   C.   Any recent court rulings governing the physical taking or exaction of
private real property by a governmental entity.
(Ord. 2003-11, 2-18-2003)
4-8-4: REVIEW OF DECISION BY MAYOR:
Any owner of private real property or a real property right who claims there
has been an unconstitutional taking of their property, without just
compensation, shall petition for a review of a final decision of any city
officer, employee, board, commission, or the city council. Consistent with the
separation of powers that is integral to the city's form of government, the
council designates the mayor to hear and consider such petitions. The mayor may
delegate such responsibility to another individual.
(Ord. 2003-11, 2-18-2003)
4-8-5: REVIEW PROCEDURES:
The following procedures for review of a final decision shall be followed:
   A.   Final Decision: The person petitioning for review shall obtain a final
decision before requesting review.
   B.   Petition For Review: Within thirty (30) days from the date of the final
decision, the person requesting the review shall file, in the office of the
city recorder, a written petition for review of that decision. A copy shall
also be filed with the city attorney.
   C.   Hearing Date: The mayor, or the mayor's designee, shall set a time to
review the decision that gave rise to the petition as soon as reasonably
practical. The mayor, or the mayor's designee, shall hear and consider the
evidence related to and submitted by the petitioner, the city or other
interested parties. In the discretion of the mayor, or the mayor's designee,
the hearing may be oral or based upon written submittals.
   D.   Petitioner Information Submittal:
      1.   In addition to the petition for review, the petitioner shall submit
within seven (7) days prior to the date of the review, the following:
         a.   The name of the petitioner requesting review;
         b.   The name and business address of the current owner of the
property; the form of ownership, i.e., whether sole proprietorship, for profit
or not for profit corporation, partnership, joint venture or other; and if
owned by other than a real person, the name and address of all partners or
shareholders owning ten percent (10%) or more of the outstanding shares;
         c.   A detailed description of the factual and legal grounds for the
claim that there has been an constitutional taking, without just compensation;
         d.   A detailed description of the property allegedly taken;
         e.   Evidence and documentation as to the value of the property
allegedly taken, including the date and cost at the date the property was
acquired. This should include any evidence of the value of that same property
before and after the alleged constitutional taking, the name of the party from
whom purchased, including the relationship, if any, between the person
requesting a review and the party from whom the property was acquired;
         f.   Nature of the protectable interest claimed to be affected, such
as, but not limited to, fee simple ownership, leasehold interest;
         g.   Terms (including sale price) of any previous purchase or sale of
a full or partial interest in the property in the three (3) years prior to the
date of application;
         h.   The assessed value of and ad valorem taxes on the property for
the previous three (3) years;
         i.   All information concerning current mortgages or other loans
secured by the property, including name of the mortgagee or lender, current
interest rate, remaining loan balance and term of the loan and other
significant provisions, including, but not limited to, right of purchasers to
assume the loan;
         j.   All listings of the property for sale or rent, price asked and
offers received, if any, within the previous three (3) years;
         k.   All studies commissioned by the petitioner or agents of the
petitioner within the previous three (3) years concerning feasibility of
development or utilization of the property;
         l.   For income producing property, itemized income and expense
statements from the property for the previous three (3) years;
         m.   Information from a title policy or other source showing all
recorded liens or encumbrances affecting the property; and
         n.   The mayor, or the mayor's designee, may request additional
information reasonably necessary, in their opinion, to arrive at a conclusion
concerning whether there has been a constitutional taking.
      2.   A petition shall not be deemed to be "complete" or "submitted" until
the mayor, or the mayor's designee, certifies to the petitioner, that all the
materials and information required above, have been received by the city. The
mayor, or the mayor's designee, shall promptly notify the petitioner of any
incomplete submissions. If the petitioner establishes to the satisfaction of
the mayor, or the mayor's designee, that the required materials or information
is either inapplicable or unnecessary for an adequate review, the submission of
such materials or information may be waived by the mayor, or the mayor's
designee.
(Ord. 2003-11, 2-18-2003)
4-8-6: REVIEWING GUIDELINES:
The mayor, or the mayor's designee, shall review the facts and information
presented by the petitioner and determine if the action by the city constitutes
a constitutional taking. In doing so, the city attorney's office shall serve as
legal counsel and shall be consulted. The mayor, or the mayor's designee shall
review the facts in light of the applicable state and federal constitutional
law.
(Ord. 2003-11, 2-18-2003)
4-8-7: TIME FOR FINAL DECISION:
If the mayor, or the mayor's designee, fails to hear and decide the petition
within fourteen (14) days after the filing of the petition, the administrative
decision of the city officer, employee, board, commission or the city council
shall be deemed approved; provided, however, the mayor, or the mayor's
designee, may extend the time to reach a decision, not exceeding an additional
one hundred twenty (120) days following the receipt of the information required
pursuant to this chapter, if prior to the expiration of the fourteen (14) day
period, the mayor, or the mayor's designee notifies the petitioner, in writing,
of such extension.
(Ord. 2003-11, 2-18-2003)
4-8-8: RESULTS OF REVIEW:
After completing the review, the mayor, or the mayor's designee, shall make a
determination regarding the petition and, if determined to be necessary and
appropriate, make a recommendation to the city council or the appropriate
officer, employee, board or commission.
(Ord. 2003-11, 2-18-2003)
4-8-9: GUIDELINES ADVISORY:
The guidelines adopted and decisions rendered pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter are advisory, and shall not be construed to expand or limit the
scope of the city's liability for an unconstitutional taking of a vested
property interest. The decision rendered and the recommendations made pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter are not admissible in court for any purpose,
and in no event shall any recommended compensation be admissible into evidence.
(Ord. 2003-11, 2-18-2003)
4-8-10: APPEAL BY PROPERTY OWNER NOT REQUIRED:
The private property owner need not file the appeal authorized by this chapter
before bringing an action in any court to adjudicate claims that are eligible
for appeal herein. A property owner's failure to appeal the action as
authorized by this chapter does not constitute, and may not be interpreted as
constituting, a failure to exhaust available administrative remedies or as a
bar to bring legal action.
(Ord. 2003-11, 2-18-2003)
4-8-11: USE OF OTHER APPEALS OR ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDIES:
It is not the intention of this chapter to restrict or replace the use of other
available administrative remedies or appeals processes under, or pursuant to,
the provisions of this code.
(Ord. 2003-11, 2-18-2003)
CHAPTER 9
ADMINISTRATIVE GUIDELINES PERTAINING TO VESTED PROPERTY RIGHTS
SECTION:
4-9-1: Definitions
4-9-2: Vested Property Right Determinations
4-9-3: Development Moratoriums
4-9-4: Notice Of Pending Ordinance
4-9-5: Authority To Decline Development Application Pending Review
4-9-6: Appeal Of Vested Rights Decisions
4-9-7: Authority Of Board Of Zoning Adjustment
4-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms shall be defined as indicated for the purpose of this
chapter:
COMPLETE APPLICATION: An application containing all documents and information
required by ordinance and administrative regulations for the review of a
permit, together with all required filing fees.
DEVELOPMENT: The subdivision of land, the construction or design of buildings
or other improvements to land, or any other development or use of land for
which a permit is required.
DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION: A complete application for a permit that conforms to
the zoning, sign, and/or subdivision ordinances in effect on the date of filing
of such application.
DEVELOPMENT MORATORIUM: A period of time during which permits will not be
issued for proposed development, notwithstanding the proposed development's
compliance with existing ordinances and regulations.
DIRECTOR: The director of the community and economic development department of
Ogden City, or the manager of the planning division within such department, if
so designated by the director.
PENDING ORDINANCE: A proposed change in the ordinances and regulations relating
to zoning, subdivisions, or signage, scheduled, or requested to be scheduled,
before the planning commission or the city council, and noticed by any of the
following methods prior to the filing of a development application:
   A.   Publication of notice, pursuant to section 10-9-303, 304, or 802 of the
municipal land use development and management act;
   B.   Actual notice to the affected property owner or applicant, prior to
submission of a development application; or
   C.   A notice of pending ordinance, posted at the customer service counter
operated by the community and economic development department, located on the
second floor of the Ogden municipal building, and complying with the
requirements of section
4-9-4 of this chapter.
PERMIT: A permit, approval or authorization issued or granted by the city for
an improvement to, or alteration of, real property within the city, including,
but not limited to, a building permit, an approved site plan, an approved
preliminary subdivision plan, a conditional use permit, or any other similar
review process approving development. It is not intended to apply to
preapplication reviews or concept reviews that may occur prior to the actual
submission of a development application.
VESTED PROPERTY RIGHT: A right to develop property based on the ordinances
existing on the date of filing of a development application notwithstanding a
change in the regulations, which would otherwise preclude the development.
VESTED RIGHTS DECISION: The denial of a permit or the refusal to process a
development application where the applicant is asserting the denial was
improper based upon a vested property right.
(Ord. 2003-71, 12-16-2003)
4-9-2: VESTED PROPERTY RIGHT DETERMINATIONS:
   A.   The director may proceed to process a development application in
accordance with the zoning, sign, and/or subdivision ordinances in effect on
the date of said development application, where the director determines, after
consulting with the city attorney, that the development has a vested property
right in accordance with Western Land Equities, Inc., v. City of Logan or its
successor case law.
   B.   It is the policy of Ogden City that development applications prohibited
or subject to additional regulation under a pending ordinance be delayed until
final legislative action is taken on the pending ordinance, so long as the
proposed legislative action is pursued with due diligence and without
unnecessary delay. It is not the intent of this policy to restrict an applicant
from conforming a development application to the pending ordinance and the
application being approved subject to compliance with the requirements of the
pending ordinance if approved and adopted by the city council. This policy
shall not apply to an ordinance wherein the city council adopts a saving clause
that would have the effect of exempting the development application.
   C.   A property owner, aggrieved by a decision of the director that a vested
property right either does not exist or has not been substantiated, may file an
application for a final determination to the mayor, under section
4-9-6 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2003-71, 12-16-2003)
4-9-3: DEVELOPMENT MORATORIUMS:
   A.   The city council may, pursuant to section 10-9-404, Utah Code
Annotated, impose a development moratorium or other temporary regulation as
specified by the terms of the statute.
   B.   A development moratorium or other temporary regulation proposed for
adoption by the mayor, the planning commission, or the director, and submitted
to the city council for its consideration, shall be considered to be a pending
ordinance, if:
      1.   The affected property owner or applicant received actual notice
prior to the filing of a development application; or
      2.   A notice of pending ordinance, complying with the requirements of
section
4-9-4 of this chapter, was posted at the customer service counter operated by
the community and economic development department, located on the second floor
of the Ogden municipal building, prior to the filing of a development
application.
(Ord. 2003-71, 12-16-2003)
4-9-4: NOTICE OF PENDING ORDINANCE:
A notice of pending ordinance shall comply with the following minimum
requirements:
   A.   If the proposed ordinance involves the rezoning of property, the notice
must provide a general description of the property proposed to be rezoned, the
existing zoning designation, and the new proposed zoning classification; or
   B.   If the proposed ordinance or regulation does not involve the rezoning
of property, the notice shall either include a copy of the proposed ordinance
or regulation or provide a summary of its provisions and indicate how the
reader may review or obtain a copy of the proposed ordinance or regulation; and
   C.   The notice shall contain the date that the notice was originally
posted, the date and time of any public hearings scheduled for the
consideration of the pending ordinance as of the date of the notice, and the
identification of a person or office that may be contacted in order to obtain
more information about the pending ordinance and the process for its review and
adoption.
(Ord. 2003-71, 12-16-2003)
4-9-5: AUTHORITY TO DECLINE DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION PENDING REVIEW:
Upon receipt of a development application that may seriously threaten an
overriding interest of public importance, or threaten the public health, safety
or welfare of the city, the director, after consultation and concurrence with
the city attorney, may decline to process or approve a development application
for fifteen (15) calendar days, while the city determines if there are
compelling reasons that justify the retroactive effect of an ordinance to
change the zoning, sign, or subdivision regulations to prohibit, restrict, or
modify the proposed development. During this fifteen (15) day period, the city
shall consider the imposition of a development moratorium, and determine if
there are compelling reasons that justify the retroactive application of the
development moratorium to such development application, consistent with the
standards of Western Land Equities, Inc., v. City of Logan, 758 P.2d 987 (Utah
1988) Scherbel v. Salt Lake City Corporation, 617 P.2d 388 (Utah 1980), and
other applicable current land use law.
(Ord. 2003-71, 12-16-2003)
4-9-6: APPEAL OF VESTED RIGHTS DECISIONS:
Any property owner, who has submitted a development application for a permit
and whose permit has been denied because of a vested rights decision or a
development moratorium, may appeal, in writing, to the mayor within thirty (30)
days of the denial of the permit, by filing such written appeal in the office
of the city recorder. The appeal shall specify all of the reasons that the
applicant contends support the granting of the permit. The city recorder shall
promptly notify the director, the city council and the planning commission of
any such appeal. The officials or entities above, or any other interested
party, may file written submissions concerning the appeal within thirty (30)
days of the filing of the appeal. The appellant shall have fifteen (15) days to
respond to any comments submitted. Thereafter, the appeal shall be submitted to
the mayor for a decision on the written record; provided, that if any material
factual dispute appears from the written record, the mayor may direct that a
factual hearing be set in accordance with chapter 4, article A of this title.
The mayor is authorized to stay proceedings under this section pending a
determination by the board of zoning adjustment found to be material to a final
determination of vested property rights. A final determination by the mayor may
be appealed to district court pursuant to section 10-9-1001, Utah Code
Annotated, or its successor provision.
(Ord. 2003-71, 12-16-2003)
4-9-7: AUTHORITY OF BOARD OF ZONING ADJUSTMENT:
The provisions of this chapter are not intended to restrict the jurisdiction of
the board of zoning adjustment in hearing appeals of decisions administering or
interpreting a zoning ordinance.
(Ord. 2003-71, 12-16-2003)
TITLE 5
BUSINESS TAXES, LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE A.  LICENSING REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
5-1A-1: Definitions
5-1A-2: Business License Required
5-1A-3: Exemptions From Business License Requirement
5-1A-4: Reserved
5-1A-5: Businesses Governed By Other Provisions
5-1A-6: Reciprocal Recognition Of Business Licenses
5-1A-7: Place Of Business Is An Element Of Business
5-1A-8: Business License Coordinator; Duties And Responsibilities
5-1A-9: Application For License
5-1A-10: Reserved
5-1A-11: Issuance
5-1A-12: Renewals
5-1A-13: Fee For License; License Terms
5-1A-14: Failure To Renew Or Obtain License; Penalties
5-1A-15: Delinquency; Authority Of City
5-1A-16: Reserved
5-1A-17: No Rebate Allowed; Exemptions
5-1A-18: Appeals; License Fees, Penalties And Rebates
5-1A-19: Inspections
5-1A-20: Enforcement; Powers Of Business License Coordinator
5-1A-21: Inspection Duty; Reporting Delinquency
5-1A-22: Destruction Of Records
5-1A-23: Transfer Of License
5-1A-24: Display Of License
5-1A-25: Bonds Required For Particular Businesses
5-1A-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms shall be defined as indicated for the purpose of this
title:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE LICENSES: A class A, class B, class C, class D, class E or
class F beer license, or a liquor consumption license under chapter 3, article
C of this title.
APPLICANT: Any person applying for any license provided for in this title. If
the person is a partnership or corporation, then each partner, officer or
director is considered an applicant and must qualify accordingly.
APPLICATION: A formal written request for the issuance of any license permitted
under this title.
AUTHORIZED OFFICERS: Those persons authorized by the city or other entities to
inspect businesses and enforce the provisions of this title or other applicable
regulations, including peace officers and employees of the county health
department, fire department, planning division, inspection services division,
code enforcement division, and the business license coordinator.
BUSINESS: Includes every trade, occupation, profession or activity engaged in
within the city with the object of gain or economic profit, excluding however,
the acts of employees rendering service to employers unless otherwise
specifically provided.
BUSINESS LICENSE COORDINATOR: The person designated by the director of the
management services department as the officer charged with the assessment and
collection of business license taxes and fees, and with the enforcement of this
title.
CONSOLIDATED BUSINESS LICENSE FEE SCHEDULE: The schedule of business license
fees adopted under article B of this chapter.
EMPLOYEE: All individuals who work for an employer for salary or commission or
wages and who are subject to the direction and control of such employer and who
do not share in the profits and losses of such employer. It does not include
independent contractors. For purposes of the employee fee, imposed as part of
the disproportionate impact fee under subsection 5-1B-2C of this chapter,
"employee" shall not include disabled persons participating in a sheltered
workshop program operated by a nonprofit organization, where the primary
purpose of establishing the employee relationship is to provide job training.
ENGAGING IN BUSINESS: Any enterprise carried on for the purpose of gain or
economic profit, including, but not limited to, the sale of real or personal
property at retail or wholesale, the keeping, conducting, operating or
maintaining of a "rental dwelling" as defined in chapter 10 of this title, the
bartering or trading of property or services, the manufacturing of goods or
property and the rendering of personal services for others for a consideration
by persons engaged in any profession, trade, craft, business, occupation or
other calling, except that the acts of employees rendering services to
employers are not included in this definition.
PERSON: Includes every individual, partnership, corporation, association, or
other legal entity engaged in business.
PLACE OF BUSINESS: Each separate location operated, maintained, or occupied by
the licensee, whether or not under the same name, within the city in which
business is engaged.
(Ord. 2011-51, 10-25-2011)
5-1A-2: BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED:
Unless otherwise provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any
business within the city without first having obtained a business license
pursuant to this title. A separate license shall be required for each type of
"business" defined herein and for each separate place of business maintained
within the city. Each day of noncompliance shall constitute a separate
violation.
(1979 Code § 5.04.020; amd. Ord. 88-49, 12-28-1988; Ord. 97-94, 12-16-1997)
5-1A-3: EXEMPTIONS FROM BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIREMENT:
A business license shall not be required of any business exempt from municipal
licensing under state or federal law.
(1979 Code § 5.04.030; amd. Ord. 88-49, 12-28-1988; Ord. 97-94, 12-16-1997)
5-1A-4: RESERVED:
(1979 Code § 5.04.040; amd. Ord. 88-49, 12-28-1988; Ord. 97-94, 12-16-1997)
5-1A-5: BUSINESSES GOVERNED BY OTHER PROVISIONS:
   A.   Conflicts: Any provision of this article in conflict with a specific
ordinance or provision pertaining to a business or activity regulated under
this title shall be inapplicable and the specific regulatory provision shall
govern.
   B.   Public Utility Business: Any public utility business holding a
franchise from the city under which franchise the city is to be paid a
franchise fee or tax in lieu of all other license fees or taxes shall be exempt
from the provisions of this article; provided, that if such business maintains
a business office within the city, such business office location shall be
licensed in accordance with the provisions of this article, including the
payment of license fees applicable to such office.
(1979 Code § 5.04.050; amd. Ord. 88-49, 12-28-1988; Ord. 97-94, 12-16-1997)
5-1A-6: RECIPROCAL RECOGNITION OF BUSINESS LICENSES:
   A.   Conditions: No business license shall be required of any person whose
only business activity in the city is the mere delivery in the city of property
sold by him at a regular place of business maintained by him outside the city,
where:
      1.   Such person's business is at the time of such delivery licensed by
the Utah municipality or county in which such place of business is situated;
and
      2.   The authority licensing such business grants to licensees of this
city making deliveries within its jurisdiction the same privileges, upon
substantially the same terms, as are granted by this section; and
      3.   Neither the property delivered nor any of the facilities by which it
was manufactured, produced or processed are subject to inspection by authority
of this city for compliance with health or sanitary standards prescribed by
this city; and
      4.   The truck or other conveyance by which such delivery is made
prominently displays at all times a license plate or symbol issued by the
licensing authority to evidence such business license. Such plate or symbol
shall identify the licensing authority by which it is issued, shall indicate
that it evidences a license issued thereby, and shall specify the year or term
for which it is effective.
   B.   Proof Required: Before reciprocity is granted, the person must show
proof of a valid business license in a qualifying city or county, and may be
required to fill out a business license application, if determined by the
business license coordinator to be necessary to establish whether reciprocity
should be granted. Reciprocity shall not be granted to solicitors, mobile food
units or any business requiring police check or police identification cards.
   C.   Certification Of Section: The city recorder shall, at the request of
any person upon payment of copying and postage costs, certify a copy of this
section to any city or county of the state.
(1979 Code § 5.04.060; Ord. 88-49, 12-28-1988; amd. Ord. 97-94, 12-16-1997)
5-1A-7: PLACE OF BUSINESS IS AN ELEMENT OF BUSINESS:
The rendering of personal service in the city pursuant to the practice of any
profession or calling shall not be deemed to be engaging in business unless the
person rendering such services maintains an office or place of business within
the corporate limits of the city.
(1979 Code § 5.04.070; Ord. 88-49, 12-28-1988; amd. Ord. 97-94, 12-16-1997)
5-1A-8: BUSINESS LICENSE COORDINATOR; DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the business license coordinator to:
   A.   Enforce the provisions of this title.
   B.   Assess and collect all business license fees under this title.
   C.   Process all applications and renewals of all licenses provided for in
this title.
   D.   Obtain the necessary approvals from city departments and divisions or
from the mayor, or the mayor's designee, if applicable, before issuing any
business licenses.
(1979 Code § 5.04.080; Ord. 88-49, 12-28-1988; amd. Ord. 92-22, 3-24-1992; Ord.
97-94, 12-16-1997)
5-1A-9: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Format; Information: The city business license application shall be in
such format and require such information as the business license coordinator
deems necessary to enforce this title, including, but not limited to:
      1.   The date of application;
      2.   The name, date of birth and home address;
      3.   The registered name of the business, if applicable;
      4.   The type of business to be engaged in;
      5.   The class of license desired, if the type of license is divided into
classes;
      6.   The location of the place of business;
      7.   The federal tax number of the corporation, if applicable;
      8.   A state tax number, if applicable;
      9.   Proof that the business is state licensed or registered, if
applicable;
      10.   A space for the applicant or applicant's authorized agent to sign
under penalty of law that all the information contained herein is true.
   B.   Submission; Payment Of Fee: Applications for business licenses shall be
submitted as one licensing application and include the payment of all fees for
the licensing of each business or activity conducted at one location and in
operation at the time of licensing or renewal; provided, that an application
for a business license for residential rental dwellings under chapter 10 of
this title shall include all locations of residential rental dwellings subject
to licensure which are owned by the applicant within the city.
(1979 Code § 5.04.090; Ord. 88-49, 12-28-1988; amd. Ord. 97-94, 12-16-1997)
   C.   Criminal History Background Report: If any applicant, or any officer,
director, principal, shareholder, manager, or employee of an applicant, is
subject to disqualification under the provisions of this title based on the
individual's criminal history, the business license coordinator may require the
submission of a criminal history background report at the individual's own
expense, from the bureau of criminal investigation, department of public
safety, state of Utah.
(Ord. 2000-69, 11-28-2000; amd. Ord. 2002-5, 1-15-2002)
5-1A-10: RESERVED:
(1979 Code § 5.04.100; Ord. 88-49, 12-28-1988; amd. Ord. 97-94, 12-16-1997)
5-1A-11: ISSUANCE:
   A.   Verification: An applicant for a business license shall fill out the
application in full and sign it as verification under penalty of law that all
information contained therein is true.
   B.   Payment Of Fees: The application shall be submitted to the city with
full payment of all business license fees.
   C.   Copies To Officials: The business license coordinator shall submit
copies to the inspection services division, the current planning division, the
fire department and county health department and, for certain businesses where
specifically provided for herein, to the police department, unless a specific
provision of this title requires submission to fewer or additional departments,
divisions or agencies than those named.
   D.   Preparation Of Certificate Of License: Only after receiving signed,
written approval from each of the entities named in this section, the business
license coordinator shall be authorized to prepare a certificate of license for
issuance, unless a specific provision of this title requires the mayor or the
mayor's designee to approve issuance of the license in which case no license
shall be issued without approval of the mayor or the mayor's designee.
   E.   Signature, Information On Certificate: The certificate of license shall
be signed by the business license coordinator and shall contain the following
information:
      1.   The name of the licensee;
      2.   The business name;
      3.   The type of business licensed; including the class of the license,
if such licenses are divided into classes;
      4.   The date the license was issued;
      5.   The expiration date of the license;
      6.   The place where the licensed business is to be conducted, giving the
street number if such business is to be carried on at a fixed place;
      7.   The business license number.
   F.   More Than One Business Type: If the business is licensed to conduct
more than one type of "business", as defined herein, the certificate of license
shall state each type of business licensed.
(1979 Code § 5.04.110; Ord. 88-49, 12-28-1988; amd. Ord. 92-22, 3-24-1992; Ord.
97-94, 12-16-1997)
5-1A-12: RENEWALS:
   A.   Application; Fee: Licensees shall annually renew their business
licenses by submitting an application for a license renewal, signed under
penalty of law that the information contained therein is true, along with the
required fees.
   B.   Renewal Certificate: Upon receipt of the application, fees and any
required departmental or mayoral approvals, the business license coordinator
shall be authorized to issue either a renewal certificate of license or a
renewal validation to be affixed to the prior year's license certificate.
(1979 Code § 5.04.120; Ord. 88-49, 12-28-1988; amd. Ord. 92-22, 3-24-1992; Ord.
97-94, 12-16-1997)
5-1A-13: FEE FOR LICENSE; LICENSE TERMS:
   A.   Fee Required: All business license fees established pursuant to article
B of this chapter shall be payable in advance for the term of licensure and
shall be paid upon making application to the business license coordinator. The
application shall not be processed until the required fees are paid.
   B.   New Rental Dwelling Licenses: During the first year of licensure, fees
assessed against rental dwellings for disproportionate municipal services under
section
5-1B-2 of this chapter shall be prorated quarterly and the licensee shall only
be required to pay the proportionate fee for those quarters in which the
business actually engages in business. This provision shall not be construed as
exempting a late applicant from payment of the full license fee, or permitting
a refund of any portion of a license fee already paid.
   C.   Discounts Or Exemptions Granted Provisionally; Disallowance And
Collection:
      1.   Any discount or exemption to the full payment of licensing fees
authorized under this title is granted conditioned upon the licensee's initial
and continued compliance with the provisions of such discount or exemption. If
the discount or exemption was improperly granted in reliance upon false,
inaccurate or misleading information provided by the licensee, or if the
licensee has become otherwise unqualified to receive such discount or exemption
during the licensing year, the business license coordinator is authorized and
directed to:
         a.   Determine the discounted portion of the business license fee that
was improperly granted or for which the licensee is unqualified;
         b.   Notify the licensee by first class mail, postage prepaid, that
the discount or exemption has been disallowed and the reasons therefor; and
         c.   Proceed to collect the amount representing the disallowed
discount or exemption.
      2.   The amount of such discount shall be considered to be delinquent if
not paid within sixty (60) days after notification that the discount or
exemption has been disallowed, or before renewal of the business license,
whichever occurs first.
      3.   The business license coordinator's determination is subject to
appeal pursuant to section
5-1A-18 of this article.
   D.   Term: Unless another term is provided under the provisions of this
title:
      1.   Business licenses issued prior to October 1, 2006, except rental
dwellings, licenses for beer wholesalers and alcohol retail and consumption,
and sidewalk vendor licenses, shall expire on December 31 of each year, with
all business license fees, along with the required application for renewal, due
and payable on or before January 2 following the expiration date.
      2.   All business licenses for rental dwellings shall commence on the
date of issuance and shall expire on January 31 of each year, with all business
license fees, along with the required application for renewal, due and payable
on or before February 1 following the expiration date.
      3.   Business licenses issued on or after October 1, 2006, except rental
dwelling licenses, licenses for beer wholesalers and alcohol retail and
consumption, and sidewalk vendor licenses, shall commence on the date of
issuance and shall expire in the next calendar year on the last day of the
month of issuance, with all business license fees, along with the required
application for renewal, due and payable on or before the first business day
following the expiration date.
      4.   All business licenses for beer wholesalers and alcohol retail and
consumption shall commence on the date of issuance and shall expire on December
31 of each year, with all business license fees, along with the required
application for renewal, due on or before the preceding November 30 of each
year.
      5.   All business licenses for sidewalk vendors shall commence on the
date of issuance and shall expire on December 31 of each year, with all
business license fees, along with the required application for renewal, due and
payable on or before the first business day following the expiration date,
unless specified otherwise by administrative order.
(1979 Code § 5.04.130; Ord. 88-49, 12-28-1988; amd. Ord. 97-94, 12-16-1997;
Ord. 2004-71, 10-12-2004, eff. 12-31-2004; Ord. 2006-42, 7-11-2006; Ord. 2007-
5, 1-16-2007; Ord. 2008-49, 10-7-2008; Ord. 2009-76, 12-22-2009)
5-1A-14: FAILURE TO RENEW OR OBTAIN LICENSE; PENALTIES:
   A.   Renewals:
      1.   If any license fee is not paid by the due date, a penalty of twenty
five percent (25%) of the amount of such license fee shall be added to the
original amount thereof, and, if such amount is not paid within two (2) months
of the due date, an additional penalty of seventy five percent (75%) shall be
added to the original amount thereof for a total of one hundred percent (100%)
of such license fee. Penalties provided for in this section shall be collected
by the business license coordinator and the payment thereof enforced by him in
the same manner as the license fees are collected and payment thereof enforced.
No license shall be issued until all penalties legally assessed have been paid
in full.
      2.   If the license fee for a renewal is not obtained within sixty (60)
days of the due date, then the business shall be considered to be operating
without a business license in violation of this article and the business shall
terminate business operations at the previously licensed location. No business
shall be conducted thereafter at said location unless and until licensed in
accordance with the provisions of this title. Notwithstanding the above, any
business requiring an alcoholic beverage license which has not applied for
renewal thirty (30) days prior to expiration shall be considered to be
operating without an alcoholic beverage license upon the due date.
   B.   Unlicensed Businesses: In addition to any criminal prosecution or civil
proceedings, if any person found violating section
5-1A-2 of this article later applies for a license and if a license is granted,
a penalty fee of one hundred percent (100%) of the amount of such license fees
for the current year, and the business shall pay an additional penalty for each
prior year or portion of a prior year in which the business operated without a
license. The penalty fee for each prior year or portion of a prior year without
a license shall be an amount equal to one hundred twenty five percent (125%) of
the current business license fees; provided that the amount of the current
business license fees shall not include disproportionate impact fees or
enhanced services fees for the current year if no such fees were in effect in
such prior years.
   C.   Reduction Or Waiver Of Fees: The business license coordinator may
reduce or waive the penalty fees to be paid by businesses operating without a
license one time per calendar year for a period not to exceed one month, for
the purpose of encouraging unlicensed businesses to properly license.
(1979 Code § 5.04.140; Ord. 88-49, 12-28-1988; amd. Ord. 92-22, 3-24-1992; Ord.
97-94, 12-16-1997; Ord. 2004-46, 6-15-2004; Ord. 2005-28, 5-17-2005)
5-1A-15: DELINQUENCY; AUTHORITY OF CITY:
   A.   Assessment By Business License Coordinator: If any person subject to
license under any ordinance of the city fails, refuses, or neglects to file his
application for the license and to pay the license fee or tax provided by
ordinance within the time prescribed by ordinance, or fails to pay any other
amount determined to be delinquent under the provisions of this title, the
business license coordinator is authorized and directed to determine the amount
of the license fees due from any information which may be available to him, and
such information shall be prima facie correct. The business license coordinator
shall thereupon proceed to collect such tax or fee by all lawful means.
   B.   Remedies: Every license fee imposed by any ordinance of the city and
all interest accruing thereon after the date of delinquency and all penalties
levied or assessed thereon by any ordinance of the city for failure to pay the
same within the time required constitutes a debt to the city, and the city may
maintain an action to recover the same in any court of competent jurisdiction,
which remedy shall be in addition to any and all other remedies which may be
provided.
(1979 Code § 5.04.150; Ord. 88-49, 12-28-1988; amd. Ord. 97-94, 12-16-1997;
Ord. 2007-5, 1-16-2007)
5-1A-16: RESERVED:
(1979 Code § 5.04.160; Ord. 88-49, 12-28-1988; amd. Ord. 97-94, 12-16-1997)
5-1A-17: NO REBATE ALLOWED; EXEMPTIONS:
No rebate shall be allowed upon any license fee, unless the licensed premises
has been damaged by fire or other unavoidable accident. Rebates may also be
allowed upon disruption of the business due to the use of the city's power of
eminent domain. In all such cases the business license coordinator shall
determine whether the request for rebate is authorized under this section. Any
rebate shall be prorated using the number of days of business disruption in
relation to the remainder of the calendar year.
(1979 Code § 5.04.170; amd. Ord. 88-49, 12-28-1988; Ord. 92-22, 3-24-1992; Ord.
97-94, 12-16-1997)
5-1A-18: APPEALS; LICENSE FEES, PENALTIES AND REBATES:
   A.   Appointment Of Hearing Officer; Authority: The mayor shall appoint a
hearing officer who shall have the authority to hear appeals of any decision of
the business license coordinator regarding the assessment of any fee or penalty
imposed or rebate determination pursuant to the provisions of this title. The
hearing officer shall have the authority to make adjustments in any license
assessment found to be illegally imposed. In regards to penalties assessed
under subsection 5-1A-14A of this article, the hearing officer may set aside
all or a part of said penalty imposed for an untimely renewal, if the failure
to pay the license fees on a timely basis was found to be a matter of excusable
neglect based upon circumstances beyond the control of the licensee.
   B.   Time Limit For Filing: Appeals of the assessment as determined by the
business license coordinator shall be made by filing a written notice of appeal
with the business license coordinator setting forth with specificity the
reasons for which the appeal is taken. All appeals pertaining to licenses due
on January 2 must be filed prior to the first day of March, and all appeals
pertaining to licenses due at any other time must be filed within sixty (60)
days from the date such licenses are due. All appeals pertaining to the
assessment of penalties must be filed within thirty (30) days of notification
of the penalty assessment. All appeals not filed before such deadlines shall be
barred.
   C.   Notice; Evidence, Witnesses: The hearing officer shall fix a reasonable
time for the hearing and give notice to appellant and the business license
coordinator of the time, date and place. Both the business license coordinator
and the appellant may present evidence and the hearing officer shall have the
authority to call and swear witnesses.
   D.   Decision Of Hearing Officer; Appeal: The hearing officer's decision
shall be made in writing within ten (10) days after the hearing and filed in
the office of the business license coordinator. A copy shall be mailed to the
applicant. The decision may be appealed to the district court within thirty
(30) days from when the written decision is filed.
   E.   Fee: All appeals filed pursuant to this section shall be accompanied by
a fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00). Such fee may be refunded by the hearing
officer if it is determined that the fees or penalties were illegally imposed.
(1979 Code § 5.04.180; amd. Ord. 88-49, 12-28-1988; Ord. 90-46, 9-20-1990; Ord.
92-22, 3-24-1992; Ord. 97-94, 12-16-1997; Ord. 2005-56, 10-18-2005)
5-1A-19: INSPECTIONS:
   A.   Authority: Authorized officers, including peace officers, code
enforcement officers, and any other "authorized officer" as defined in section
5-1A-1 of this article, shall be permitted to make an inspection to enforce any
of the provisions of this title or any other applicable statute or ordinance,
and may enter any building or may enter upon any premises during regular
business hours; or, if there are no regular business hours, the officers or
their authorized representatives shall first make a reasonable effort to locate
the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises
and request entry.
   B.   Refusal Prohibited: No owner, occupant or any other person having
charge, care or control of any building or premises shall fail or neglect,
after public request is made as herein provided, to properly permit entry
therein by the authorized officer or his representative(s) for the purpose of
inspection and examination to ensure compliance with this title.
(Ord. 2011-51, 10-25-2011)
5-1A-20: ENFORCEMENT; POWERS OF BUSINESS LICENSE COORDINATOR:
The business license coordinator shall have the authority to make
investigation, audit records, compel the production of documents, subpoena
witnesses and administer oaths for the purpose of determining whether or not an
applicant or licensee is in compliance with any licensing provision, and may
refuse to issue a license or recommend suspension of a license, if an applicant
or licensee, for any reason, fails or refuses to cooperate in such
investigation or audit.
(1979 Code § 5.04.200; amd. Ord. 88-49, 12-28-1988; Ord. 92-22, 3-24-1992; Ord.
97-94, 12-16-1997)
5-1A-21: INSPECTION DUTY; REPORTING DELINQUENCY:
All code enforcement officers are appointed assistant inspectors of licenses
and shall examine all places of business or persons required to obtain business
licenses and shall inform the business license coordinator of any violations of
this article. Code enforcement officers shall report to all businesses or
persons that have failed to obtain business licenses as required by this
article.
(Ord. 2011-51, 10-25-2011)
5-1A-22: DESTRUCTION OF RECORDS:
The business license coordinator is authorized, from time to time, in his
discretion, to remove from the files in his office and to destroy the following
records and papers:
   A.   All applications for city license except for the then current year and
the three (3) years immediately preceding;
   B.   All daily cash receipt transaction records except those for the then
current year and the year immediately preceding.
(1979 Code § 5.04.220; amd. Ord. 88-49, 12-28-1988; Ord. 92-22, 3-24-1992; Ord.
97-94, 12-16-1997)
5-1A-23: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
   A.   Person: Unless specifically prohibited in the provisions of this title,
existing business licenses may be transferred to another person operating the
same business at the same location upon the new person making application and
being able to qualify for such license under this title and paying the
applicable business license ownership transfer fee as set forth in the business
license consolidated fee schedule.
   B.   Location: Unless specifically provided for in the provisions of this
title, a business license may not be transferred to a new location within the
city. Each location shall be applied for and all appropriate fees shall be paid
for each location; provided, that the following license fees paid at an
existing location shall be waived at the new location by the business license
coordinator if necessary to eliminate duplicative charges:
      1.   Disproportionate impact fees; or
      2.   Enhanced services fees.
(1979 Code § 5.04.230; amd. Ord. 88-49, 12-28-1988; Ord. 91-22, 7-11-1991; Ord.
97-94, 12-16-1997)
5-1A-24: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
   A.   Required: Every certificate of license for a business shall be posted
by the licensee in a conspicuous place upon the wall of the building, room or
office of the place of business so that the same may be easily seen. When the
certificate of license has expired, it shall be removed and no certificate of
license which is not in force and effect shall be permitted to remain posted
within the place of business unless validated as a renewal. If the licensee's
business is such that a license cannot be displayed due to the transient or
mobile nature of the business, then the licensee shall carry the license on his
person ready to be shown on request by an authorized officer during all such
time or times while the licensee is engaged in or pursuing the business for
which a license is granted.
   B.   Coin Operated Machine: In the event the license is for a coin operated
machine or device, the certificate shall be attached or displayed in the
immediate vicinity of the machine for which it has been issued.
(1979 Code § 5.04.240; amd. Ord. 88-49, 12-28-1988; Ord. 97-94, 12-16-1997)
5-1A-25: BONDS REQUIRED FOR PARTICULAR BUSINESSES:
All applicants for business licenses for the following businesses shall also be
required to give bonds in favor of the city in the amounts and for the purposes
as indicated below. All aggrieved persons shall have a right to bring an action
under such bond against the licensee and the sureties. No license shall be
issued until the bonds required herein have been filed and approved by the city
attorney.
   A.   Employment agencies, in the penal sum of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) conditioned for the faithful observance of the ordinances of the
city, and the payment of all damages occasioned to any person by reason of any
misstatement, misrepresentation, fraud or deceit practiced by the licensee or
its agents or employees;
   B.   Lending monies upon personal securities, evidence of indebtedness,
assignments of salary, salary warrants or any personal property, other than
banks and building and loan institutions, in the penal sum of two thousand
dollars ($2,000.00) conditioned for the faithful observance of the ordinances
of the city and the laws of the state respecting money brokers, loan agencies,
short term loan businesses, and pawnbrokers and with respect to interest rates
chargeable;
   C.   Messenger or special delivery services, in the penal sum of one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) conditioned for the faithful observance of all
ordinances of the city and the payment of all damages arising from any
negligence in the conducting of such business;
   D.   Precious metal purchaser, in the penal sum of two thousand dollars
($2,000.00) conditioned for the faithful observance of the ordinances of the
city, and the payment of all damages occasioned to any person by reason of any
failure to retain property or any misstatement, misrepresentation, fraud or
deceit practiced by the licensee or its agents or employees.
(Ord. 2012-6, 1-24-2012)
ARTICLE B.  CONSOLIDATED FEE SCHEDULE
SECTION:
5-1B-1: Business License Fees; Purpose
5-1B-2: License Fees
5-1B-3: Multiple Businesses
5-1B-1: BUSINESS LICENSE FEES; PURPOSE:
For the purpose of regulation and for the purpose of obtaining revenue for the
city, annual license fees in the amounts specified in this article are hereby
levied and assessed upon the privilege of doing or engaging in business in the
city during any calendar year or part thereof, and upon the privilege of doing
any of the acts within the city for which a license fee is prescribed in this
article during any calendar year or portion thereof. Nonregulatory licenses as
provided herein shall be levied only for the purpose of revenue.
(1979 Code § 5.05.010; amd. Ord. 88-49, 12-28-1988; Ord. 97-94, 12-16-1997;
Ord. 2004-71, 10-12-2004, eff. 12-31-2004)
5-1B-2: LICENSE FEES:
   A.   Fee Imposed: The amount of the business license fee levied and imposed
shall be the business license fee imposed under subsection B of this section,
plus, if applicable, the disproportionate impact fee imposed under subsection C
of this section. If a business is subject to multiple licenses for the same
location and applies concurrently for such licenses, the regulatory license fee
under subsection B of this section shall be the highest license fee, plus
thirty dollars ($30.00) per additional license. Businesses subject to multiple
licenses for the same location shall pay only the highest disproportionate
impact fee assessed against all of the applicable businesses at such location.
Fees applicable to new rental dwelling licenses may be prorated as provided in
subsection 5-1A-13B of this chapter.
   B.   License Fees Enumerated: The business license fee levied and imposed,
covering the cost of licensing, inspection and related administrative costs and
cost of general or special regulation, as applicable, is as follows:
 
1. General business (applicable to all businesses not listed     $ 83.00
below)
2. Rental dwellings with 2 or fewer dwelling units, including    Not applicable
owner occupied triplexes
3. For businesses and licenses subject to special regulation      
involving licensing, inspection or police supervision:
  Alcoholic beverage licenses (Alcoholic beverage licenses are
  granted only for the privilege of selling or allowing the
 consumption of alcoholic beverages. The license is required in  
  addition to any other regulatory license required herein or,
  if none is required, a general business license.):
  Class A                                                      $267.00
  Class B                                                      267.00
  Class C                                                      267.00
  Combination B and C                                          267.00
  Class D                                                      267.00
  Class E                                                      98.00
  Class F                                                      267.00
  Class G                                                      267.00
  Liquor consumption                                           83.00
 Amusement halls and arcades                                    83.00
 Auction house                                                  83.00
 Beer, wholesaler                                               83.00
  Boarding houses/rooming houses (as defined in section
 5-9-1 of this title) (including hotels, motels and other short 83.00
  term room rentals)
 Cabarets or nightclubs                                         83.00
 Daycare                                                        91.00
 Employment agencies                                            83.00
 Horsedrawn carriage                                            83.00
 Manufactured (mobile) home park                                83.00
 Pawnbrokers                                                    546.00
 Private clubs and associations                                 83.00
 Refuse haulers                                                 83.00
 Rental dwellings:                                               
    Multiple-family rental dwellings (not applicable to
  buildings with 2 or fewer dwelling units, including owner     
    occupied triplexes):
   Per building (See discount available under section         83.00
      12-16-2, "Good Landlord Incentive Program", of this code.)
 Restaurants                                                    83.00
 Secondhand and junk dealers                                    83.00
 Sidewalk vendor                                                83.00
 Special transportation vehicle                                 83.00
 Swap meet:                                                      
  Operator                                                     83.00
  Individual sellers                                           5.00
 Taxicab, per vehicle                                           83.00
 Temporary businesses:                                           
  Christmas tree sales                                         83.00
  Distressed goods (30 days)                                   83.00
  Exhibitions or special events, per event                     83.00
   Special event fundraiser by 501(c)(3) organization with no No fee
      vendors
  Fireworks                                                    83.00
   Participant in an exhibition or special event:              
     Per day                                                 5.00
     Per event, up to 7 consecutive days                     15.00
     Per event, weekends or 1 day per week                   25.00
        up to 15 consecutive weeks
 Towing service                                                 83.00
4. For individual, occupational or employee licensing subject to  
special licensing and regulation:
 Auctioneer                                                     83.00
 Door to door solicitors and peddlers                           83.00
 Horsedrawn carriage driver                                     83.00
 Taxicab driver                                                 83.00
5. Sexually oriented businesses:                                  
 Businesses:                                                     
  Adult businesses:                                             
   Adult bookstore                                            267.00
   Adult motion picture theater                               267.00
   Adult video store                                          267.00
   Adult entertainment dancing agencies                       560.00
   Adult live entertainment business                          560.00
   Outcall businesses                                         560.00
 Employees:                                                      
  Employees of adult live entertainment businesses personally  83.00
    providing seminude entertainment to patrons
  Employees providing outcall services away from the licensed  83.00
    premises
  All other employees requiring an individual license          83.00
 Multiple/additional licenses:                                   
    Any individual applying for a license for outcall services
  and an adult entertainment dancing agency or more than 1      
    type of adult business at the same location, at the same
    time, shall pay only the higher of all applicable fees.
 
   C.   Disproportionate Costs:
      1.   Determination: It is hereby determined by the city council that:
         a.   A disproportionate level of municipal services is provided to
commercial operations within the city in comparison with that level of services
provided to residences within the city not classified as rental dwellings,
based on the disproportionate use of police and fire services and the
additional costs associated with increased usage of and demand for public
facilities and services by employees; and
         b.   Certain types of businesses also receive a disproportionate level
of municipal services in comparison with that level of services provided to
other business categories and classifications, based on the disproportionate
use of police and fire services.
      2.   Fees Determined: Except as otherwise provided in subsections C3, C5,
C6 and C7 of this section, the fee determined to be related to the
disproportionate costs of such municipal services is seven dollars ($7.00) per
employee, plus the designated fee for the applicable business or business
license as follows:
 
Amusement halls and arcades under chapter 4, article  $105.00  
A of this title
Auction houses                                        105.00   
Banks, credit unions and other banking related        216.00   
businesses
Boarding houses/rooming houses (as defined in
section
5-9-1 of this title) (including hotels, motels and    105.00   
other short term room rentals but not including
owner occupied residential vacation rentals)
Businesses with alcoholic beverage license:                   
 Retail with class A beer license                    885.00   
 Restaurant with class B beer or liquor consumption  225.00   
  license
 Tavern with class C beer or combination B and C     253.00   
  beer license
 Private club with class D beer license              253.00   
 Class E beer license per event                      31.00    
 Recreation business with class F license            125.00   
 Hotel, resort facility, sports center or            225.00   
  conference center with class G license
 Beer wholesalers                                    105.00   
Constables                                            105.00   
Detective agencies                                    105.00   
Manufactured (mobile) home park, based on the number  58.00   per pad or space
of rental pads or spaces
New/used motor vehicle dealers (including all
retailing of automobiles, trucks, motorcycles,        301.00   
recreational vehicles)
Pawnbrokers                                           105.00   
Recreational and sporting activities, other than      105.00   
amusement halls and arcades
Rental dwellings, based on the number of dwelling             
units per building:
 1 dwelling unit (single-family dwelling)            156.00  per unit
 2 dwelling units (duplex, two-family dwelling)      70.00   per unit
 3 or more dwelling units (multiple-family           82.00   per unit
  dwelling)
Restaurants (without alcoholic beverage license)      225.00   
Retailing of goods, other than motor vehicles or      245.00   
secondhand goods
Retailing of secondhand goods (secondhand dealers)    105.00   
Short term loan business                              216.00   
Sidewalk vendors                                      105.00   
Street vendors                                        105.00   
Temporary businesses:                                         
 Christmas tree sales                                21.00    
 Distressed goods (30 days)                          21.00    
 Exhibition or special event, per event               No charge
 Fireworks:                                          
  Temporary stand                                   21.00    
  With ongoing business                              No charge
 Participant in an exhibition or special event        No charge
 Spook alleys                                        21.00    
All other businesses, not listed above                105.00   
 
      3.   Special Discounts For Rental Dwellings:
         a.   If the owner of a rental dwelling with two (2) dwelling units per
building (a two-family dwelling or duplex under the city's zoning ordinances)
resides in one of the dwelling units, the owner shall be entitled to a discount
of fifty percent (50%) on the disproportionate fees applicable to the remaining
dwelling unit. Such discount shall be applied on a pro rata basis, if such
residency is not maintained during the entire licensing year.
         b.   Landlords may qualify for a discount under the good landlord
incentive program as provided in section
12-16-2 of this code.
         c.   The owner of a multi-family rental dwelling with no more than
four (4) dwelling units in the building shall be entitled to a discount of
fifty percent (50%) on the disproportionate fees applicable to the remaining
dwelling units located within the rental dwelling, if the owner resides in one
of the dwelling units but does not otherwise qualify for a discount under
subsection C3b of this section for such building. Such discount shall be
applied on a pro rata basis, if such residency is not maintained during the
entire licensing year.
      4.   Fixed Location Required: Disproportionate impact fees shall only
apply to businesses with a fixed location within the city. It shall
specifically not apply to individual, occupational, or employee licenses
identified under subsection B4 of this section or to any other license or
permit required of an employee of a business licensed herein.
      5.   Home Occupations: Businesses which are located in the principal
residence of the owner of the business and which are classified as a home
occupation under the city zoning ordinances are exempt from the
disproportionate impact fee.
      6.   Special Discounts For Small Businesses:
         a.   Small businesses, as defined herein, shall be entitled to the
following discount:
 
Gross Receipts              Discount
   $0.00 to $9,999.00    100 percent
   $10,000.00 to $49,999.50 percent
 
         b.   A "small business", for purposes of this subsection C6, shall
include any business with less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) in
gross receipts in the immediately preceding calendar year. It shall not apply
to any of the following business classifications: businesses with alcoholic
beverage licenses, sexually oriented businesses, banks, credit unions and other
banking related businesses, new/used motor vehicle dealers, boarding houses,
rooming houses (including hotels, motels and residential vacation rentals),
pawnbrokers, rental dwellings, manufactured (mobile) home parks, taxicabs, or
temporary businesses.
         c.   For purposes of this subsection C6, "gross receipts" shall mean:
            (1)   The gross receipts derived from the trade, business, commerce
or sale of tangible personal property or services, or both, without deduction
or exclusion for the cost of goods or property sold or the expense of carrying
on any business, trade, profession, craft, occupation or calling; or
            (2)   The gross receipts of each and any person received as
compensation for personal services without deduction or exclusion for the
expense of carrying on any business, trade, profession, craft, occupation or
calling specified therein.
         d.   Any person applying for the small business discount shall report
and declare, in writing, under oath, the true and correct amount of the gross
receipts by which the discount is measured. The business license coordinator is
authorized to deny any discount, if determined that the information is
inaccurate or that the applicant was not otherwise qualified for the discount.
      7.   Independent Contractor: An individual who engages in business as an
independent contractor shall not be subject to the disproportionate impact fee,
under the following circumstances:
         a.   The independent contractor shares or uses office or work space
within the premises of another licensed business;
         b.   The other licensed business is subject to the applicable
disproportionate impact fee for the entirety of the business location;
         c.   The business activities of the independent contractor are
directly related to and a part of the business operations of the other
business; and
         d.   The independent contractor is not in a landlord-tenant
relationship with the other licensee.
   D.   Reserved.
   E.   Business License Transfer Fees:
      1.   For ownership transfers permitted under section
5-1A-23 of this chapter, the following fees shall apply:
 
 a. General businesses                          $30.00
2. For location transfers as may specifically    30.00
be authorized under the provisions of this title
 
   F.   License Amendment Fees: For rental dwelling license amendments under
section
5-10-9 of this title:
 
Rental dwellings with 2 or fewer units         No fee
Multi-family rental dwellings, per application $30.00
 
Together with the disproportionate impact fees applicable to the additional
rental dwellings. Disproportionate fees applicable to new rental dwellings may
be prorated as provided in subsection
5-1A-13B of this chapter.
   G.   Certificates:
 
Certificates of public convenience and necessity $83.00
 
   H.   Duplicates:
 
Duplicate original licenses 10.00
 
(Ord. 2016-61, 12-20-2016)
5-1B-3: MULTIPLE BUSINESSES:
The following standards shall apply to multiple businesses being carried on by
one licensee at the same business location:
   A.   There shall be only one disproportionate impact fee imposed per
business location and the licensee shall pay the highest fee that may be
applicable to such business location.
   B.   There shall be only one license required, unless the business element
in question is subject to special regulation by the city under the provisions
of this title.
(1979 Code § 5.05.030; amd. Ord. 88-49, 12-28-1988; Ord. 97-94, 12-16-1997;
Ord. 2004-71, 10-12-2004, eff. 12-31-2004)
ARTICLE C.  DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION 1
SECTION:
5-1C-1: Hearing Officer; Appointment And Powers
5-1C-2: Procedure
5-1C-3: Criteria For Denial
5-1C-4: Suspension Or Revocation
5-1C-5: Hearing Procedure
5-1C-6: Reapplication; Waiting Period
 
Notes
1 1. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the denial, suspension on or
  revocation of any license issued under authority of this title.
5-1C-1: HEARING OFFICER; APPOINTMENT AND POWERS:
The mayor may appoint one or more hearing officers, and the mayor or the
hearing officer shall have power and authority to call, preside at and conduct
hearings to consider the suspension, revocation, denial or approval of business
licenses issued by the city, including the power to examine witnesses and
receive evidence, compel the attendance of witnesses and compel the production
of documents.
(1979 Code § 5.03.050; Ord. 92-21, 3-24-1992)
5-1C-2: PROCEDURE:
   A.   Authority: The business license coordinator shall have the authority,
without a hearing, to deny issuance of a new license application for the
reasons provided for in this article.
   B.   Appeal: The decision of the business license coordinator may be
appealed by filing a written notice of appeal with the city recorder within
fifteen (15) days of receipt of the notice of denial. The hearing of the appeal
shall be conducted pursuant to section
5-1C-5 of this article.
   C.   Hearing: Any suspension, revocation or denial of a license application
submitted for renewal shall not be imposed until a hearing is held by the mayor
or a hearing officer appointed by the mayor. Reasonable notice of the time and
place of the hearing, together with notice of the nature of the charges or
complaint against the licensee, premises or applicant sufficient to reasonably
inform the licensee or applicant and enable the licensee or applicant to answer
such charges and complaint, shall be served upon the licensee or applicant
personally or by mailing a copy to the licensee or applicant at his or her last
known post office address not later than five (5) days prior to the hearing
date.
(1979 Code § 5.03.030; Ord. 88-49, 12-22-1988; amd. Ord. 92-21, 3-24-1992)
5-1C-3: CRITERIA FOR DENIAL:
The city may deny the application for a business license for any of the
following reasons:
   A.   Failure To Meet Qualifications: The applicant does not meet the
qualifications for a license as provided under this title.
   B.   Nonpayment Of Fees: For a new application, nonpayment of a returned
check for the required license fees at the time the application is made. For a
business license renewal application, nonpayment of the required license fees
plus any penalty assessed for late payment, or for the nonpayment of any
delinquent amounts or penalties due from prior years.
   C.   Disapproval Of Reviewing Department: One of the reviewing departments
or divisions of the city provided for in this title has disapproved the
application pursuant to any applicable provision of this code.
   D.   False Information: False or incomplete information given on the
application.
   E.   Noncompliance: Noncompliance with any city, state or federal statutes,
or any health department regulations governing the applicant's proposed
business.
   F.   Other: Any other reason expressly provided for in this title.
(1979 Code § 5.03.010; Ord. 88-49, 12-22-1988; amd. Ord. 92-21, 3-24-1992; Ord.
2007-5, 1-16-2007)
5-1C-4: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
   A.   Grounds: The city may suspend or revoke a business license for any of
the following reasons:
      1.   The license should not have been issued.
      2.   The licensee does not now meet the qualifications for a license as
provided under this title.
      3.   False or incomplete information given on an application.
      4.   The licensee has violated or is violating any provision of this
title or provision of this code, state or federal statutes or regulations
governing the licensee's business.
      5.   Violation of this title by the agents or employees of a licensee and
violations of any other laws by the agents or employees committed while acting
as an agent or employee of the licensee.
      6.   Failure to pay a required fee.
      7.   Any other reason expressly provided for in this title.
   B.   Time Limitation: No business license shall be suspended or revoked for
a period of time exceeding one year, unless otherwise provided in this title.
(1979 Code § 5.03.020; Ord. 88-49, 12-22-1988; amd. Ord. 92-21, 3-24-1992; Ord.
2004-57, 8-3-2004)
5-1C-5: HEARING PROCEDURE:
   A.   Mayor; Hearing Officer: Hearings to consider the revocation, suspension
or denial of a license issued by the city shall be held by or at the direction
of the mayor. Such hearings may be held either before the mayor or before a
hearing officer who has been appointed by the mayor to conduct such hearings.
   B.   Testimony Under Oath; Recorded: All witnesses called at such hearings
shall be sworn by a person duly authorized to administer oaths and a record of
such hearing shall be made by a recording. At the request and expense of any
party, a hearing may be recorded by a court reporter.
   C.   Licensee Rights: A licensee shall have the right to appear at the
hearing in person or by counsel, or both, present evidence, present argument on
the licensee's or applicant's behalf, cross examine witnesses, and in all
proper ways defend the licensee's or applicant's position.
   D.   Order Or Decision: The mayor or a designated hearing officer shall make
a ruling and decision based upon the evidence presented at such hearing and
shall issue or adopt written findings of fact and conclusions of law in
appropriate cases and issue a written order or decision.
   E.   Vacation Of Decision: Any decision entered by a hearing officer may be
vacated by the mayor within fifteen (15) days after the entry thereof. The
mayor shall thereafter conduct such further hearings, if any, as the mayor
shall deem necessary, and based upon evidence received at all hearings on the
issues, the mayor shall adopt written findings and enter a written order or
decision.
   F.   Final Decision; Appeal: A written order or decision of a hearing
officer, if not vacated by the mayor, and a written order or decision of the
mayor, shall constitute a final decision from which an appeal (for purposes of
review and not a trial de novo) may be taken to a court of law, in the time and
manner otherwise provided by law.
(1979 Code § 5.03.040; Ord. 92-21, 3-24-1992)
5-1C-6: REAPPLICATION; WAITING PERIOD:
It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or any agent, manager or
operator of any person, corporation or firm who has had a license suspended,
revoked or denied by the mayor or the mayor's designated hearing officer to
reapply for or obtain a license which has been so suspended, revoked or denied
during the time that said license has been revoked, suspended or denied or for
a period of one year, whichever is less.
(1979 Code § 5.03.060; Ord. 92-21, 3-24-1992)
ARTICLE D.  GENERAL REGULATIONS
SECTION:
5-1D-1: Conducting Business Under Assumed Name
5-1D-2: License; Proof Of Compliance With State Law
5-1D-1: CONDUCTING BUSINESS UNDER ASSUMED NAME:
It shall be unlawful to carry on or conduct or transact business within the
corporate limits of the City under an assumed name or under any designation,
name or style, corporate, partnership or otherwise, other than the real name or
names of the individual or individuals conducting or transacting such business,
without first having complied with applicable State law.
(1979 Code § 5.02.010)
5-1D-2: LICENSE; PROOF OF COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW:
The Business License Coordinator, at the Coordinator's discretion, may require
from any applicant for a City business license proof of such applicant's
compliance or qualifications under applicable State regulatory laws before
issuing the City business license.
(1979 Code § 5.02.020; amd. Ord. 97-94, 12-16-1997)
ARTICLE E.  REMEDIES AND PENALTIES
SECTION:
5-1E-1: Remedies And Penalties Designated; Failure To Comply
5-1E-1: REMEDIES AND PENALTIES DESIGNATED; FAILURE TO COMPLY:
   A.   Misdemeanor: Any person who fails to comply with any of the provisions
of this title is guilty of a class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction therefor,
shall be punished as provided in title 1, chapter 4, article A of this code.
   B.   Judicial Remedies: This title may also be enforced by injunction,
mandamus, abatement, or any other appropriate judicial action in law or equity.
   C.   Civil Penalties:
      1.   Failure to obtain or renew any license required under this title or
failure to correct a violation of this title after notice of violation and
expiration of the warning period may be enforced by imposition of the following
civil penalties pursuant to title 1, chapter 4, article B of this code:
         a.   The first civil citation issued after expiration of the warning
period shall subject the responsible party to the initial penalty of one
hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00).
         b.   The second civil citation issued after expiration of the warning
period and the prior imposition of the initial penalty shall subject the
responsible party to the intermediate penalty of two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00).
         c.   Any subsequent civil citation issued after expiration of the
warning period and the prior imposition of the intermediate penalty, or any
reoccurring violation under section
1-4B-6 of this code, shall subject the responsible party to the maximum penalty
of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
      2.   In the event a person obtains the necessary licenses after
imposition and payment of civil penalties pursuant to this section, such
payment shall be credited against the payment of late penalties due under
section
5-1A-14 of this chapter. In the event a person obtains the necessary licenses
after imposition of civil penalties pursuant to this section that have not been
paid, the payment of late penalties due under section
5-1A-14 of this chapter shall be credited against the unpaid civil penalties.
Civil penalties may be imposed under this section in addition to the denial,
suspension or revocation of any license pursuant to article C of this chapter.
   D.   Daily Violation: Each day that any violation continues shall be
considered a separate offense or violation for purposes of the penalties and
remedies available to the city.
   E.   Combination Permitted: Any one, all, or any combination of the
foregoing penalties and remedies may be used to enforce the provisions of this
title.
(Ord. 2011-51, 10-25-2011)
CHAPTER 2
BUSINESS TAXES
ARTICLE A.  SALES AND USE TAX
SECTION:
5-2A-1: Title
5-2A-2: Purpose
5-2A-3: Sales Tax
5-2A-4: Execution Of Documents
5-2A-5: Contract With State Tax Commission
5-2A-6: Penalty
5-2A-1: TITLE:
This Article shall be known as the LOCAL SALES AND USE TAX ORDINANCE of Ogden
City.
(1979 Code § 5.51.010; amd. Ord. 83-20, 5-26-1983; Ord. 86-27, 6-5-1986; Ord.
90-12, 2-15-1990)
5-2A-2: PURPOSE:
   A.   Authorization Of Tax: The Forty Eighth Session of the Utah Legislature
authorized municipalities of the State of Utah to enact sales and use tax
ordinances imposing a one percent (1%) tax.
   B.   Tax Established; Effective Date: It is the purpose of this Article to
levy and impose a one percent (1%) local option sales and use tax effective
January 1, 1990, to authorize and designate the Utah State Tax Commission as
agent for the City to collect the tax and to conform with the requirements of
the Local Sales and Use Tax of Utah, Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 12.
(1979 Code § 5.51.020; amd. Ord. 83-20, 5-26-1983; Ord. 86-27, 6-5-1986; Ord.
90-12, 2-15-1990)
5-2A-3: SALES TAX:
   A.   Imposed:
      1.   From and after one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M., January
1, 1990, there is levied and there shall be collected and paid a tax upon the
purchaser for the amount paid or charged for those items listed and subject to
taxation under Utah Code Annotated subsection 59-12-103(i), made within the
City at the rate of one percent (1%).
      2.   From and after one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M., January
1, 1990, an excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other
consumption in the City of tangible personal property from any retailer at the
rate of one percent (1%) of the sales price of the property.
      3.   For the purposes of this Article, all retail sales shall be presumed
to have been consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the
tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an
out-of-State destination. If a retailer has no permanent place of business in
the State, or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which
the retail sales are consummated shall be as determined under the rules and
regulations prescribed and adopted by the State Tax Commission. Public
utilities, as defined by Utah Code Annotated title 54, shall not be obligated
to determine the place or places within any county or municipality where public
utilities are rendered, but the place of sale or the sales tax revenues arising
from such service allocable to the City shall be as determined by the State Tax
Commission pursuant to an appropriate formula and other rules and regulations
to be prescribed and adopted by it.
   B.   Adoption Of State Codes; Provisions:
      1.   Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are
inconsistent with the provisions of the Local Sales Tax and Use Tax Act of
Utah, all of the provisions of Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 12, part
1, as amended, and in force and effect on the effective date hereof, insofar as
they relate to sales and use taxes, excepting sections 59-12-101 and 59-12-119
thereof, and excepting for the amount of the sales and use tax levied therein,
are hereby adopted and made a part of this Article as though fully set forth
herein.
      2.   Wherever, and to the extent that in Utah Code Annotated title 59,
chapter 12, part 1, the State of Utah is named or referred to as the taxing
agency, the name of this City shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in this
subsection B shall be deemed to require substitution of the name of the City
for the word "State" when the word is used as part of the title of the State
Tax Commission, or of the Constitution of Utah, nor shall the name of the City
be substituted for that of the State in any section when the result of that
substitution would require action to be taken by or against the State Tax
Commission in performing the functions incident to the administration or
operation of this Article.
      3.   If an annual license has been issued to a retailer under Utah Code
annotated section 59-12-106, an additional license shall not be required by
reason of this Section.
      4.   The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the State of Utah
under Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 12, part 1, shall not be included
as a part of the purchase price paid or charged for a taxable item.
      5.   The sale, storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property,
the purchase price of which has been subject to sales or use tax under a sales
and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with this part by any county, city
or town in any other county in this State, shall be exempt from the tax due
under this Section.
      6.   The sale, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal
property, the gross receipts from the sale of which has been subject to sales
or use tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with this
part by any county other than the county in which the city or town is located,
or the city or town in this State, shall be exempt from the tax due under this
Section.
      7.   The tax revenues derived hereunder shall be distributed in
accordance with the provisions of Utah Code Annotated subsection 59-12-205(2).
(1979 Code § 5.51.040; amd. Ord. 83-20, 5-26-1983; Ord. 86-27, 6-5-1986; Ord.
90-12, 2-15-1990)
5-2A-4: EXECUTION OF DOCUMENTS:
The Mayor or the Mayor's designee is authorized to execute documents as
necessary to distribute sales and use tax revenues on the combination of point
of sale and population factors set forth in Utah Code Annotated section 59-12-
205.
(1979 Code § 5.51.060; amd. Ord. 83-20, 5-26-1983; Ord. 86-27, 6-5-1986; Ord.
90-12, 2-15-1990; 1999 Code)
5-2A-5: CONTRACT WITH STATE TAX COMMISSION:
Heretofore, the City has entered into an agreement with the State Tax
Commission to perform all functions incident to the administration or operation
of the sales and use tax ordinance of the City. This contract is confirmed and
the Mayor is authorized to enter into such supplementary agreement with the
State Tax Commission as may be necessary to the continued administration and
operation of the local sales and use tax ordinance of the City as reenacted by
this Article.
(1979 Code § 5.51.070; amd. Ord. 83-20, 5-26-1983; Ord. 86-27, 6-5-1986; Ord.
90-12, 2-15-1990; 1999 Code)
5-2A-6: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article shall be deemed
guilty of a Class B misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be
punishable as set forth in Title 1, Chapter 4 of this Code.
(1979 Code § 5.51.080; amd. Ord. 83-20, 5-26-1983; Ord. 86-27, 6-5-1986; Ord.
90-12, 2-15-1990; 1999 Code)
ARTICLE B.  TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSE TAX 1
SECTION:
5-2B-1: Definitions
5-2B-2: Levy Of Tax
5-2B-3: Tax Rate
5-2B-4: Rate Limitation And Exemption
5-2B-5: Effective Date Of Tax Levy
5-2B-6: Interlocal Agreement For Collection Of The Tax
5-2B-7: Repeal Of Inconsistent Taxes And Fees; Effect On Other Ordinances
 
Notes
  1. Prior ordinance history: 1979 Code §§ 5.64.010, 5.64.020, 5.64.030,
1 5.64.040, 5.64.050, 5.64.060; Ord. 80-30, 6-26-1980; Ord. 81-26, 6-25-1981;
  Ord. 82-18, 4-29-1982; Ord. 83-4, 1-6-1983; Ord. 93-33, 8-24-1993; Ord. 97-
  55, 6-25-1997, eff. 6-30-1997; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998.
5-2B-1: DEFINITIONS:
The terms used in this article shall be defined as provided in the municipal
telecommunications license tax act, section 10-1-401 et seq., Utah Code
Annotated, or its successor provisions.
(Ord. 2004-35, 5-25-2004)
5-2B-2: LEVY OF TAX:
There is hereby levied on a telecommunications provider a municipal
telecommunications license tax on the telecommunication provider's gross
receipts from telecommunications service attributed to this municipality, in
accordance with the provisions of section 10-1-407, Utah Code Annotated, or its
successor provision. The tax levied in this article shall be enforced,
collected and administered in all respects as provided in the municipal
telecommunications license tax act section 10-1-401 et seq., Utah Code
Annotated, or its successor provisions, and the provisions of section 10-1-408,
Utah Code Annotated, are specifically incorporated herein.
(Ord. 2004-35, 5-25-2004)
5-2B-3: TAX RATE:
The rate of the tax levy imposed in this article shall be four percent (4%) of
the telecommunication provider's gross receipts from telecommunications service
that is attributed to this municipality, subject to the requirements of section
10-1-407, Utah Code Annotated, or its successor provision.
(Ord. 2004-35, 5-25-2004)
5-2B-4: RATE LIMITATION AND EXEMPTION:
The rate of the levy imposed in this article shall not exceed four percent (4%)
of the telecommunication provider's gross receipts from telecommunication
service attributed to this municipality unless a higher rate is approved by a
majority vote of the voters in this municipality that vote in:
   A.   A municipal general election;
   B.   A regular general election; or
   C.   A local special election.
(Ord. 2004-35, 5-25-2004)
5-2B-5: EFFECTIVE DATE OF TAX LEVY:
The tax imposed herein shall be levied effective July 1, 2004.
(Ord. 2004-35, 5-25-2004)
5-2B-6: INTERLOCAL AGREEMENT FOR COLLECTION OF THE TAX:
On or before the effective date hereof, the mayor shall enter into the uniform
interlocal agreement with the commission described in section 10-1-405, Utah
Code Annotated, or its successor provision, for the collection, enforcement and
administration of this municipal telecommunications license tax.
(Ord. 2004-35, 5-25-2004)
5-2B-7: REPEAL OF INCONSISTENT TAXES AND FEES; EFFECT ON OTHER ORDINANCES:
Any tax or fee previously enacted by this municipality under authority of
section 10-1-203, Utah Code Annotated, or its successor provision, or title 11,
chapter 26, local taxation of utilities limitation, Utah Code Annotated, is
hereby repealed effective July 1, 2004. In accordance with the provisions of
section 10-1-406, Utah Code Annotated, or its successor provision, nothing in
this section is intended nor shall be interpreted to:
   A.   Repeal or limit any municipal ordinance or fee which provides that the
municipality may recover from a telecommunications provider the management
costs of the municipality caused by the activities of the telecommunications
provider in the rights of way of the municipality, if the fee is imposed in
accordance with section 72-7-102, Utah Code Annotated, or its successor
provision, and is not related to the municipality's loss of use of a highway as
a result of the activities of the telecommunications provider in a right of
way, or increased deterioration of a highway as a result of the activities of
the telecommunications provider in a right of way;
   B.   Limit the municipality's right to charge fees or taxes on persons that
are not subject to the municipal telecommunications license tax under this
article and locate telecommunications facilities, as defined in section 72-7-
108, Utah Code Annotated, or its successor provision, in this municipality; or
   C.   Exempt a telecommunications provider from complying with any ordinance
related to excavation, construction, or installation of a telecommunications
facility, and that addresses the safety and quality standards of this
municipality for excavation, construction, or installation.
(Ord. 2004-35, 5-25-2004)
ARTICLE C.  ENERGY SALES AND USE TAX
SECTION:
5-2C-1: Title
5-2C-2: Purpose
5-2C-3: Definitions
5-2C-4: Tax Imposed
5-2C-5: Exemptions; Credits
5-2C-6: Tax Collection
5-2C-7: Effective Date Of Levy
5-2C-1: TITLE:
This Article shall be known as the MUNICIPAL ENERGY SALES AND USE TAX OF OGDEN
CITY.
(1979 Code § 4.40.010; Ord. 97-55, 6-25-1997, eff. 6-30-1997)
5-2C-2: PURPOSE:
   A.   The Utah State Legislature has authorized municipalities of the State
of Utah to adopt a municipal energy sales and use tax up to six percent (6%) of
the delivered value of the taxable energy.
   B.   It is the purpose of this Chapter to levy and impose a six percent (6%)
energy sales and use tax effective July 1, 1997, to authorize the Mayor to
contract with the Utah State Tax Commission for the collection of the tax, and
to conform with the requirements of Utah Code Annotated section 10-1-301 et
seq., "The Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax Act".
   C.   It is the intent of the City Council that the tax adopted herein will
replace its existing utility revenue tax (Article B of this Chapter) as it
applies to the sale of gas and electricity and that the payment of franchise
fees under existing franchise ordinances shall be applied as credits against
such tax.
   D.   It is not the intention of the City Council in adopting this ordinance
to modify in any way the obligations imposed under existing franchises.
(1979 Code § 4.40.020; Ord. 97-55, 6-25-1997, eff. 6-30-1997)
5-2C-3: DEFINITIONS:
The definitions contained under Utah Code Annotated section 10-1-303 are
incorporated herein by reference.
(1979 Code § 4.40.030; Ord. 97-55, 6-25-1997, eff. 6-30-1997)
5-2C-4: TAX IMPOSED:
There is imposed on every sale or use of taxable energy made within Ogden City
a tax of six percent (6%) of the delivered value of taxable energy to the
consumer. The tax imposed herein is in addition to any local option sales and
use tax imposed by Ogden City as provided in Utah Code Annotated title 59,
chapter 12, part 2, The Local Sales and Use Tax Act.
(1979 Code § 4.40.040; Ord. 97-55, 6-25-1997, eff. 6-30-1997)
5-2C-5: EXEMPTIONS; CREDITS:
   A.   Exemptions: The following are exempt from the tax imposed under this
Article pursuant to the provisions of Utah Code Annotated section 10-1-305(2)
(b):
      1.   The sales and use of aviation fuel, motor fuel, or special fuel
subject to taxation under Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 13, Motor and
Special Fuel Tax Act;
      2.   The sales and use of taxable energy that the City is prohibited from
taxing under Federal law or the Constitution of the United States or the Utah
Constitution;
      3.   The sales or use of taxable energy purchased or stored in the State
for resale;
      4.   The sales or use of taxable energy to a person if the primary use is
for use in compounding or producing taxable energy or a fuel subject to
taxation under Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 13, Motor and Special Fuel
Tax Act;
      5.   Taxable energy brought into the State by a nonresident for the
nonresident's own personal use or enjoyment while within the State, except
taxable energy purchased for use in the State by a nonresident living or
working in the State at the time of purchase;
      6.   The sales or use of taxable energy for any purpose other than use as
a fuel or energy; and
      7.   The sale of taxable energy for use outside a municipality imposing a
municipal energy sales and use tax.
   B.   Credits: There is allowed a credit against the tax due under this
Article for any contractual franchise fee paid where:
      1.   The taxpayer's energy supplier pays a contractual franchise fee to
Ogden City pursuant to a franchise agreement in effect on July 1, 1997;
      2.   The contractual franchise is passed through by the energy supplier
to the taxpayer as a separately-itemized charge; and
      3.   The energy supplier has accepted the franchise.
(1979 Code § 4.40.050; Ord. 97-55, 6-25-1997, eff. 6-30-1997)
5-2C-6: TAX COLLECTION:
   A.   Except as provided in subsection B of this Section and except insofar
as they are inconsistent with the provisions of The Municipal Energy Sales and
Use Tax Act, all of the provisions of Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 12,
part 1, as amended, as they relate to sales and use taxes, are hereby adopted
and made a part of this Article as though fully set forth herein.
   B.   The adoption and incorporation by reference of the provisions of Utah
Code Annotated title 59, chapter 12, part 1, as amended, shall not include
section 59-12-119 and the exemptions applicable to the State and local sales
and use tax under section 59-12-104 and 59-12-104.1. Additionally:
      1.   The energy use and sales tax shall be calculated on the delivered
value of the taxable energy to the consumer;
      2.   The name of this City as the taxing agency shall be substituted for
that of the State when necessary for purposes of The Municipal Energy Sales and
Use Tax Act; and
      3.   An additional license to collect the tax is not required if one has
been issued under section 59-12-106.
   C.   Wherever, and to the extent that in Utah Code Annotated title 59,
chapter 12, part 1, the State of Utah is named or referred to as the taxing
agency, the name of this City shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in this
Section shall be deemed to require substitution of the name of the City for the
word "State" when the word is used as part of the title of the State Tax
Commission, or of the Constitution of Utah, nor shall the name of the City be
substituted for that of the State in any section when the result of that
substitution would require action to be taken by or against the City, or any
agency thereof, rather than by or against the State Tax Commission in
performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this
Chapter.
   D.   The Mayor of Ogden City is authorized to contract with the State Tax
Commission to have the Commission perform all functions relative to
administration or operation of this Article; provided, that an energy supplier
shall pay the tax imposed by this Article directly to Ogden City on a monthly
basis, if the energy supplier estimates that the municipal energy sales and use
tax collected annually by it from its Utah customers equals one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) or more, and the energy supplier collects the municipal energy
sales and use tax. An energy supplier paying the municipal energy sales and use
tax directly to the City may retain that percentage of the tax authorized under
Utah Code Annotated subsection 59-12-108(3) for the energy supplier's costs of
collecting and remitting the tax. The energy supplier shall remit the tax no
later than forty five (45) days after the end of the month in which the tax was
collected.
(1979 Code § 4.40.060; Ord. 97-55, 6-25-1997, eff. 6-30-1997)
5-2C-7: EFFECTIVE DATE OF LEVY:
The tax imposed by this Article is levied from and after one minute after
twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M., July 1, 1997.
(1979 Code § 4.40.070; Ord. 97-55, 6-25-1997, eff. 6-30-1997)
ARTICLE D.  TRANSIENT ROOM TAX
SECTION:
5-2D-1: Definitions
5-2D-2: Tax Imposed
5-2D-3: Computation
5-2D-4: Remittance
5-2D-5: Notice To State Tax Commission; Contract With State
5-2D-6: Restriction On Use Of Revenues
5-2D-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION: A place providing sleeping accommodations for less than
thirty (30) consecutive days that is regularly rented or offered for rental to
the public, such as:
   A.   A motel;
   B.   A hotel;
   C.   A recreational coach park;
   D.   A rooming house;
   E.   A bed and breakfast inn;
   F.   A timeshare or other fractional interest development;
   G.   A residential vacation rental; and
   H.   A boarding house.
RENTS: Rents and timeshare fees or dues.
TRANSIENT: A person who occupies a public accommodation.
(Ord. 2016-61, 12-20-2016)
5-2D-2: TAX IMPOSED:
Pursuant to the authority granted under part 3A, chapter 12, title 59, Utah
Code Annotated, or its successor provisions, there is levied upon every person
doing business in the city as a public accommodation a transient room tax upon
the gross revenue derived from rents charged to a transient occupying public
accommodations in the amount of one percent (1%) of the rents charged for each
and every occupancy of a suite, room or rooms. The transient room tax imposed
herein shall be levied at the same time and collected in the same manner as
provided in part 2, local sales and use tax act, including the assessment of
penalties and interest rates authorized under 59-1-401 and 59-1-402, Utah Code
Annotated or its successor provisions.
(Ord. 2005-43, 6-14-2005)
5-2D-3: COMPUTATION:
For purposes of this article, the gross revenue derived from rents shall be
computed based upon the base room rental rate. There shall be excluded from
rents:
   A.   The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state or by any other
governmental agency upon a retailer or consumer;
   B.   The amount of any transient room tax levied under authority of chapter
31 of title 17, Utah Code Annotated, 1953, as amended, or its successor;
   C.   Receipts from the sale or service charge for any food, beverage or room
service charges in conjunction with the occupancy of the suite, room or rooms,
not included in the base room rate; and
   D.   Charges made for supplying telephone service, gas or electrical energy
service, not included in the base room rate.
(Ord. 2005-43, 6-14-2005)
5-2D-4: REMITTANCE:
Unless otherwise required under state law or any agreement with the state tax
commission, the tax imposed by this article shall be due and payable to the
city treasurer quarterly on or before the thirtieth day of the month next
succeeding each calendar quarterly period, the first of such quarterly periods
being the period commencing with October 1, 2005. Every person or business
taxed hereunder shall on or before the thirtieth day of the month next
succeeding each calendar quarterly period, file with the license office a
report of its gross revenue for the preceding quarterly period. The report
shall be accompanied by a remittance of the amount of tax due for the period
covered by the report.
(Ord. 2005-43, 6-14-2005)
5-2D-5: NOTICE TO STATE TAX COMMISSION; CONTRACT WITH STATE:
   A.   Before July 1, 2005, the city shall provide notice to the state tax
commission meeting the requirements of section 59-12-355(2)(b).
   B.   The city may enter into a contract with the state tax commission to
perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this
article.
(Ord. 2005-43, 6-14-2005)
5-2D-6: RESTRICTION ON USE OF REVENUES:
Tax revenues collected pursuant to this article shall be restricted to a
special revenue fund known as the tourism and marketing fund. Expenditures from
such fund shall be limited to special purposes or projects as authorized in the
city's annual budget within the nondepartmental accounts, as described in
section
4-1A-8 of this code.
(Ord. 2005-43, 6-14-2005)
CHAPTER 3
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
ARTICLE A.  DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
5-3A-1: Alcoholic Beverage Definitions
5-3A-1: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following
meanings unless a different meaning clearly applies from the context:
ACT: The alcoholic beverage control act of the state of Utah, Utah Code
Annotated title 32A, or its successor provisions.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: "Beer" and "liquor" as those terms are defined in the
alcoholic beverage control act of the state of Utah.
BEER: All products that contain sixty three one hundredths of one percent
(0.63%) of alcohol by volume or one-half of one percent (0.5%) of alcohol by
weight, but not more than four percent (4%) of alcohol by volume or 3.2 percent
by weight, and obtained by fermentation, infusion, or decoction of any malted
grain. Beer may or may not contain hops or other vegetable products. Beer
includes products referred to as malt liquor, malted beverages or malt coolers.
DISORDERLY CONDUCT: Any illegal or improper diversion or any use of insulting,
profane, indecent, immoral, lewd or obscene language, or any indecent,
insulting, tumultuous, immoral, lewd or lascivious conduct or behavior, or any
disturbance or breach of the peace or fighting, or challenging or threatening
to fight, or any mendicancy or larceny.
DISORDERLY PERSON: Any person guilty of any "disorderly conduct", as defined
herein.
LICENSED PREMISES: The building, portion of a building, or place designated by
the licensee and approved under the licenses issued pursuant to this chapter
for the purpose of the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages. The licensed
premises shall not include any outside areas unless specifically approved and
designated as part of the license. The licensed premises shall be limited to
those areas under the management and control of the licensee except as provided
for class F licenses. If issued the necessary permits under sections
7-4-2 and
7-2-13 of this code, the licensed premises of a restaurant with a class B beer
license or a liquor consumption permit may be approved for extension of the
licensed premises to include such portion of the sidewalk, if the licensee has
assumed the necessary management and control of such sidewalk use area and
ingress and egress occurs directly through the interior of the building
otherwise constituting the licensed premises.
LICENSEE: Any person issued a license by Ogden City to sell, manufacture,
store, or allow consumption of alcoholic beverages on premises owned or
controlled by the person.
LINEAR BLOCK: Both sides of that portion of any street that has street numbers
ranging between any two (2) consecutive multiples of 100, such as between 100
and 200, or between 2200 and 2300, etc. A corner tavern or private club shall
be included in the particular linear block indicated by the street address of
such establishment.
LIQUOR: A. Alcohol, or any alcoholic, spirituous, vinous, fermented, malt or
other liquid, or combination of liquids, a part of which is spirituous, vinous,
or fermented, and all other drinks, or drinkable liquids that contain more than
one-half of one percent (0.5%) of alcohol by volume and is suitable to use for
beverage purposes.
   B.   "Liquor" does not include any beverage defined as a beer, malt liquor,
or malted beverage that has an alcohol content of less than four percent (4%)
alcohol by volume.
   C.   For purposes of this chapter, "liquor" includes wine as defined in the
alcoholic beverage control act of the state of Utah, except as otherwise
provided in such act.
MINOR: Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years.
NUISANCE: Any room, house, building, vehicle, structure or place where:
   A.   Alcoholic beverages are manufactured, kept, stored, sold, bartered,
given away or offered or exposed for sale in violation of the alcoholic
beverage control act of the state of Utah or any ordinance of the city or where
persons resort for drinking alcoholic beverages contrary to the alcoholic
beverage control act of the state of Utah or any ordinances of the city;
   B.   Intoxicated persons are permitted to loiter about in such a way as to
annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, repose, health or safety of another
person or persons, or which loitering in any way renders another person or
persons insecure in life or use of property;
   C.   Disorderly conduct is permitted and carried on;
   D.   Persons under twenty one (21) years of age are permitted to purchase or
drink any alcoholic beverage or are employed in violation of this chapter; or
   E.   Laws or ordinances are violated by the licensee or the licensee's
agents or patrons with the consent or knowledge of the licensee upon such
premises which tend to affect the public health, peace or morals.
PRIVATE CLUB: Any social club, recreational association, fraternal association,
athletic association, or kindred association organized primarily for the
benefit of its members, regulated and operated as a "club" or "private club" in
accordance with the provisions of chapter 5 of the act, as amended, and shall
be deemed to be a "private club" or "club" for the provisions of this chapter
and shall be subject to the regulations and licensing provisions contained
herein. A private club is subject to business licensing under chapter 4,
article C of this title.
RESTAURANT: A business establishment where a variety of food is prepared and
complete meals are served to the general public, located on a premises having
adequate culinary fixtures for food preparation and dining accommodations, and
that is engaged primarily in serving meals to the general public.
RETAILER: Any person engaged in the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages
to the consumer.
SELL OR TO SELL: Means and includes to solicit; to accept an order for; to keep
or expose for sale; to deliver for value or gratuitously; to peddle; to possess
with intent to sell; to traffic in; for any consideration promised or obtained
directly or indirectly or under any pretext or by any means whatsoever to
procure or allow to be procured for any other person; and "sale" includes every
act of selling as above defined.
TAVERN: Any business establishment engaged primarily in the retail sale or
distribution of beer to public patrons for consumption on the establishment's
premises, in accordance with Utah Code Annotated title 32A, chapter 10, of the
alcoholic beverage control act of the state of Utah and ordinances of Ogden
City. "Tavern" is inclusive of beer bars, parlors, lounges, cabarets, and
nightclubs where the revenue from the sale of beer exceeds the revenue from the
sale of food, although food need not be sold in such establishments.
WHOLESALER: Any person other than a brewer engaged in the distribution of beer
in wholesale or jobbing quantities to licensed retailers.
(1979 Code § 5.12.010; amd. Ord. 81-32, 8-6-1981; Ord. 91-23, 7-11-1991; Ord.
92-23, 3-24-1992; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998; 1999 Code; Ord. 2002-13, 3-19-2002;
Ord. 2004-57, 8-3-2004)
ARTICLE B.  BEER WHOLESALERS 1
SECTION:
5-3B-1: License Required
5-3B-2: License Fee
5-3B-3: Privileges Of State License
5-3B-4: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. U.C.A. §§ 10-8-42 and 32A-11-101 et seq.
5-3B-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of a wholesaler of beer
within the corporate limits of the City without first having procured a license
therefor from the State Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission and having paid
therefor the fees as provided in this Article.
(1979 Code § 5.14.020)
5-3B-2: LICENSE FEE:
License fees for wholesale dealers in beer shall be as determined in Chapter 1,
Article B of this Title.
(1979 Code § 5.14.030; amd. Ord. 81-27, 6-25-1981; Ord. 97-94, 12-16-1997)
5-3B-3: PRIVILEGES OF STATE LICENSE:
Holders of a license issued by the State Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission
for the sale of beer at wholesale in the City shall be entitled to sell bottled
and keg beer to licensed retailers.
(1979 Code § 5.14.040)
5-3B-4: PENALTY:
Any person violating the provisions of this Article shall be guilty of a Class
B misdemeanor and shall be punished as set forth in Title 1, Chapter 4 of this
Code.
(1979 Code § 15.14.050; amd. 1999 Code)
ARTICLE C.  RETAIL AND CONSUMPTION LICENSES
SECTION:
5-3C-1: License Required
5-3C-2: Classification Of Licenses
5-3C-3: Application; Review
5-3C-4: Licensee Qualifications
5-3C-5: Classifications; Privileges And Conditions
5-3C-6: Conditions Of License
5-3C-7: Employee Requirements
5-3C-8: Location Regulations
5-3C-9: Suspension, Revocation Or Denial
5-3C-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful and shall constitute an offense of strict liability for any
person to sell an alcoholic beverage at retail and/or permit the consumption of
an alcoholic beverage on any business premises within the corporate limits of
the city without first having obtained a license as provided in this article. A
separate license shall be required for each place of sale or consumption. The
license shall at all times be conspicuously displayed upon the licensed
premises. All licensees shall comply with the alcoholic beverage control act of
the state and the regulations of the alcoholic beverage control commission, and
with the ordinances of the city and every license shall recite that it is
granted subject to revocation as provided in this article.
(1979 Code § 5.12.020; amd. Ord. 90-60, 12-20-1990; Ord. 92-23, 3-24-1992; Ord.
98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-3C-2: CLASSIFICATION OF LICENSES:
Licenses issued under this article shall be of the following kinds and shall
carry the privileges and responsibilities set forth in this article: class A
(off premises beer license); class B (on premises restaurant beer license);
class C (on premises tavern beer license); class D (private club beer license);
class E (single event beer license); class F (recreational on premises beer
license); class G (on premises banquet beer license); liquor consumption
license.
(1979 Code § 5.12.050; amd. Ord. 90-60, 12-20-1990; Ord. 91-23, 7-11-1991; Ord.
92-23, 3-24-1992; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998; Ord. 2004-57, 8-3-2004)
5-3C-3: APPLICATION; REVIEW:
   A.   Application: Every applicant for an alcoholic beverage license under
this article shall file with the business license coordinator his written and
verified application therefor upon such form as may be prescribed by the
business license coordinator of the city.
   B.   Contents: In every application, the applicant shall:
      1.   State the applicant's name in full and shall specify in detail his/
her qualifications to hold an alcoholic beverage license under this article and
the alcoholic beverage control act;
      2.   If the applicant is:
         a.   A partnership, the applicant shall state the name and address of
all partners and detail his/her qualifications; or
         b.   A corporation, the names and addresses of its principal officers
and directors and detail his/her qualifications; or
         c.   A limited liability company, the applicant shall state the name
and address of its members, the percentage share of the company and detail his/
her qualifications;
      3.   State the name of the manager of the licensed premises and his/her
qualifications, if the premises are not managed by the applicant;
      4.   Specify the licensed premises for which the application is made;
      5.   If for a class C, combination B and C, or class D license, provide a
diagram of the premises;
      6.   If for a class D license, state whether the applicant is licensed
under chapter 5 of the act as a class A, B, C or D private club;
      7.   Provide such other information as determined to be necessary by the
business license coordinator to determine compliance with the provisions of
this title.
(1979 Code § 5.12.150; amd. Ord. 90-60, 12-20-1990; Ord. 92-23, 3-24-1992; Ord.
98-54, 8-18-1998; Ord. 2004-57, 8-3-2004)
   C.   Fees: At the time of filing an application for an alcoholic beverage
license as provided in this article, every applicant shall deposit with the
business license coordinator the license fee prescribed in this article, which
shall forthwith be deposited in the city treasury. If the application is
denied, the fee so deposited shall be returned to the applicant. No license fee
shall be refunded after a license has been issued, and upon revocation of the
license, the license fee paid therefor shall be forfeited to the city.
(1979 Code § 5.12.160; amd. Ord. 90-60, 12-20-1990; Ord. 92-23, 3-24-1992; Ord.
98-54, 8-18-1998)
   D.   Required Investigations:
      1.   Chief Of Police: Every application for an alcoholic beverage
license, together with such information as is required to be attached thereto,
shall be referred to the chief of police for inspection and report. The chief
of police, or the chief's designee, shall, within ten (10) days after receiving
the application, report in writing to the business license coordinator. The
report shall include: a) the results of a criminal background or other required
application verification of the applicant, or of any partner, officer,
director, member, shareholder, or manager required to meet the qualifications
of a licensee; b) the result of any police inspection made of the proposed
licensed premises; c) the general reputation and character of the applicant,
the premises and of the persons who habitually frequent the same; d) the nature
and kind of business conducted at the place; e) whether the place is or has
been conducted in a lawful, quiet and orderly manner; the nature and kind of
entertainment, if any, at the place; f) whether gambling is or has been
permitted, or gambling devices displayed, upon the premises, or by the
applicant at any other place; g) the proximity of the premises to any school or
church; and h) whether there are any grounds to believe that any statement made
in the application is untrue. The chief of police shall add such further
information as the chief believes to be pertinent. The chief of police shall
add thereto in writing his/her recommendation as to the granting or denying of
such application.
(1979 Code § 5.12.180; amd. Ord. 92-23, 3-24-1992; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998; Ord.
2004-57, 8-3-2004)
      2.   Health Department: The application shall also be referred
immediately to the county health department. The health department shall,
within ten (10) days after receiving such application, make an investigation
and inspection of the proposed licensed premises and shall report in writing to
the business license coordinator whether the premises to be licensed is in a
sanitary condition and whether the equipment used in the storage, handling and
distribution or sale of alcoholic beverages and other beverages and food, if
any, complies with all health regulations of the city and the state. No
alcoholic beverage license shall be issued for any premises where the premises
and the equipment aforesaid do not comply with all such health regulations.
(1979 Code § 5.12.190; amd. Ord. 92-23, 3-24-1992; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
      3.   Fire Chief: The original application shall be referred immediately
to the chief of the fire department, or the chief's designee, for inspection
and report. Within ten (10) days, the chief shall report in writing to the
business license coordinator whether the proposed licensed premises complies
with all applicable laws, ordinances and regulations relating to safety in the
event of fire or panic, and whether the same is reasonably safe for use as
licensed premises of the class of license applied for. The fire chief shall
have a continuing duty to inform the business license coordinator of known fire
safety violations regarding the licensed premises which have not been
corrected.
(1979 Code § 5.12.200; amd. Ord. 92-23, 3-24-1992; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
      4.   Inspection Services Manager: The original application shall also be
referred immediately to the manager of the inspection services division for
inspection and report. Within ten (10) days, the manager shall report in
writing to the business license coordinator whether the proposed licensed
premises complies with all applicable building, electrical and mechanical codes
and regulations, and whether the premises is reasonably safe for its intended
use. The inspection services manager shall have a continuing duty to inform the
business license coordinator of known building code violations regarding the
licensed premises which have not been corrected.
(1979 Code § 5.12.201; Ord. 81-13, 4-2-1981; amd. Ord. 92-23, 3-24-1992; Ord.
98-54, 8-18-1998)
      5.   Community Development Department: The original application shall
also be referred immediately to the community development director, or the
director's designee, for inspection and report. Within ten (10) days, the
director or designee shall report in writing to the business license
coordinator whether the proposed licensed premises complies with all applicable
zoning ordinances. The community development director, or the director's
designee, shall have a continuing duty to inform the business license
coordinator of known zoning violations regarding the licensed premises which
have not been corrected.
(1979 Code § 5.12.202; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
   E.   Issuance Procedures: Upon receipt of the reports from the chief of
police, the county health department, and, for the initial application only,
the chief of the fire department, current planning division and the inspection
services division, the business license coordinator shall refer each new
application for an alcoholic beverages license to the mayor, or the mayor's
designee, who shall consider the application, and, if of the opinion that the
applicant has complied with all applicable laws, ordinances and regulations,
may approve the license and authorize the business license coordinator to issue
a license to the applicant for the retail sale of beer upon the licensed
premises, if it is determined that issuance of the license will not be
detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Ogden. If the
license shall be for renewal of an existing license, the business license
coordinator after favorable recommendation by the agencies required to review
the application, shall be authorized to issue a renewal certificate of license
or a renewal validation to be affixed to the prior year's license certificate.
(1979 Code § 5.12.210; amd. Ord. 81-13, 4-2-1981; Ord. 92-23, 3-24-1992; Ord.
98-54, 8-18-1998)
   F.   Renewal Procedures:
      1.   Filing; Time Limit: All applications to renew alcoholic beverage
licenses shall be filed by the holders of existing licenses with the business
license coordinator at least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration date of
the then issued license. Any person who fails to file such application within
the time limit shall close such person's licensed premises on the expiration
date of the then issued license, and shall keep the premises closed for the
sale of alcoholic beverages until the date a new license is issued by order of
the mayor or the mayor's designee. All renewal applications shall state whether
or not the business is presently operating and, if not, the date when it ceased
daily operation, together with such other information as the business license
coordinator shall reasonably require to verify or determine the operating
status of such business.
      2.   Right To Renew: The foregoing notwithstanding, a licensee has the
right to renew such license annually until revoked or denied as provided in
this article or until the license is no longer currently and actively used to
operate a business authorized by such license.
      3.   Special Provisions For Inactive Licenses: A license may be renewed
after termination of the authorized business activity during a licensing period
for one additional year, if he or she makes application within forty five (45)
days after the expiration date of the license, and if the applicant certifies
under oath that: a) such applicant is not holding the license for speculative
reasons; and b) such applicant is actively seeking a purchaser for his or her
business premises and assets as above provided, or is actively seeking a new
business location for which he or she will seek a transfer of such license as
provided by law. No license renewal may be granted beyond one year of inactive
status, as above provided; and, if not renewed within the forty five (45) day
period, the license shall expire.
(1979 Code § 5.12.220; amd. Ord. 81-32, 8-6-1981; Ord. 92-23, 3-24-1992; Ord.
98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-3C-4: LICENSEE QUALIFICATIONS:
   A.   No alcoholic beverage license shall be granted to any person unless the
person shall be over the age of twenty one (21) years.
   B.   No alcoholic beverage license shall be granted to any person who has
been convicted of:
      1.   A felony under any federal or state law;
      2.   Any violation of any federal or state law or local ordinance
concerning the sale, manufacture, distribution, warehousing, adulteration, or
transportation of alcoholic beverages;
      3.   Driving under the influence of alcohol, any drug, or the combined
influence of alcohol and any drug within the two (2) year period immediately
preceding the date on which the license may be granted, or on two (2) or more
occasions within the five (5) years preceding the date on which the license may
be granted;
      4.   Gambling; or
      5.   Any crime involving moral turpitude.
   C.   No license shall be granted to an applicant that had a license
involving the sale or distribution of alcohol revoked within the three (3)
years preceding the date of the application for a license or the renewal of a
license.
   D.   No alcohol beverage license shall be granted to any partnership,
corporation, or limited liability company, if any of the following fails to
meet all of the standards and qualifications of an applicant prescribed herein:
      1.   A partner;
      2.   An officer;
      3.   A director; or
      4.   A member of a limited liability company who owns at least twenty
percent (20%) of the applicant limited liability company.
   E.   No license shall be granted to an applicant representing itself to be a
partnership, corporation, or limited liability company, if the applicant fails
to present proper verification evidencing the legal existence of such entity
and that the person or persons signing the application are authorized to so act
on the behalf of such entity.
   F.   No license shall be granted to any person who does not meet the
qualifications therefor prescribed by the act.
(1979 Code § 5.12.030; amd. Ord. 87-37, 7-2-1987; Ord. 92-23, 3-24-1992; Ord.
98-54, 8-18-1998; Ord. 2004-57, 8-3-2004)
5-3C-5: CLASSIFICATIONS; PRIVILEGES AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   Class A; Off Premises Beer License: A class A beer license shall
entitle the licensee to sell beer on the licensed premises in the original
containers for consumption off the premises, in accordance with the act and the
ordinances of the city; provided however, that it is unlawful for the licensee
to sell or distribute beer in any container larger than two (2) liters. For the
purposes of a class A license granted for a convenience type store located
within a hotel or resort facility, the consumption of beer in a guestroom duly
rented by a guest of the hotel or resort facility shall be deemed consumed off
the premises of the hotel or resort facility.
   B.   Class B; On Premises Restaurant Beer License:
      1.   A class B beer license shall entitle the licensee to sell beer at
retail for consumption with meals on the premises, all of the privileges
granted herein to be exercised in accordance with the act and the ordinances of
the city. Class B beer licensees may also sell beer in sealed containers for
off premises consumption.
      2.   A class B license shall be granted only to a licensed restaurant
keeper and only then when the nature and volume of business of the restaurant
is such as to evidence and to afford assurance to the city that the applicant
is engaged in such business in good faith and that such restaurant is the
principal business and not a mere pretext for the obtaining of such license,
and which restaurant food sales constitute no less than fifty one percent (51%)
of the gross dollar values of the licensee's business, not including the sale
of beer or service charges.
      3.   The holder of a class B license shall maintain records which shall
disclose separately, for each and every quarter of the year, the gross sales of
beer and the gross sales of food served for consumption on the licensed
premises. Such records shall be available for inspection and audit by the
business license coordinator at any time following the end of the quarter and
for eighteen (18) months thereafter.
      4.   Failure of a licensee to properly maintain or submit the records for
inspection and audit shall be cause for suspension or revocation of the class B
license.
   C.   Class C; On Premises Tavern Beer License: A class C beer license shall
entitle the licensee to sell beer at retail for on premises consumption with or
without food, all of the privileges granted herein to be exercised in
accordance with the act and the ordinances of the city. A class C license shall
be issued only to an applicant engaged, in good faith, in the business of
dispensing and selling beer at retail in a tavern with or without food. Any
restaurant having a tavern operation at the same location must hold a class B
and C combination license. Class C beer licenses may also sell beer in sealed
containers for off premises consumption.
   D.   Combination B And C License: A class B and C combination license shall
entitle the licensee to conduct separate class B (restaurant) and class C
(tavern) operations with separate licensed premises at the same location. Each
class B or class C premises must comply with the rules and regulations
applicable to each class and must establish a physical separation or barrier
approved by the police chief that clearly distinguishes and separates the class
B and C premises.
   E.   Class D; Private Club Beer License: A class D beer license shall
entitle the licensee to sell beer in any state licensed private club on the
licensed premises for consumption on the premises, all to be exercised in
accordance with the act and the ordinances of the city.
   F.   Class E; Single Event Beer License:
      1.   A class E beer license shall entitle the licensee to sell beer in
the original containers or on draft only upon the licensed premises of a
qualified single event during such times and in such manner and under such
conditions as the mayor or the mayor's designee, upon application of the
licensee, may allow. Such sales may be made for consumption on or off the
designated premises upon which public fairs, stock and other animal shows,
celebrations, fiestas, occasional athletic contests and similar events are in
preparation or progress. The licensee shall comply with all of the applicable
provisions of the act.
      2.   The class E beer license may only be issued to a bona fide
partnership, corporation, limited liability company, incorporated association,
church, political organization, or governmental entity, or to a recognized
subordinate lodge, chapter or other local unit thereof that is conducting a
convention, civic or community enterprise or event and any one license shall
not be issued for a period of time exceeding thirty (30) consecutive days.
      3.   No class E license shall be approved for any special event in a city
park or recreational facility unless:
         a.   The city is the licensee for the sale of beer;
         b.   The city has granted a concession in conformance with the
requirements of section
6-1-8 of this code; or
         c.   The community services director has granted an alcoholic beverage
permit allowing such sale of alcoholic beverages as provided in section
6-1-9 of this code.
      4.   The sale of beer under a series of permits issued to the same person
may not exceed a total of ninety (90) days in any one calendar year.
   G.   Class F; Recreational On Premises Beer License:
      1.   A class F beer license shall entitle the licensee to sell beer at
retail in the original container or on draft for on premises consumption with
or without food, to persons patronizing an authorized recreational facility.
All of the privileges granted herein to be exercised in accordance with the
act.
      2.   Authorized recreational facilities are limited to bowling alleys,
golf courses, whether public or private, and public parks, fairgrounds,
stadiums or arenas. The recreational facility may be operated by the holder of
the class F license or by another person, firm or corporation who has
contracted with the licensee as a concessionaire in order to provide
refreshments to the patrons of the recreational facility. A class F licensee
must be licensed by the state as an on premises beer retailer other than a
tavern, and the licensed premises shall include the entire recreational
facility.
   H.   Class G; On Premises Banquet License:
      1.   A class G beer license shall entitle the licensee to sell beer at
retail for consumption with food in connection with the licensee's banquet and
room service activities associated with a hotel, resort facility, sports
center, or convention center, as such terms are defined under the act, all of
the privileges granted herein to be exercised in accordance with the act and
the ordinances of the city.
      2.   A class G license shall maintain at least fifty percent (50%) of its
total annual banquet gross receipts from the sale of food, not including mix
for alcoholic beverages, and charges in connection with the service of
alcoholic beverages.
      3.   The holder of a class G license shall maintain records which shall
disclose separately for each and every quarter of the year the gross sales of
alcoholic beverages and the gross sales of food served for consumption on the
licensed premises. Such records shall be available for inspection and audit by
the business license coordinator at any time following the end of the quarter
and for eighteen (18) months thereafter.
      4.   Failure of a licensee to properly maintain or submit the records for
inspection and audit shall be cause for suspension or revocation of the class G
license.
   I.   Liquor Consumption License:
      1.   A liquor consumption license shall entitle the licensee to permit
patrons to possess and consume liquor on the premises, all of the privileges
granted herein to be exercised in accordance with the act and the ordinances of
the city.
      2.   Liquor consumption licenses are limited to events for which a single
event permit has been issued under Utah Code Annotated section 32A-7-101, as
amended, premises for which an on premises banquet license has been granted
under Utah Code Annotated section 32A-4-401, as amended, and restaurants for
which a restaurant liquor license or limited restaurant liquor license has been
granted under Utah Code Annotated section 32A-4-101 or 32A-4-302, as amended,
respectively. A separate liquor consumption license shall not be required for a
class D beer licensee. Any other establishment selling liquor and beer to its
patrons for on site consumption shall require a liquor consumption license in
conjunction with the applicable beer license.
   J.   Combination Class B And Liquor Consumption License:
      1.   A class B and liquor consumption license shall entitle the licensee
to all of the privileges of a class B license and a liquor consumption license.
      2.   A restaurant with a class B and liquor consumption license shall
maintain records which shall disclose separately, for each and every quarter of
the year, the gross sales of alcoholic beverages, food, and setups served for
consumption on the licensed premises. The sale of carbonated and noncarbonated
soft drinks, soda water, water and other mixers shall be included as part of
setups and shall not be included as part of food sales. Such records, and any
other records required to be kept pursuant to the act, shall be available for
inspection and audit by the business license coordinator at any time following
the end of the month and for eighteen (18) months thereafter.
      3.   Failure of a licensee to properly maintain or submit the records for
inspection and audit shall be cause for suspension or revocation of the
combination class B and liquor consumption license.
      4.   Each restaurant with a class B and liquor consumption license shall
maintain at least seventy percent (70%) of its total restaurant business from
the sale of food, which does not include mix for alcoholic beverages or service
charges.
(1979 Code §§ 5.12.060, 5.12.070, 5.12.080, 5.12.090, 5.12.100, 5.12.110,
5.12.115, 5.12.116, 5.12.117; amd. Ord. 81-27, 6-25-1981; Ord. 85-35, 9-5-1985;
Ord. 89-11, 6-15-1989; Ord. 90-60, 12-20-1990; Ord. 91-23, 7-11-1991; Ord. 92-
23, 3-24-1992; Ord. 94-19, 4-26-1994; Ord. 97-94, 12-16-1997; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-
1998; Ord. 2002-49, 8-6-2002; Ord. 2004-57, 8-3-2004)
5-3C-6: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
   A.   Fee; Expiration:
      1.   The amount of the license fee for any alcoholic beverage license
shall be as determined in chapter 1, article B of this title.
      2.   All licenses issued under this chapter shall expire at the end of
the licensing term as provided in section
5-1A-13 of this title, unless sooner canceled or revoked. No license shall be
issued for a period longer than one year.
   B.   Revocable Privilege: An alcoholic beverage license shall grant only a
mere revocable privilege to sell or allow the consumption of alcoholic
beverages as provided in this article and the laws of the state and shall not
confer any vested right of any kind or nature.
   C.   Consent For Inspections: Every licensee, by accepting a license issued
under the provisions of this article, thereby irrevocably consents that any
peace officer of the city or other "authorized officer" as defined in section
5-1A-1 of this title may, at any time during the effective period of the
license, freely enter upon and inspect and search the licensed premises for any
alcoholic beverage or for any other goods or chattels illegally possessed or
kept thereon or for evidence of any alleged crime under investigation by such
peace officer and further consents to the seizure of any such alcoholic
beverage or any goods, chattels or evidence, the property of the licensee,
which may be found therein upon such search.
   D.   Transfer Of License: Alcoholic beverage licenses shall not be
transferable, except by the licensee to a different location; no transfer shall
be made to a different licensee. All transfers to a different location by the
licensee shall require approval in the same manner as an original license and
the payment of the transfer fee specified in subsection 5-1B-2E of this title.
No license fee shall be refunded after a license has been issued, and, upon
revocation of license as provided in this article, the license fee paid for
such license shall be forfeited to the city.
   E.   Change Of Ownership: If, during the term of the license year after the
license has been granted under this article, there is any change in the
personnel of any licensed partnership or of the officers or directors of any
licensed corporation, the licensee shall forthwith report any such change in
personnel to the business license coordinator.
   F.   Display Of License: Every license issued under this article, along with
the license issued by the alcoholic beverage control commission of the state,
shall be posted and prominently displayed upon the licensed premises.
(Ord. 2011-51, 10-25-2011)
5-3C-7: EMPLOYEE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Register Of Employees: The licensee shall maintain a current register
of employees, showing the employee's name, date of birth, date of employment,
and of terminating that employment. The register of the employees shall be
available at the licensed premises during regular business hours and shall be
open for inspection by any member of the police department.
   B.   Unqualified Persons Prohibited:
      1.   It is unlawful for any licensee holding a class A, class B, class C,
class D, class E, class F, or class G license under this article to employ any
person as a manager who does not have the qualifications required of licensees
as specified in this article; provided that for a class A license, this
requirement will only apply to a manager responsible for overall, on site
management of the premises, not including assistant managers or supervisors
with responsibilities unrelated to the sale of alcoholic beverages on the
premises.
      2.   No person shall be employed or act as a bartender, waitress or in
any other capacity deal with the public in connection with the sale of or
dispensing alcoholic beverages in the premises of a class C, class D or class F
license who has been convicted of or pled guilty to the acts constituting a
felony under state or federal law involving the unlawful possession, use or
sale of controlled substances.
   C.   Alcohol Training And Education Seminar:
      1.   Any licensee holding a class B, class C, class D, class F, or liquor
consumption license shall show by certificates granted by the Utah division of
alcoholism and drugs that each employee of the licensee engaged in the serving,
selling or furnishing of alcoholic beverages on the premises, has completed the
alcohol training and education seminar, as required in Utah Code Annotated
section 32A-1-401, so long as the above seminars are made available by the
state.
      2.   Every new employee required to complete this seminar shall complete
the seminar within six (6) months of commencing employment. Violation of this
subsection will result in suspension of the license unless compliance is
completed within two (2) months of the time the licensee first became aware
that such violation occurred.
(1979 Code §§ 5.12.170, 5.12.230, 5.12.235; amd. Ord. 81-32, 8-6-1981; Ord. 88-
6, 2-25-1988; Ord. 92-23, 3-24-1992; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998; Ord. 2004-57, 8-3-
2004)
5-3C-8: LOCATION REGULATIONS:
   A.   No tavern, private club, or other premises for the sale or consumption
of alcoholic beverages shall be established or maintained in the city except in
those areas authorized by the city zoning ordinances.
   B.   Within those areas to which the establishment and maintenance of
taverns or private clubs is limited, there shall be no more than a total of two
(2) establishments licensed or maintained as a tavern or private club in any
linear block. This means only two (2) such establishments shall be allowed in a
block, including both sides of the block (see section
5-3A-1 of this chapter). The provisions of this section in no way shall affect
present locations of taverns or private clubs so long as licenses for those
locations remain in good standing, or prevent the issuance of new licenses for
those locations upon the transfer of the business by the licensees thereof,
including transfer by death, or prevent the moving of a present tavern or
private club to another location in the same block, until the license for the
premises is revoked or terminated in the manner prescribed in this article. In
no event shall an existing private club be allowed to be changed to a tavern in
those areas subject to the above limitation.
   C.   No class B, C, D or F beer license, and no liquor consumption license,
shall be granted within three hundred thirty feet (330') of another business
licensed as an adult live entertainment business under chapter 15 of this
title.
   D.   No class A beer license shall be granted or renewed for any premises
located in or within one hundred fifty feet (150') of any area designated as
part of the 25th Street historic district under title 17 of this code. The
provisions of this subsection shall not affect existing locations with class A
licenses until such time as the licenses expire on December 31, 2004.
Thereafter, any privilege the licensee may have to renewal shall be considered
to be revoked.
(1979 Code § 5.12.040; amd. Ord. 81-13, 4-2-1981; Ord. 92-23, 3-24-1992; Ord.
94-16, 3-29-1994; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998; Ord. 2000-40, 7-18-2000; Ord. 2004-57,
8-3-2004; Ord. 2004-59, 10-19-2004)
5-3C-9: SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OR DENIAL:
   A.   Reasons Specified: In addition to the reasons provided for in sections
5-1C-3 and
5-1C-4 of this title, an alcoholic beverage license may be denied, suspended or
revoked for any of the following reasons:
      1.   The violation on the licensed premises of any provision of the act
or this title, whether an infraction or a misdemeanor, or of any other
applicable ordinance or law relating to alcoholic beverages;
      2.   If the licensed premises is used for the commission of any illegal
act or activity for any reason;
      3.   If the person to whom the license was issued, or any other person
subject to such requirements, no longer possesses the qualifications required
by this title and the statutes of the state;
      4.   If the licensed premises is not conducted and kept in a quiet,
peaceable and orderly manner; or
      5.   If any nuisance is suffered to be committed or to be maintained upon
such premises.
   B.   Procedure: Denials, suspensions or revocations shall be handled in
accordance with the provisions of chapter 1, article C of this title, or its
successor.
(1979 Code § 5.12.270; amd. Ord. 91-23, 7-11-1991; Ord. 92-23, 3-24-1992; Ord.
98-54, 8-18-1998; Ord. 2004-57, 8-3-2004)
ARTICLE D.  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
5-3D-1: Alcoholic Beverage Control Act
5-3D-2: Hours Regulated
5-3D-3: Minors; Prohibited And Limited Activities
5-3D-4: Prohibited Activities; Licensee Responsibilities
5-3D-5: Penalty
5-3D-1: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL ACT:
   A.   General Provisions: Except as the application thereof is impractical or
inappropriate in view of the context of purposes or penalties as provided, the
following provisions, sections, definitions, requirements, regulations, and
prohibitions of the alcoholic beverage control act, Utah Code Annotated title
32A, as amended, are hereby adopted by the city and shall apply to all
businesses located within Ogden City limits:
      32A-12-101; Utah criminal code applicable
      32A-12-102; Special burdens of proof - inferences and presumptions
      32A-12-103; Criminal responsibility for conduct of another
      32A-12-104; Violation of title a misdemeanor (class B)
      32A-12-105; Additional criminal penalties
      32A-12-201; Unlawful sale or supply
      32A-12-202; Unauthorized sale or supply
      32A-12-203; Unlawful sale or supply to minors
      32A-12-204; Unlawful sale or supply to intoxicated persons
      32A-12-205; Unlawful sale or supply to interdicted persons
      32A-12-206; Unlawful sale or supply of beer
      32A-12-207; Unlawful sale or furnishing during emergency
      32A-12-208; Unlawful purchase or acceptance
      32A-12-209; Unlawful purchase, possession, or consumption by minors -
penalties
      32A-12-210; Unlawful purchase by intoxicated persons
      32A-12-211; Unlawful purchase by interdicted persons
      32A-12-212; Unlawful possession - exceptions
      32A-12-213; Unlawful bringing onto premises for consumption
      32A-12-214; Unlawful possession by licensees or permittees
      32A-12-215; Unlawful storage
      32A-12-216; Unlawful permitting of intoxication
      32A-12-217; Unlawful permitting of consumption by minors
      32-A-12-218(1); Unlawful labeling or lack of label
      32A-12-219; Unlawful adulteration
      32A-12-221; Lawful detention
      32A-12-222; Unlawful dispensing
   B.   Violation; Penalty: Any and all violations thereof shall be considered
violations of this code, and each violation shall be subject to the penalties
provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this  code.
(1979 Code § 5.12.302; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998; amd. Ord. 2004-57, 8-3-2004)
5-3D-2: HOURS REGULATED:
   A.   Sales: It is unlawful to sell beer or offer alcoholic beverages for
sale between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M.
on any premises licensed for on premises consumption of alcoholic beverages. It
is unlawful to sell alcoholic beverages or offer alcoholic beverages for sale
for off premises consumption between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and
six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
   B.   Consumption: It is unlawful for any person to consume alcoholic
beverages, or for any licensee to suffer or permit alcoholic beverages to be
consumed, upon any licensed premises between the hours of two o'clock (2:00)
A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. of any day.
   C.   Entrances Secured: The entrances to all premises for which a class C or
class D license has been issued shall be locked or otherwise adequately secured
so as to prevent the entry thereupon of any person or persons and it shall be
unlawful for any person other than the class C or D licensee or an employee,
servant, workman of the licensee, or a custodian, to be upon the licensed
premises between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. of any day, or for any class C or class D licensee to suffer or permit any
unauthorized person or persons to be or remain upon the premises between the
said hours.
(1979 Code § 5.12.280; amd. Ord. 90-60, 12-20-1990; Ord. 92-23, 3-24-1992; Ord.
98-54, 8-18-1998; Ord. 2004-57, 8-3-2004)
5-3D-3: MINORS; PROHIBITED AND LIMITED ACTIVITIES:
   A.   Prohibited Activities:
      1.   It is unlawful to sell beer to any person under the age of twenty
one (21) years.
      2.   It is unlawful for any licensee holding a class C or D license under
this chapter to suffer or allow any minor to be in, to loiter about or to
frequent the licensed premises, except as provided in subsection B of this
section.
      3.   It is unlawful for any person except a class A licensee to employ or
to permit any minor to sell or to serve alcoholic beverages; provided however,
that a minor may not sell beer on the premises of a class A license except
under the supervision of a person over the age of twenty one (21) years who is
on the premises.
      4.   It is unlawful for any person having charge or custody of any minor
to take said underage person into, or to suffer said underage person to enter,
be in, loiter about or frequent any beer tavern or any premises for which a
class C or class D license has been issued, except as provided in subsection B
of this section.
      5.   It is unlawful for any minor to enter, to be in, to loiter about or
to frequent a beer tavern or any premises for which a class C or class D
license has been issued or to consume or possess an alcoholic beverage, except
as provided in subsection B of this section.
      6.   It is unlawful for any minor to consume or possess any beer or any
other alcoholic beverage at any place in the city.
      7.   It shall be unlawful for any minor to misrepresent his age, or for
any other person to knowingly misrepresent the age of a minor, for the purpose
of obtaining an alcoholic beverage or for the purpose of giving entrance to
class C or D licensed premises.
   B.   Limited Activities:
      1.   Except for private clubs with a class D private club license under
state law, it shall be lawful for any licensee holding a class D beer license
to allow a minor to be in designated dining areas or to be employed by the
licensee in activities not involving the preparation or service of alcoholic
beverages or the providing of entertainment to patrons of the licensed
premises. Any minor so allowed on the premises must be under the direct
supervision of an adult bona fide member of the licensed premises when either
in the designated dining areas or employed under the direct supervision of the
licensee or an adult employee of the licensee when on the licensed premises.
      2.   For a private club with a class D private club license under state
law, it shall be lawful for any licensee holding a class D beer license to:
         a.   Allow a minor to be admitted into, use, or be on the premises:
            (1)   During periods when no alcoholic beverages are sold, served,
otherwise furnished, or consumed on the premises, but in no event later than
one o'clock (1:00) P.M.,
            (2)   When accompanied at all times by a member or bona fide
visitor, who is the minor's parent or guardian, and
            (3)   The club has a full kitchen and is a licensed restaurant
under this title;
         b.   Allow a minor to be employed on the premises, if the parent or
legal guardian of the minor owns or operates the club, and all employment
activities occur outside of any lounge or bar areas;
         c.   Allow a minor to be employed by the licensee on the premises when
performing maintenance and cleaning services during the hours when the club is
not open for business;
         d.   Allow a minor who is at least eighteen (18) years of age to be
admitted into, use or be on the premises of a dance or concert hall located
either on or immediately adjoining the club, if otherwise permitted and allowed
under sections 32A-5-107(8)(d) and (e) of the act;
         e.   Allow a minor who is under eighteen (18) years of age to be
admitted into, use or be on the premises of a concert hall located either on or
immediately adjoining the club premises, if otherwise permitted and allowed
under section 32A-5-107(8)(f) of the act;
      3.   If a minor is otherwise allowed on the licensed premises under
subsection B1 or B2 of this section, it shall be lawful for:
         a.   Any adult bona fide member or visitor of class D beer licensed
premises to take a minor into designated dining areas on the licensed premises;
or
         b.   Any minor to be in designated dining areas of class D beer
licensed premises or to be employed by the licensee in activities not involving
the preparation or service of alcoholic beverages or involving the providing of
entertainment to patrons of the licensed premises, provided the underage person
is under the direct supervision of an adult bona fide member of the licensed
premises when in the designated dining area or under the direct supervision of
the licensee or an adult employee of the licensee when employed on the licensed
premises.
      4.   For purposes of this section, "designated dining areas" is defined
as those areas set aside by the licensee, with the approval and consent of the
police chief, for the preparation, sale and service of food. Designated dining
areas shall be separated from the remainder of the licensed premises by a
physical barrier or other devices approved by the police chief which will keep
minors away from those areas where alcoholic beverages are generally served
without consumption of food. Under no circumstances shall a "designated dining
area" include a lounge or bar area as proscribed under state law.
      5.   Notwithstanding the above, it is unlawful for any minor to be on
premises for which a class C or D license has been issued, if the premises are
also licensed as an adult live entertainment business under chapter 15 of this
title.
(1979 Code §§ 5.12.290, 5.12.291; amd. Ord. 81-32, 8-6-1981; Ord. 91-23, 7-11-
1991; Ord. 92-23, 3-24-1992; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998; Ord. 2004-57, 8-3-2004)
5-3D-4: PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES; LICENSEE RESPONSIBILITIES:
   A.   Violate Terms And Conditions Of License: It is unlawful for any
licensee to violate any terms or conditions of the license issued.
   B.   Sale To Intoxicated Persons: It is unlawful to sell beer to any person
intoxicated or under the influence of any alcoholic beverage.
   C.   Sale Upon Unlicensed Premises: It is unlawful for any licensee to sell
beer anywhere within the city except upon or within his licensed premises.
   D.   Reserved.
   E.   Frequent Unlawful Premises: It is unlawful for any person to visit, to
loiter about, to frequent or to resort to any house, building, room, or
premises where any alcoholic beverages are kept, stored, sold, bartered,
offered or exposed for sale in violation of the alcoholic beverage control act
of the state or of any ordinance of the city.
   F.   Consume Upon Class A Licensed Premises: It is unlawful for any licensee
under a class A license to suffer or allow any person to consume alcoholic
beverages upon the licensed premises. It is unlawful for any person to consume
alcoholic beverages upon such premises.
   G.   Improper Illumination: It is unlawful for any licensee to fail to keep
all parts of the licensed premises to which customers have any access
illuminated with a minimum illumination of three (3) foot-candles at all times
it is occupied or open for business.
   H.   Impede View: It is unlawful for any licensee holding a class B, class
C, class D license or liquor consumption license to arrange to keep the
licensed premises, or any booth, stall, furniture, fixtures, screens or
curtains thereon, so as to impede a full view of the premises and all of the
occupants therein from the main floor entrance thereof. All stalls and booths
must conform to the requirements specified for stalls and booths in
restaurants.
   I.   Maintain Nuisance: It is unlawful for any person to commit, keep or
maintain a nuisance upon any licensed premises. It is unlawful for any person
to suffer a nuisance to be maintained upon licensed premises owned, occupied,
operated or controlled by him or which may be in his charge.
   J.   Unlawfully Acquired Alcoholic Beverage: It is unlawful for any licensee
to purchase or acquire or to have or possess or to suffer to be kept upon the
licensed premises any alcoholic beverages except that lawfully acquired from a
brewer or wholesaler licensed under the provisions of the alcoholic beverage
control act of the state.
   K.   Unlawful Storage: It is unlawful for any licensee to keep, store or
possess, or to suffer any person to keep, store or possess, any liquor, upon
the licensed premises, unless to sell liquor under the alcoholic beverage
control act of the state.
   L.   Unqualified Employee: It is unlawful for any licensee knowingly to
employ or to suffer to work for him upon the licensed premises any person who
does not meet the requirements for such employment.
   M.   Gambling Devices: It is unlawful for any licensee under this chapter to
have, possess, store or display upon the licensed premises any gambling devices
or any lottery tickets, or to suffer any such device or tickets to be brought,
kept, possessed or stored or displayed upon the premises for any purpose
whatsoever.
   N.   Financial Interest By Wholesaler: No brewer, beer jobber or beer
wholesaler shall directly or indirectly supply, give or pay for any furniture,
furnishings or fixture of a retailer of beer, nor shall any brewer, beer dealer
or beer wholesaler advance, furnish money or pay for any license fee for such a
retailer or be financially interested either directly or indirectly in the
conduct or operation of the business of any such retailer, or lend money or
grant more than forty (40) days of credit to any such retailer.
   O.   Interfere With Entrance: It is unlawful for any door or other means of
ingress to or egress from any licensed premises to be locked or barred or
barricaded in any way so as to interfere with the free entrance to the licensed
premises by any peace officer of the city or other "authorized officer" as
defined in section
5-1A-1 of this title at any time while the premises are occupied or open to the
public, and all doors or other means of entrance thereto during the time the
premises are occupied or open to the public shall be left unlocked or
unfastened so that any peace officer may enter the same without any hindrance
or delay; provided however, that exit doors openable from the inside, which
have been approved by the fire marshal, shall not be prohibited under this
subsection if installed at other than the main entrance. There may be
maintained upon the premises a locked storeroom for the keeping of goods and
supplies used in the business; provided, that such storerooms shall at all
times be subject to search and inspection by any peace officer or other
authorized officer as provided in this chapter. It is unlawful for any licensee
to deny any peace officer or other authorized officer immediate access to such
storeroom for such search or inspection upon demand made for such access. It is
unlawful for any licensee to suffer any person, except a bona fide employee of
the licensee or a peace officer to enter or remain in such storeroom.
   P.   Lookout: It is unlawful for any person commonly known as a "lookout" to
be stationed or maintained to give warning of the approach of any police
officer or other authorized officer to such premises. It is unlawful to
maintain or operate any electrical or other device which is used or capable of
being used to give warning to persons within any such licensed premises of the
approach of any police officer or other authorized officer.
   Q.   Disorderly Persons Upon Premises: It is unlawful for any disorderly
person to be or remain within any licensed premises, or to be guilty of any
disorderly conduct therein. It is unlawful for any licensee to suffer or allow
any disorderly conduct to be committed, or to suffer or allow any disorderly
person to be or remain upon, any licensed premises.
   R.   Solicitation: It is unlawful for any person to solicit any other person
upon any licensed premises for illicit sexual intercourse or other immoral
purpose, or to be upon such premises for the purpose of such solicitation. It
is unlawful for any licensee to suffer or allow any violation of the
prohibition in this section upon the licensed premises.
   S.   Beg Or Solicit Alcoholic Beverage: It is unlawful for any person upon
any public street or upon any licensed premises to beg or solicit a gift of any
alcoholic beverage.
   T.   Sale After Revocation, Denial Or Suspension: It is unlawful for any
person to sell beer after the revocation or denial of any license issued to him
or during a period of suspension of such license.
   U.   Failure To Maintain Control: It is unlawful for any licensee hereunder
to fail to maintain full control of the conduct of the business upon the
licensed premises, or to fail to inform himself of the manner in which the
business is conducted and of the activities of his agents, servants and
employees in and about the licensed premises. The licensee shall be
responsible, under this article, for all of the activities of his agents,
servants and employees in and about the licensed premises, and by accepting a
license under this chapter, the licensee unconditionally guarantees to the city
that neither he nor his agents, servants or employees will violate the terms of
this chapter upon the licensed premises, and for breach of such guarantee the
license may be revoked.
   V.   Consumption By Employee On Duty: An employee of a licensee, while on
duty, may not consume an alcoholic beverage or be under the influence of an
alcoholic beverage.
   W.   Sexually Oriented Business Regulations; Public Indecency: It is
unlawful for any licensee to allow or permit any person on the licensed
premises to violate chapter 15 of this title, or to engage in any act which
violates the offense of public indecency under section
11-5-8 of this code, or lewdness as provided in Utah Code Annotated sections
76-9-702 and 76-9-702.5 and adopted by the city in section
11-1-1 of this code.
   X.   Leaving Premises With Open Container: It is unlawful for any licensee
under a class B, C or D license to allow a person to leave the premises with
any container which contains any alcoholic beverage if the container has been
opened or the contents of the container partially consumed. It is unlawful for
any person to leave such premises with any container which contains any
alcoholic beverage if the container has been opened or the contents of the
container partially consumed.
(Ord. 2011-51, 10-25-2011)
5-3D-5: PENALTY:
A violation of any provision of this chapter is a class B misdemeanor,
punishable as set forth in title 1, chapter 4 of this code.
(1979 Code § 5.12.310; amd. Ord. 92-23, 3-24-1992; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
CHAPTER 4
AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENT
ARTICLE A.  AMUSEMENT HALLS AND ARCADES
SECTION:
5-4A-1: Definitions
5-4A-2: Alcoholic Beverages And Tobacco; Minors
5-4A-3: Operational Restrictions; Curfew
5-4A-4: Interior Visibility
5-4A-5: Supervision
5-4A-6: Exemption
5-4A-7: Spook Alleys; Special Regulations
5-4A-8: Effective Date
5-4A-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms shall be defined as indicated for the purposes of this
Article:
AMUSEMENT DEVICE: Any machine, device or contrivance not prohibited or declared
unlawful by the City or the State of Utah, designed, or intended to be operated
or used for amusement or the playing of a game upon or in response to the
payment of some charge or the insertion therein of a coin, slug, trade-token or
similar object.
AMUSEMENT HALL: A building, portion of a building or enclosed area used for
recreation purposes by the public for a fee and includes, but is not limited
to, an arcade, batting cage, billiard hall, card room, miniature golf course,
driving range, public dance hall, motion picture theater or other theater,
shooting gallery, spook alley, or skating rink.
ARCADE: A place of business which contains four (4) or more amusement devices.
BATTING CAGE: A place of business where patrons may hit baseballs projected by
a mechanical device for a fee.
BILLIARD HALL: A place of business containing more than three (3) tables on
which billiard, bagatelle or pool is played by the public for a fee.
BOWLING ALLEY: An amusement hall where bowling and related activities are
played by the public for a fee.
CARD ROOM: Any room or building where there is played any backgammon, cards,
checkers, chess, or other games of similar nature, or any game played with
beans, buttons, dice or similar devices, or to keep, maintain or operate in the
City any table on which said games are played, where charge is made for the use
of the room, use of the tables or for the privilege of playing on such tables
or in such room.
DANCE STUDIO: A place where people are taught to dance with or without the
payment of a fee.
DRIVING RANGE: A place where the public may use a golf driving range for a fee,
but shall not include a driving range accessory to a golf course other than a
miniature golf course.
MINIATURE GOLF COURSE: Any amusement hall or enclosure where miniature golf and
related activities are played by the public for a fee.
PUBLIC DANCE HALL: An amusement hall where people may dance for a fee, not
including cabarets.
SHOOTING GALLERY: A place of business where shooting of any kind is done,
including a shooting range.
SKATING RINK: A place of business where a fee is charged for any kind of
skating.
SPOOK ALLEY: Any amusement hall where displays or structures depict scenes of
horror, violence or the unusual for entertainment of the public for a fee.
THEATER: A place of business where an outdoor or indoor motion picture or
theatrical performance is given to the public for admission to which a fee is
charged.
(1979 Code § 5.40.010; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-4A-2: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND TOBACCO; MINORS:
   A.   Tobacco: No tobacco shall be sold to or placed in the possession of a
minor, nor shall a minor be allowed to use tobacco on the licensed premises or
in the parking lot of any amusement hall catering to minors.
   B.   Alcoholic Beverages: No alcoholic beverage shall be sold to or placed
in the possession of a minor, nor shall a minor be allowed to use, consume or
possess any alcoholic beverage on the licensed premises or in the parking lot
of any amusement hall catering to minors.
(1979 Code § 5.40.020; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-4A-3: OPERATIONAL RESTRICTIONS; CURFEW:
   A.   Amusement halls catering to minors shall not be operated in a manner
contrary to the curfew ordinances of the City.
   B.   No person subject to the curfew ordinance of the City shall be
permitted on the licensed premises of an amusement hall after fifteen (15)
minutes prior to the curfew time fixed by ordinance.
   C.   In accordance with exemptions applicable to the City's curfew
ordinance, the above restrictions shall not apply to a minor who is:
      1.   Accompanied by the minor's parent, guardian or other adult person
having the care, custody or supervision of said minor;
      2.   Engaged in a lawful employment activity; or
      3.   A minor, fourteen (14) years or older, emancipated by marriage.
(1979 Code § 5.40.030; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-4A-4: INTERIOR VISIBILITY:
A clear, unobstructed view of the entire interior of an amusement hall,
excluding restrooms or portions of the premises to which patrons are excluded,
shall be maintained by the licensee at all times. The required view must be
visible from either the entrance or from another location open to the general
public. The licensee shall not erect or maintain any enclosed booth, blinds or
stalls relating to amusement within the interior of the licensed premises. All
amusement devices shall be kept in plain view.
(1979 Code § 5.40.040; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-4A-5: SUPERVISION:
   A.   Required: The licensed premises, at all times when it is open for
business, shall be under the immediate and effective supervision and control of
the operator or the operator's personal representative, who shall diligently
enforce on the premises all applicable ordinances, rules and regulations.
   B.   Activity In Violation Of Law Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person
to engage in, or for the operator or operator's representative to suffer or
permit any person to engage in, any activity that is in violation of the
criminal ordinances of the City or the State or any gaming or betting.
(1979 Code § 5.40.050; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-4A-6: EXEMPTION:
This Chapter does not apply to any building, activity or performance given,
played or used solely for the benefit of and under the supervision of a
religious, educational or charitable organization.
(1979 Code § 5.40.070; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-4A-7: SPOOK ALLEYS; SPECIAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Guides Required: Guide persons shall be provided for each fifteen (15)
people admitted to the premises. Each guide person shall be provided with a
flashlight.
   B.   Restoration Of Structure: The structure which housed the displays shall
be restored to its condition prior to the establishment of the spook alley, and
all signs, displays and related paraphernalia removed from the premises by
November 21 following Halloween.
(1979 Code § 5.40.080; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-4A-8: EFFECTIVE DATE:
The provisions of this Article shall apply to amusement halls and arcades,
effective December 1, 1998.
(1979 Code § 5.40.090; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
ARTICLE B.  CABARETS OR NIGHTCLUBS 1
SECTION:
5-4B-1: Definitions
5-4B-2: License Required
5-4B-3: Application; Fee
5-4B-4: Compliance With Laws
5-4B-5: Unlawful Activities
5-4B-6: Interior Visibility
5-4B-7: Lighting
5-4B-8: Hours Of Operation
5-4B-9: Application Of Article
 
Notes
  1. Prior ordinance history: 1979 Code §§ 5.25.010, 5.25.020, 5.25.030,
1 5.25.040, 5.25.050, 5.25.060, 5.25.070, 5.25.080, 5.25.090; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-
  1998.
5-4B-1: DEFINITIONS:
"Cabaret" or "nightclub" means any restaurant or other business establishment
licensed for the on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages which permits
its patrons to dance or entertains its patrons with live performers who sing,
dance or play musical instruments. It shall not include an adult live
entertainment business required to be licensed as a sexually oriented business
under chapter 15 of this title.
(Ord. 2000-40, 7-18-2000)
5-4B-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person or entity to operate a cabaret or nightclub
without first obtaining a license.
(Ord. 2000-40, 7-18-2000)
5-4B-3: APPLICATION; FEE:
   A.   Submission: Applications shall be made to the business license
coordinator.
   B.   Referral To Chief Of Police: The application shall be referred to the
police chief, who shall within ten (10) days after receiving the application,
report to the business license coordinator whether the premises is in
compliance with the requirements of this chapter, and whether the cabaret or
nightclub has been operated in compliance with the requirements of this
chapter.
   C.   Initial Applications; Referrals: Initial applications shall be referred
to the following departments and divisions:
      1.   The fire department, to determine compliance with all fire codes;
      2.   The inspection services division, to determine compliance with all
building codes; and
      3.   The community development department, to determine compliance with
all zoning ordinances.
   D.   Reporting Violations; Duty: The fire department, the inspection
services division, and the community development department shall have a
continuing duty to report to the business license coordinator any violations of
the premises which have not been corrected.
   E.   Fee: The fee for a cabaret license or nightclub license shall be the
fee as determined in chapter 1, article B of this title.
(Ord. 2000-40, 7-18-2000)
5-4B-4: COMPLIANCE WITH LAWS:
No license shall be issued for a cabaret or nightclub unless and until it shall
be found that the premises for which it is issued complies with and conforms to
all laws, ordinances and regulations applicable thereto and is a safe and
proper place for the purposes for which it shall be used pursuant to such
license.
(Ord. 2000-40, 7-18-2000)
5-4B-5: UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to whom a license under this article has
been issued to allow or permit, on the licensed premises, any act to be
committed on the premises that is in violation of the statutes of the state or
the ordinances of the city.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any holder of a cabaret license to allow any
dancer, model, performer, or any other person to appear on the premises in
violation of section
11-5-8 of this code.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any dancer, model, performer, or any other
person to appear on the premises of a cabaret in violation of section
11-5-8 of this code.
(Ord. 2000-40, 7-18-2000)
5-4B-6: INTERIOR VISIBILITY:
A clear, unobstructed view of the entire interior of a cabaret or nightclub, or
such portions of a business establishment where dancing or entertainment is
allowed, permitted or provided, shall be maintained by the licensee at all
times. The required view must be visible from either the entrance or from
another location open to plain view. The licensee shall not erect or maintain
any enclosures within the interior which obstructs the view of all areas where
dancing or entertainment is allowed, permitted or provided, and no booth, blind
or stall shall be maintained unless all tables, chairs and occupants, if any
therein, are kept open to plain view.
(Ord. 2000-40, 7-18-2000)
5-4B-7: LIGHTING:
All cabarets or nightclubs shall maintain a minimum of two (2) candlepower
light measured at a level five feet (5') above the floor.
(Ord. 2000-40, 7-18-2000)
5-4B-8: HOURS OF OPERATION:
No cabaret or nightclub shall provide dancing or entertainment between the
hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M.
(Ord. 2000-40, 7-18-2000)
5-4B-9: APPLICATION OF ARTICLE:
The provisions of this article regarding separate licensure shall not apply to
private clubs under article C of this chapter until January 2, 1999.
(Ord. 2000-40, 7-18-2000)
ARTICLE C.  PRIVATE CLUBS AND ASSOCIATIONS
SECTION:
5-4C-1: Definition
5-4C-2: License Required
5-4C-3: Application; Fee; Expiration
5-4C-4: Compliance With Law
5-4C-5: Premises; Lighting, Visibility
5-4C-6: Permitting Illegal Acts Prohibited
5-4C-7: Alcoholic Beverage Licensing; Compliance With State
5-4C-8: Hours Of Operation
5-4C-9: Right Of Entry; Lookout Or Warning Device Prohibited
5-4C-1: DEFINITION:
"Private club or association" means any social club, recreational, fraternal or
athletic association or kindred association organized primarily for the benefit
of its stockholders or members, regulated and operated in compliance with the
provisions of Utah Code Annotated title 32A, chapter 5.
(1979 Code § 5.24.010; amd. Ord. 90-60, 12-20-1990; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998; Ord.
2004-57, 8-3-2004)
5-4C-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person or entity to operate a private club or
association in the city without first obtaining a private club or association
license.
(1979 Code § 5.24.020; amd. Ord. 90-60, 12-20-1990; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-4C-3: APPLICATION; FEE; EXPIRATION:
   A.   Application: Applications shall be made to the business license
coordinator and shall show the location of the private club or association and
state whether a restaurant is or will be operated on the premises. The
applicant shall also comply with the requirements of chapter 3, article C of
this title.
   B.   Restaurant, Cabaret Operated On Premises: If a restaurant is being
operated on the premises, the licensee shall also comply with the requirements
of chapter 14 of this title. If a cabaret is being operated on the premises,
the licensee shall also comply with the requirements of article B of this
chapter.
   C.   Investigation By Chief Of Police: An application for a private club or
association license, together with such information as is required to be
attached thereto, shall be referred to the chief of police for inspection and
report. The chief of police, or the chief's designee, shall, within ten (10)
days after receiving the application, report in writing to the business license
coordinator whether the premises are in compliance with the requirements of
this chapter; whether the place is or has been conducted or operated in
compliance with the requirements of this chapter; the nature and kind of
business conducted at the place; the nature and kind of entertainment, if any,
at the place; whether gambling is or has been permitted, or gambling devices
displayed, upon the premises, or by the applicant at any other place; and
whether there is any grounds to believe that any statement made in the
application is untrue. The chief of police shall add such further information
as is pertinent to the licensure of the private club or association.
   D.   Additional Referrals: Initial applications shall be referred to the
following departments and divisions:
      1.   The fire department, to determine compliance with all fire codes;
      2.   The inspection services division, to determine compliance with all
building codes;
      3.   The community development department, to determine compliance with
all zoning ordinances; and
      4.   The county health department, to determine compliance with all
regulations complying with food preparation and service.
   E.   Fee: The fees for a private club license shall be the fee as determined
in chapter 1, article B of this title.
   F.   Term: All licenses issued under this chapter shall be issued for one
year and shall expire on the December 31 of each year.
(1979 Code § 5.24.030; amd. Ord. 97-94, 12-16-1997; Ord. 98-9, 2-3-1998; Ord.
98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-4C-4: COMPLIANCE WITH LAW:
No license shall be issued for a private club or association unless and until
it shall be found that the place for which it is issued complies with and
conforms to all laws, ordinances and health and fire regulations applicable
thereto and is properly ventilated and has available separate and sufficient
toilet conveniences for each sex and is a safe and proper place for the
purposes for which it shall be used pursuant to such license.
(1979 Code § 5.24.040; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-4C-5: PREMISES; LIGHTING, VISIBILITY:
   A.   Lighting: All premises licensed or regulated by this chapter shall
maintain throughout the premises and during business hours a minimum of two (2)
candlepower light measured at a level five feet (5') above the floor.
   B.   Visibility: A clear, unobstructed view of the entire interior of the
private club, excluding restrooms, kitchens or storerooms, shall be maintained
by the licensee at all times. The required view must be visible from either the
entrance or from another location open to plain view. The licensee shall not
erect or maintain any enclosed booth, blinds or stalls within the interior
which obstructs such view of all tables, chairs and occupants.
(1979 Code § 5.24.050; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-4C-6: PERMITTING ILLEGAL ACTS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to whom a license under this article has been
issued to allow or permit, on the licensed premises, any act to be committed
that is in violation of the statutes of the state or the ordinances of the
city, or to permit prostitutes, pimps or procurers to enter and remain on said
premises.
(1979 Code § 5.24.070; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-4C-7: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE LICENSING; COMPLIANCE WITH STATE:
   A.   Required: It is unlawful for a private club or association, any member
thereof, or any other person to hold, store, possess, or consume alcoholic
beverages on the premises of a private club or association unless the premises
are licensed in accordance with the alcoholic beverage control act of the state
and chapter 3, article C of this title.
   B.   Failure To Comply: It shall also be unlawful for a private club or
association, or any officer, manager or employee of such private club, to fail
to comply with the alcoholic beverage control act of the state, as amended, and
the ordinances of the city.
(1979 Code § 5.24.100; amd. Ord. 90-60, 12-20-1990; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-4C-8: HOURS OF OPERATION:
A private club or association shall terminate and close its facilities for the
enjoyment and benefit of its membership and guests between the hours of two
o'clock (2:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. of each day.
(1979 Code § 5.24.250; amd. Ord. 90-60, 12-20-1990; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-4C-9: RIGHT OF ENTRY; LOOKOUT OR WARNING DEVICE PROHIBITED:
   A.   Right Of Entry; Inspection: A private club or association may not
maintain facilities in any manner that barricades or conceals the club
operation. Any peace officer or other "authorized officer" as defined in
section
5-1A-1 of this title shall, upon presentation of credentials, be admitted
immediately to the club and permitted without hindrance or delay to inspect
completely the entire club premises and, if the premises are licensed for the
sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages under chapter 3, article C of this
title, all books and records of the licensee, at any time during which the same
are open for the transaction of business to its members.
   B.   Lookout; Warning Device: It is unlawful for any person commonly known
as a lookout to be stationed or maintained to give warning of the approach of
any peace officer or other authorized officer to such room or rooms, and no
electrical or other devices shall be operated or maintained which are used or
capable of being used to give warning to persons within any such room or rooms,
or on the premises owned or controlled by such private club or association, of
the approach of any police officer or other authorized officer.
(Ord. 2011-51, 10-25-2011)
CHAPTER 5
AUCTIONS AND AUCTIONEERS
SECTION:
5-5-1: Definitions
5-5-2: Licensing
5-5-3: Rules, Regulations And Requirements
5-5-4: Prohibited Acts
5-5-5: Revocation
5-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
AUCTION HOUSE: A building, site, or location from which an auction is
conducted. Auction houses shall not include estate auctions conducted at the
residence of the deceased; auctions for the liquidation of a business licensed
under this title, if conducted on the premises of that business; and auctions
to dispose of abandoned or unclaimed property, if conducted on the premises of
a business licensed under this title and the property to be auctioned was
initially received or stored in the regular course of that business.
AUCTIONEER: A person who conducts a public competitive sale of property by
outcry to the highest bona fide bidder.
(1979 Code §§ 5.10.010, 5.10.011; amd. Ord. 90-42, 7-26-1990)
5-5-2: LICENSING:
   A.   Required; Fee: It is unlawful for any person to act as an auctioneer in
the city unless he has a valid business license in full force and effect as
required by chapter 1 of this title. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm
or corporation or association to operate as an "auction house", as defined in
section
5-5-1 of this chapter, within the city unless licensed under chapter 1 of this
title. The business license fees shall be as specified in chapter 1, article B
of this title.
   B.   Exemptions: The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any
auction held for charitable or benevolent purposes; nor for any church fair,
festival or bazaar; nor to the sale of household goods or effects by the owner
thereof at his place of residence; nor to the sale of live animals or poultry
at any stockyards, stock show or fair.
   C.   Bond Required: Before issuing any auctioneer's license under the
provisions of this chapter, the business license coordinator shall require the
applicant to execute and file with him a bond to the city with a corporate
surety in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), conditioned for the
faithful observance of all of the laws of the state and the ordinances of the
city applicable to the activities of the auctioneer and for the honest
performance of all duties required by the city ordinances of an auctioneer and
the protection of all persons dealing with or through an auctioneer against any
fraud, deception, breach of warranty or imposition. Such bond must be approved
in writing by the city attorney before filing.
(1979 Code §§ 5.10.020, 5.10.030, 5.10.040; amd. Ord. 90-42, 7-26-1990; 1999
Code)
5-5-3: RULES, REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Receipt For Property: It is unlawful for any auctioneer receiving any
personal property for sale at public auction to fail to give to the person
delivering to him such property an itemized receipt. A copy of the receipt so
given shall be kept at the auctioneer's place of business for at least one year
and shall be subject, at any reasonable time, to inspection by the police
department or by an "authorized officer" as defined in section
5-1A-1 of this title. The copy of such receipt so to be maintained by the
auctioneer shall contain the true and correct name and address of the person
delivering such goods to the auctioneer. It is unlawful for an auctioneer to
fail to maintain a copy of such receipt complete with the information required
in this section in accordance with the requirements set out in this chapter, or
to refuse a police officer or other authorized officer access thereto for
purposes of inspection at any time when the auctioneer's place of business is
open or at any other reasonable time.
   B.   Statement Of Transaction: At the close of the sale at auction of any
personal property, the auctioneer shall deliver an accurate written statement
of the transaction to the owner of the property sold or his authorized
representative, and shall pay to the person legally entitled thereto the
purchase price received upon the sale of such property, deducting therefrom
only his agreed commission. Upon the close of any sale at auction of any
personal property, the auctioneer shall, upon demand of the person purchasing
the same, furnish to such purchaser a written memorandum of the transaction
particularly describing the article sold. It is unlawful for any auctioneer to
fail to comply with any provision of this subsection.
   C.   Goods Held Over One Business Day: It is unlawful for any auctioneer to
sell any goods or chattels at public auction unless and until one full business
day has elapsed between the time the auctioneer has issued the receipt required
to be issued by subsection A of this section and the copies of such receipts
have been maintained for inspection at the auctioneer's place of business
throughout the business day.
(Ord. 2011-51, 10-25-2011)
5-5-4: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   Misleading Conduct: It is unlawful for any auctioneer to make any
fraudulent, misleading, untruthful or unwarranted statements with respect to
the character, quality, kind, value, ownership or origin of the goods, wares
and merchandise sold or offered for sale by him or to make any other misleading
or untruthful statements with respect thereto, or to substitute another article
for the article actually sold.
   B.   Misleading Bidding: It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation
conducting or interested in any sale of property at auction to employ or use at
such sale any by-bidder, capper or booster. Every sale must be bona fide, and
it is unlawful for any auctioneer at an auction sale to accept or pretend to
accept any false, misleading or fictitious bid for any article offered for
sale.
   C.   Public Disturbances: It is unlawful for any auctioneer, or for any
other person concerned or interested in any auction sale, to conduct an auction
sale in such manner or in such place as to cause people to gather in crowds
upon the sidewalks or public streets of the city so as to obstruct the same. It
is unlawful for any person to make or cause to be made any noisy announcements
of an auction sale, including, but not limited to, the ringing of bells or
blowing of whistles through the streets of the city. It is unlawful for any
person to employ or suffer to be used at or near any place of an auction sale
any bellman or crier or drum or fife or other musical instrument or noisemaking
means of attracting the attention of passersby.
(1979 Code §§ 5.10.090, 5.10.100, 5.10.110)
5-5-5: REVOCATION:
Any auctioneer's license issued under the provisions of this chapter may be
revoked or suspended in accordance with chapter 1, article C of this title.
(1979 Code § 5.10.050; amd. 1999 Code)
CHAPTER 6
BURGLARY AND ROBBERY ALARMS AND ALARM BUSINESSES
SECTION:
5-6-1: Purpose And Scope
5-6-2: Definitions
5-6-3: Alarm Users; Permits Required
5-6-4: Unlawful Alarm Reporting; Automatic Dialing, Prerecorded Message Systems
Prohibited
5-6-5: Audible Alarm Requirements
5-6-6: Excessive False Alarms; Service Fees; Permit Revocation
5-6-7: Failure To Respond; Service Fees; Treated As False Alarm
5-6-8: Permit Revocation; Appeal
5-6-9: Records Maintenance, Classification; Statistics
5-6-10: Operation Restrictions On Alarm Businesses
5-6-11: Operational Defects Remedied
5-6-12: City Liability Limitations
5-6-13: Administration And Enforcement
5-6-14: Collection Of Service Fees
5-6-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
   A.   The purpose and scope of this chapter is to protect the emergency
services of the city from misuse.
   B.   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all alarm users, alarm
businesses, employees of alarm businesses, and alarm systems which are
installed, connected, operated or maintained on or prior to the date on which
the ordinance codified herein became effective, and subsequent thereto.
(1979 Code § 5.15.010; amd. Ord. 88-49, 12-22-1988; Ord. 92-15, 2-25-1991; Ord.
98-63, 10-27-1998)
5-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
ALARM BUSINESS OR COMPANY: A person engaged in the sale, installation,
maintenance, alteration, repair, replacement, servicing, or monitoring of an
alarm system. "Alarm business or company" does not include the activities of:
   A.   A person engaged in the manufacture and sale of alarm systems when that
person is not engaged in the installation, maintenance, alteration, repair,
replacement, servicing, or monitoring of alarm systems, and the manufacture or
sale occurs only at a place of business established by the person engaged in
the manufacture or sale and does not involve site visits at the place or
intended place of installation of an alarm system; or
   B.   An owner of an alarm system, or an employee of the owner of an alarm
system who is engaged in installation, maintenance, alteration, repair,
replacement, servicing, or monitoring of the alarm system owned by that owner.
ALARM COMPANY AGENT: Any individual employed within the state of Utah by a
person engaged in an alarm business.
ALARM SYSTEM: Any equipment and devices assembled for the purpose of detecting
and signaling unauthorized intrusion or entry into or onto certain premises, or
signaling a robbery, burglary or other emergency in progress, and to signal the
above occurrences either by a local or audible alarm or by a silent or remote
alarm. The following devices shall not constitute alarm systems within the
meaning of this definition:
   A.   Devices which do not register alarms that are audible, visible, or
perceptible outside the protected premises;
   B.   Devices which are not installed, operated or used for the purpose of
reporting an emergency to the police department;
   C.   Alarm devices affixed to motor vehicles; and
   D.   Alarm devices installed on a temporary basis by the police department.
ALARM USER: Any person who owns or leases an alarm system.
ANSWERING SERVICE: A telephone answering service providing among its services
the receiving on a continuous basis through trained employees of emergency
signals from alarm systems and the subsequent relaying of such messages by a
live voice to the police department.
AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE: A device which automatically sends over telephone
lines, by direct connection or otherwise, a prerecorded voice message or code
signal indicating the existence of an emergency situation that the alarm system
is designed to detect.
BURGLAR ALARM SECURITY AND LICENSING ACT: Burglar alarm security and licensing
act, Utah Code Annotated section 58-65-101 et seq., as amended.
BURGLARY OR INTRUSION ALARM SYSTEM: An alarm system signaling an entry or
attempted entry into an area protected by the system.
CENTRAL STATION: An office to which alarm systems are connected, where
operators supervise the circuits, and where guards and/or servicemen may or may
not be maintained continuously to investigate signals.
CHIEF OF POLICE, CHIEF: Director of the police department of Ogden City or the
chief's designated representative.
CITY COMMUNICATION CENTER: The city facility used to receive emergency and
general information from the public to be dispatched to the respective police
personnel. "City communication center" includes the dispatch facility operated
by Ogden City as well as other governmental, dispatch facilities in the county
used to receive emergency and general information from the public to be
dispatched to the police department.
EMERGENCY: The commission or attempted commission of a robbery, burglary or
other criminal action.
FALSE ALARM: Activation of any alarm system which results in a response by
peace officers when a situation requiring a response by them or other emergency
response unit in fact does not exist. It includes an alarm signal caused by
conditions of nature which are normal for that area and subject to control by
the alarm business operator or alarm user. False alarm does not include an
alarm signal caused by extraordinarily violent conditions of nature not
reasonably subject to control.
INTRUSION ALARM SYSTEM: An alarm system signaling an entry or attempted entry
into the area protected by the system.
LOCAL ALARM: Any noisemaking alarm device.
PERMITTEE: The person to whom an alarm user permit is issued.
POLICE DEPARTMENT: The Ogden City police department.
ROBBERY ALARM SYSTEM: An alarm system signaling a robbery or attempted robbery
or other physical endangerment.
(Ord. 2016-64, 1-3-2017)
5-6-3: ALARM USERS; PERMITS REQUIRED:
   A.   Required: Every alarm user who is also engaged in any "business" within
the city, as defined in section
5-1A-1 of this title shall obtain from the police department an alarm user's
permit for each system prior to any installation of an alarm system. Users of
alarm systems having both a robbery alarm system and a burglary or intrusion
alarm system shall obtain separate permits for each system if they are distinct
alarm systems. An application for a burglary or robbery alarm user's permit and
an annual twenty five dollar ($25.00) fee shall be filed with the business
license division prior to installation of the system and thereafter on or
before the business license renewal due date, with a copy of the application to
the police department. A fee for an initial user's permit shall be prorated by
half if within six (6) months of business license renewal. Each permit shall
bear the signature of the chief of police. The permit shall be physically upon
the premises using the alarm system and shall be available for inspection by
the police.
   B.   Information: The alarm user's permit application shall set forth the
full name, address and telephone number of both the owner or lessee on whose
premises the system will be installed, operated or maintained and the name of
the person or licensed alarm business or company installing, maintaining or
servicing the alarm system, as well as the type of system to be installed,
operated or maintained. The application shall further contain the names,
addresses and telephone numbers of three (3) individuals who may be contacted
by police officers responding to an alarm. The person listed shall have
authority to act for the alarm user in granting police officers access to any
portion of the premises concerned and shall be knowledgeable in the basic
operation of the alarm system. The application shall also contain such
additional information as reasonably determined by the chief of police to be
necessary to properly identify and locate the alarm user, the alarm business or
company installing, servicing or maintaining the alarm system, and the persons
to be contacted in the event of the filing of an alarm report.
   C.   Copy Provided To Alarm Servicing Business: The police department will
furnish a copy of the alarm permit to the named licensed alarm business or
company that will be monitoring, maintaining and servicing the system. The
alarm user will notify the alarm business or company of any changes in names,
addresses and telephone numbers of the individuals who may be contacted by
police officers responding to an alarm.
   D.   Late Penalty; Exemption: All permit fees shall increase by twenty five
dollars ($25.00) if not paid on or before the date due. No late penalty shall
be charged on an initial permit fee upon proof that the alarm system was
installed after obtaining an initial business license but prior to annual
renewal thereof.
(Ord. 2016-64, 1-3-2017)
5-6-4: UNLAWFUL ALARM REPORTING; AUTOMATIC DIALING, PRERECORDED MESSAGE SYSTEMS
PROHIBITED:
   A.   Unpermitted Systems: It is unlawful to report to the city communication
center, the police department or other emergency service agency, any alarm from
an alarm system that has no alarm use permit. This shall not apply to the
reporting of the sounding of a local alarm.
   B.   False Alarms: No person shall cause to be transmitted any burglary or
intrusion alarm or any robbery alarm knowing the same to be false or without
basis in fact. Central stations shall not request the city communication center
or any police officer to respond to alarm scenes when monitoring equipment
indicates an alarm system malfunction signal.
   C.   Prerecorded Messages: It is unlawful to maintain, operate, connect, or
allow to be maintained, operated or connected, any automatic dialing device
which automatically dials the city communication center or the police
department and then relays any prerecorded message to report any robbery,
burglary, intrusion or other emergency.
(1979 Code § 5.15.040; amd. Ord. 88-49, 12-22-1988; Ord. 92-15, 2-25-1991; Ord.
98-63, 10-27-1998)
5-6-5: AUDIBLE ALARM REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Time Limiting Device: All audible alarm systems shall include a device
that will limit the generation of the audible sound of the system to not longer
than fifteen (15) minutes after activation where the alarm system is protecting
a residential structure and not longer than thirty (30) minutes where the alarm
system is protecting a commercial structure.
   B.   Notice Posted: All alarm users with an audible alarm system shall post
a notice containing the names and telephone numbers of the persons to be
notified to render repairs or service and secure the premises during any hour
of the day or night that the alarm is activated. Such notice shall be posted
near the alarm in such a position as to be legible from the ground level
adjacent to the building, structure or facility where the alarm system is
located.
(1979 Code § 5.15.050; amd. Ord. 88-49, 12-22-1988; Ord. 92-15, 2-25-1991; Ord.
98-63, 10-27-1998)
5-6-6: EXCESSIVE FALSE ALARMS; SERVICE FEES; PERMIT REVOCATION:
   A.   Service Fees: Whenever the city communication center receives an
excessive number of false alarms from any one source, a service fee shall be
assessed to the alarm user.
      1.   The first and second false alarm in any twelve (12) month period
shall not be considered excessive, and no service fee shall be assessed.
      2.   Upon receipt of the third and any subsequent false alarm within any
twelve (12) month period, the alarm user shall pay a service fee of one hundred
fifty dollars ($150.00) for each false alarm to which the police respond.
   B.   Permit Revocation: An alarm permit may be revoked for any of the
following reasons:
      1.   An alarm user has more than six (6) false alarms at the permitted
address within any twelve (12) month period; or
      2.   An alarm user fails to pay an assessed service fee within thirty
(30) days of the billing date.
   C.   Effect Of Permit Revocation: Upon permit revocation, the police
department shall cease police response to further activities of the alarm
system.
   D.   Permit Issuance After Revocation: Any alarm user whose user permit is
revoked by the city and desires to reinstate police response, shall make new
application for a new alarm permit. Such new alarm permit shall not be issued
until the alarm user pays:
      1.   A reinstatement fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00); and
      2.   Any unpaid service fees assessed under the revoked permit.
(Ord. 2016-64, 1-3-2017)
5-6-7: FAILURE TO RESPOND; SERVICE FEES; TREATED AS FALSE ALARM:
A service fee may be assessed upon a user when the police officers responding
to an alarm are unable to contact any of the listed parties due to outdated or
inaccurate information provided by the user, or if the listed parties fail to
respond to the scene within thirty (30) minutes of notice. The service fee
shall be determined by treating any such failure by a user as if it were a
false alarm, as provided in section
5-6-6 of this chapter, and may be considered as an additional false alarm for
the purpose of computing fees or permit revocation.
(1979 Code § 5.15.070; amd. Ord. 88-49, 12-22-1988; Ord. 92-15, 2-25-1991; Ord.
98-63, 10-27-1998)
5-6-8: PERMIT REVOCATION; APPEAL:
   A.   Notice: In those cases where an alarm user permit may be subject to
revocation as set forth in section
5-6-6 of this chapter, a written notice of such action shall be mailed to the
alarm permittee at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of revocation. The
permittee may, within ten (10) days after such notice is mailed, request a
meeting with the chief of police or the chief's designee to present material to
rebut the basis of the revocation.
   B.   Determination: Based on the information presented, the chief of police
or the chief's designee, may determine that:
      1.   The permit be revoked;
      2.   The permit be reinstated because one or more of the incidents did
not constitute a false alarm under the provisions of this chapter;
      3.   The permit be reinstated on a probationary basis, based on the
implementation of corrective measures directed by the chief, or the chief's
designee.
(1979 Code § 5.15.080; amd. Ord. 88-49, 12-22-1988; Ord. 92-15, 2-25-1991; Ord.
98-63, 10-27-1998)
5-6-9: RECORDS MAINTENANCE, CLASSIFICATION; STATISTICS:
   A.   Protected Record: Alarm user permit applications and any other
information submitted in compliance with the requirements of this chapter
regarding the installation, operation, or maintenance of an alarm system shall
be classified as a protected record and shall not be subject to public
disclosure, except to the extent necessary for enforcement of the provisions
herein. The police department shall be charged with the sole responsibility for
the maintenance of all application and permit records.
   B.   Statistics May Be Maintained: Subject to the requirements of
confidentiality, the police department may develop and maintain statistics
having the purpose of assisting alarm system evaluation for use by members of
the public.
(1979 Code § 5.15.090; amd. Ord. 88-49, 12-22-1988; Ord. 92-15, 2-25-1991; Ord.
98-63, 10-27-1998)
5-6-10: OPERATION RESTRICTIONS ON ALARM BUSINESSES:
   A.   Installation Prohibited; Condition: No alarm business or company shall
install an alarm system unless and until an alarm user's permit has been
obtained by the alarm user under section
5-6-3 of this chapter.
   B.   User Instruction: Every alarm business or company selling, leasing or
furnishing to any alarm user an alarm system which is installed on premises
located within the city shall furnish the alarm user with written instructions
that provide information to enable the alarm user to operate the alarm system
properly.
   C.   Alarm Company Agents; Licensure, Display Of License: It is unlawful:
      1.   For any person to engage directly within the city in the sale,
installation, maintenance, alteration, repair, replacement, servicing, or
monitoring of an alarm system unless such person has in his/her possession a
valid license issued by the state pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 58-
65-308 of the burglar alarm security and licensing act or its successor
provision; or
      2.   For an alarm company agent to fail to display the license upon the
request of a police officer or a customer.
   D.   Alarm Reports; Provision Of Toll Free Number: All alarm businesses,
central stations or other answering services shall provide the city
communication center, at the time of filing an alarm report, with a toll free
telephone number for contacting the central station dispatchers and for
obtaining the information required under subsection E of this section, or its
successor.
   E.   Records: Alarm businesses who request police response to alarm signals
shall maintain a record of all police calls, stating the time, date and
location of the alarm and the name, address and phone number of the alarm user.
The records shall indicate the cause of the alarm, if known. This record shall
be current and shall be made available to the chief of police or the chief's
designated representative at any time during normal business hours.
(1979 Code § 5.15.100; amd. Ord. 88-49, 12-22-1988; Ord. 92-15, 2-25-1991; Ord.
98-63, 10-27-1998)
5-6-11: OPERATIONAL DEFECTS REMEDIED:
The sensory mechanisms used in connection with the robbery, burglary, intrusion
or other emergency alarm systems shall be adjusted to suppress false alarms, so
that the device will not be actuated by impulses due to transient pressure
changes in water pipes, short flashes of light, wind noises such as the
rattling or vibrating of doors or windows, vehicular noise adjacent to the
installation, or other forces unrelated to genuine alarms.
(1979 Code § 5.15.110; amd. Ord. 92-15, 2-25-1992; Ord. 98-63, 10-27-1998)
5-6-12: CITY LIABILITY LIMITATIONS:
The city shall not be liable for any defects in operation of burglary or
robbery alarm systems, for any failure or neglect to respond appropriately upon
the receipt of an alarm nor for the failure or neglect of any person registered
or issued a permit pursuant to this chapter in connection with the
installation, operation or maintenance of the equipment necessary to or
incident to the operation of such systems. In the event the city finds it
necessary to revoke the permit and discontinues police response, the city shall
assume no liability for such action.
(1979 Code § 5.15.130; amd. Ord. 92-15, 2-25-1992; Ord. 98-63, 10-27-1998)
5-6-13: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Chief Of Police; Inspections Authorized: The provisions of this chapter
shall be administered and enforced by the chief of police. The chief, or the
chief's authorized representative, is authorized to make inspections of alarm
systems and of the premises wherein the alarm systems are located. Such
individual shall have authority at reasonable time and upon oral notice to
enter upon any premises within the city to undertake such inspections and to
determine where such systems are being used in conformity with the provisions
of this chapter.
   B.   Implementation Of Rules And Regulations: Subject to the approval of the
mayor, the chief shall have power to make such reasonable rules and regulations
as are deemed by the chief to be necessary to implement the provisions of this
chapter.
(1979 Code § 5.15.140; amd. Ord. 98-63, 10-27-1998)
5-6-14: COLLECTION OF SERVICE FEES:
Enforcement or collection of the service fees imposed herein may be by civil
action or through the enforcement of the criminal penalties imposed by this
code, as restitution.
(1979 Code § 5.15.120; amd. Ord. 92-15, 2-25-1992; Ord. 98-63, 10-27-1998; Ord.
2005-29, 5-24-2005)
CHAPTER 7
CONSTABLES 1
SECTION:
5-7-1: Defined
5-7-2: Licensing; Procedure
5-7-3: Suspension Or Revocation
5-7-4: General Regulations
 
Notes
  1. Prior ordinance history: 1979 Code §§ 5.19.010, 5.19.020, 5.19.030,
1 5.19.040, 5.19.050, 5.19.060; Ord. 91-14, 6-13-1991; Ord. 97-94, 12-16-1997;
  1999 Code.
   
5-7-1: DEFINED:
"Constable", as used in this chapter means any person who provides constable
services as defined in state law within the corporate limits of the city.
(Ord. 2001-21, 3-27-2001)
5-7-2: LICENSING; PROCEDURE:
   A.   Required: It is unlawful for any person to act as a constable in the
city unless he has a valid business license in full force and effect as
required by chapter 1, article A of this title.
   B.   Exemptions: The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any
constable appointed by a political subdivision other than the city to provide
constable services for that jurisdiction.
   C.   Application: An application for a constable license shall be made to
the business license coordinator and shall state thereon the name of the
applicant, the office location, and the names of all deputy constables
deputized by the constable. The applicant shall provide proof of certification
as a special function officer in the state for the licensee and all deputy
constables deputized by the constable. The applicant shall provide proof of
insurance to be approved by the city attorney as fulfilling the requirements of
subsection D of this section. No license shall be issued to any person who has
not been appointed as a constable by the city council pursuant to Utah Code
Annotated section 17-25a-1.
   D.   Insurance Requirements: The license applicant shall agree to hold the
city, its officers, employees and agents harmless and to indemnify and defend
the city, its officers, employees and agents, against all claims, liability,
loss, damage, or expense, including attorney fees, arising out of the
performance of constable services by the licensee, the licensee's agents,
employees or subcontractors, or any deputy constable deputized by the licensee.
Applicant shall maintain a commercial general liability insurance policy with
minimum limits of liability of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per
occurrence for bodily injury, personal injury, and property damage. Any
deductible or self-insured retention must be declared to and approved by the
city. A current certificate of insurance must be kept on file with the business
license coordinator verifying continuing coverage and naming Ogden City as an
additional insured. The certificate shall provide thirty (30) days' written
notice to the city upon cancellation, nonrenewal, or material change in the
policy.
(Ord. 2001-21, 3-27-2001)
5-7-3: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
   A.   Reasons: A constable's license issued under the provisions of this
chapter may be revoked or suspended for any of the following reasons:
      1.   Failure to maintain peace officer certification as required by state
law for the constable or any deputy constable employed by the licensed
constable;
      2.   Failure to maintain the required liability insurance; or
      3.   Withdrawal of the authority to act as a constable by the city
council pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 17-25a-1.
   B.   Procedure: The procedure for suspension or revocation shall be as
provided in chapter 1, article C of this title.
(Ord. 2001-21, 3-27-2001)
5-7-4: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   A licensee shall not deputize any person as a deputy constable, nor
allow any person to perform constable services, unless that person is a peace
officer certified by the Utah peace officers standards and training division.
All deputies shall be duly deputized, sworn, and bonded in conformity with Utah
law.
   B.   The licensee shall maintain workers' compensation and employer's
liability insurance as required by the state of Utah.
   C.   The licensee shall be responsible for the supervision and control of
all deputy constables deputized by the licensee and performing constable
services, pursuant to the authority granted to the licensee under Utah Code
Annotated section 17-25a-1.
   D.   Neither the licensee, nor any deputy constable deputized by the
licensee, shall be considered to be an agent, officer, or employee of the city,
while acting in such capacity.
(Ord. 2001-21, 3-27-2001)
CHAPTER 8
DELIVERY AND HAULING SERVICES
ARTICLE A.  MESSENGER AND DELIVERY SERVICES
SECTION:
5-8A-1: License Fee
5-8A-2: Surety Bond Required
5-8A-1: LICENSE FEE:
The license fee for a messenger service or a special delivery service shall be
as provided in Chapter 1, Article B of this Title.
(1979 Code § 5.34.010)
5-8A-2: SURETY BOND REQUIRED:
Every application for a license to operate a messenger service or a special
delivery service shall be accompanied by a surety bond in the sum of one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) in form and with provisions meeting the
requirements of Section
5-1A-25 of this Title. The failure to maintain such bond in full force and
effect during the period of the license shall automatically invalidate such
license.
(1979 Code § 5.34.020; amd. 1999 Code)
ARTICLE B.  MOVING VANS
SECTION:
5-8B-1: Record Book Required; Inspection
5-8B-2: Exceptions
5-8B-1: RECORD BOOK REQUIRED; INSPECTION:
Every person owning or operating any moving van, furniture car, transfer wagon,
express wagon, delivery wagon or any other vehicle engaged in moving or hauling
for hire in the City shall keep a book or record of the place from which and
the place to which he moves the household goods or personal effects of any
person who is, or persons who are, moving from or vacating any dwelling house,
flat, apartment, room, rooms or place of residence or abode or place of
business in the City, which record shall show the name and address of the
mover, the name of the person who was the owner or ostensible owner of the
personal property moved, the address from which in the City and the address to
which such moving was done, the date thereof and the character of the articles
moved. This record shall be open to inspection at all times by members of the
Police Department, and it shall be retained for five (5) years from the last
entry therein.
(1979 Code § 5.36.010)
5-8B-2: EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of Section
5-8B-1 of this Article shall not apply to the removal of any household goods or
personal effects from any place in the City to any place outside of the State
or to the removal of such goods or effects from one place to another in the
City while in transit between points both of which are outside of the City.
(1979 Code § 5.36.020)
ARTICLE C.  SOLID WASTE HAULERS
SECTION:
5-8C-1: Solid Waste Hauler Defined
5-8C-2: License Required
5-8C-3: Revocation Of License
5-8C-4: Vehicle Regulations
5-8C-1: SOLID WASTE HAULER DEFINED:
As used in this Article, the term "solid waste hauler" means any person engaged
in the business of removing and disposing of garbage, market waste, community
waste, bulky waste, construction and demolition waste, or other solid waste, as
defined in Title 12, Chapter 1 of this Code.
(1979 Code § 8.08.010; amd. 1999 Code)
5-8C-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall operate as or conduct the business of a solid waste hauler
without obtaining a business license therefor from the City. No such license
shall be issued until after the permits required in this Article have been
issued for each of the vehicles to be used by the applicant.
(1979 Code § 8.08.020; amd. 1999 Code)
5-8C-3: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
In the event any holder of a solid waste hauler's license fails to comply with
all applicable laws, ordinances and regulations regarding the hauling of solid
waste, the City may revoke such license or suspend the same until the solid
waste hauler complies with said laws, ordinances and regulations.
(1979 Code § 8.08.030; amd. 1999 Code)
5-8C-4: VEHICLE REGULATIONS:
   A.   Design: Every solid waste hauler must have possession of one or more
trucks or other adequate vehicles having a completely enclosed van-type body so
designed and constructed as to prevent the escape of any waste or materials
placed or transported therein. The body thereof shall be constructed or lined
with metal or other impervious material to facilitate easy and complete
cleaning. The vehicle shall at all times comply with all applicable laws,
ordinances and regulations to entitle it to operate upon the public highways.
(1979 Code § 8.08.040; amd. 1999 Code)
   B.   Permit:
      1.   Required; Inspection: Every vehicle used by a solid waste hauler to
haul garbage, refuse, rubbish, etc., shall be inspected each year by the Police
Department and the County Health Department. A permit for the use of such
vehicle to haul garbage and refuse shall be issued only if the officials
conducting the inspection certify jointly that the vehicle complies with all
the applicable provisions of this Article and Title 12, Chapters 3 and 6 of
this Code. Permits shall be numbered and a separate permit shall be issued for
each vehicle.
(1979 Code § 8.08.050; amd. 1999 Code)
      2.   Renewal: Permits issued for use of a vehicle in the business of
solid waste hauling must be renewed annually.
(1979 Code § 8.08.060; amd. 1999 Code)
      3.   Revocation: If any vehicle for which a solid waste hauler's permit
has been issued ceases to meet the requirements of this Article and Title 12,
Chapters 3 and 6 of this Code, or any other ordinance, statute, or State or
Federal rule or regulation regarding the hauling of solid waste, the City may
revoke said permit in the same manner as provided for revocation of license
under Article 1C of this Title.
(1979 Code § 8.08.070; amd. 1999 Code)
   C.   Identification: Every vehicle used in the business of hauling solid
waste for which a permit has been issued shall have clearly and legibly painted
or otherwise prominently displayed on each side in letters not less than three
inches (3") in height the words "solid waste hauler", the name of the licensee
and the permit number issued for that vehicle.
(1979 Code § 8.08.080; amd. 1999 Code)
   D.   Maintenance And Operation: All vehicles used by solid waste haulers
shall be kept in good condition as required by law. The bodies shall be
frequently washed and kept clean, and no solid waste shall be allowed to
accumulate therein. Whenever any such vehicle is being used for the
transportation of any solid waste in the City, it shall be securely closed.
Such vehicle shall be so loaded and operated that no solid waste of any kind
shall escape therefrom.
(1979 Code § 8.08.090; amd. 1999 Code)
ARTICLE D.  TOWING SERVICES
SECTION:
5-8D-1: Legislative Findings; Purpose
5-8D-2: Definitions
5-8D-3: Towing Notice Requirements; Illegal Towing
5-8D-4: Nonconsensual Removal Of Vehicle From Private Property
5-8D-5: Request For Nonconsensual Removal Of Vehicle From Parking Facility
5-8D-6: Impound Yards
5-8D-7: Signs
5-8D-8: Duty Of Vehicle Owner
5-8D-9: Duties Of Towing Operator Or Booting Company
5-8D-10: Financial Interest Of Property Owner And Towing Operators
5-8D-11: Revocation Of License
5-8D-12: Towing Authorization
5-8D-13: Exclusion
5-8D-14: Penalties
5-8D-1: LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS; PURPOSE:
The Ogden City council makes the following findings:
   A.   Existing practices associated with providing notice to vehicle owners
and drivers that their vehicle may be towed from private property are
inconsistent from property to property.
   B.   Parking disputes involve two (2) competing private property rights
which should be balanced: the property rights of the landowner and of the
vehicle owner.
   C.   Remedies available to an owner of real property exist at law for
trespass damages. Removal and retention of another's vehicle for a transitory
trespass and holding another's vehicle as security for payment of a disputed
debt without aid of court order or judgment, are extraordinary self-help
remedies. Use of such extraordinary self-help remedies should be limited to
circumstances where unequivocal notice is given and reasonable and timely means
of vehicle recovery are provided.
   D.   The inconvenience and cost to owners and drivers of vehicles that are
towed from private property without the vehicle owner's or operator's consent
is significant, especially when such removal can frequently be avoided with
more consistent notice procedures.
   E.   Owners of private property should have the ability to adequately
control access to, and use of their on site parking by members of the general
public.
   F.   It is in the best interest of vehicle owners and operators and private
property owners for uniform standards to be in place throughout the city to
control the nonconsensual removal of vehicles from private property.
   G.   Owners and operators of vehicles that have been nonconsensually removed
from private property should be treated fairly so that they can retrieve their
vehicle promptly.
   H.   Current ordinances have proven inadequate to deal with problems posed
by nonconsensual towing from private property.
   I.   The purpose of this article is to standardize notice requirements prior
to a nonconsensual vehicle removal from private property, to balance the
interests of vehicle owners and operators with the interests of private
property owners, and to provide methods whereby towing and booting services are
performed in a way that protects the interests of the public.
(Ord. 2016-35, 6-21-2016)
5-8D-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the designated
meanings:
BOOTING SERVICE: The use by a person, association, company or other entity of a
mechanical device attached to the wheel of a vehicle to immobilize or restrict
the movement of the vehicle from private property.
CONTROLLED LOT: A parking facility that utilizes one or more of the following
methods to control each public access to the facility and regulate the use of
all of the individual parking spaces at the time a vehicle enters the facility:
   A.   A system with a physical barrier around the perimeter of the facility,
including across each entry or exit to the facility that is not controlled by
an arm, door or attendant, and:
      1.   A permanent physical feature, such as an operating arm or door that
raises and lowers, that allows entry or exit of a vehicle to the facility and
with or without a system that distributes tickets for public use; or
      2.   A booth or barrier staffed by an attendant at each entry or exit to
the facility; or
   B.   A system with or without an on site payment system and with:
      1.   A physical barrier around the perimeter of the facility, not
including openings for vehicle entry and exit;
      2.   A numbering system where each parking space is designated with a
number, letter, or combination of numbers and letters affixed to the ground at
the entry of the parking space or, in the case of residential property with
more than four (4) dwellings, such as an apartment complex, condominium complex
or a planned unit development with private streets, affixed on a structure
directly over the entry to a parking space; and
      3.   A maximum width of any opening in the perimeter barrier not
exceeding forty two feet (42').
PARKING FACILITY: A portion of a lot or lots within the city that has been set
aside and designated for the parking of vehicles by customers, employees,
invitees or residents associated with the use of the lot or lots. A parking
facility does not include vehicle parking associated with a single-family
dwelling, duplex, or multiple-family dwelling with three (3) or four (4) units.
PARTIALLY CONTROLLED LOT: A parking facility in which access and use to some,
but not all, of the parking spaces meets the definition of a "controlled lot".
TOWING OPERATOR: An individual, association, company or other entity that
provides vehicle removal or transport services from private property to an
impound yard for a fee, including through use of a tow truck, wrecker, trailer
or other means of transportation.
TOWING SERVICE: The removal of a vehicle from private or public property by a
towing operator, beginning with the act of mechanically connecting a tow truck
to the vehicle and ending with the release of the vehicle to the owner or the
delivery of the vehicle to an impound yard.
UNCONTROLLED LOT: A parking facility that is not a controlled or partially
controlled lot.
(Ord. 2016-53, 10-27-2016)
5-8D-3: TOWING NOTICE REQUIREMENTS; ILLEGAL TOWING:
   A.   Police Department: Except when a vehicle is impounded under Utah Code
Annotated section 41-6a-1408, it shall be unlawful for a towing operator to tow
or otherwise move a vehicle within the city without the vehicle owner's
knowledge unless the operator has provided the notification described in
subsection B of this section and after complying with the other requirements of
this article.
   B.   Notification Of Police Department: A towing operator who has towed or
otherwise moved a vehicle within the city without the vehicle owner's knowledge
shall contact the city police department immediately upon arriving at the place
of storage or impound of the vehicle, and notify the department of the
following:
      1.   The location of the vehicle;
      2.   The date, time, and location from which the vehicle was removed;
      3.   The reasons for the removal of the vehicle;
      4.   The person who requested the removal of the vehicle; and
      5.   The vehicle's description, including its identification number and
license number.
(Ord. 2016-35, 6-21-2016)
5-8D-4: NONCONSENSUAL REMOVAL OF VEHICLE FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY:
   A.   Private Property: It shall be unlawful for a towing operator or any
other person to tow or otherwise move a vehicle or authorize the removal
thereof from any private road or driveway or from any other privately owned
land or property within the city limits without the consent of the owner or
operator of the vehicle, unless:
      1.   The towing operator is acting as an agent for a legal repossession
of a motor vehicle;
      2.   The vehicle is parked on private property in violation of another
provision of this code and the property owner has been given notice of the
violation and an opportunity to remove the vehicle;
      3.   The vehicle is parked on real property occupied by a single- family
dwelling, duplex, or multiple-family dwelling with three (3) or four (4) units,
including in the driveway, the drive approach or an easement of ingress and
egress to the property, and the vehicle operator is:
         a.   Not within the vehicle; and
         b.   Not an invitee of the owner or a legal occupant of the real
property;
      4.   The vehicle is an abandoned vehicle as defined in Utah Code
Annotated section 41-6a-1408;
      5.   The vehicle is parked in a location where parking is prohibited by
law or where it is reasonably apparent that the location is not open to parking
under any circumstances;
      6.   The vehicle is parked on private property, including in an
uncontrolled, controlled or partially controlled lot, and a written notice of
an intent to tow or remove said vehicle has been placed on the windshield or
front driver's side window of said vehicle by the private property owner or the
owner's agent for a period of twenty four (24) hours prior to the towing
service;
      7.   The vehicle is parked in a controlled lot or in a controlled portion
of a partially controlled lot, and:
         a.   The owner or operator of the facility has posted signs meeting
the requirements of section
5-8D-7 of this article;
         b.   At least fifteen (15) minutes have passed since the vehicle is
observed in violation of the private property parking regulations described on
the sign required by section
5-8D-7 of this article;
         c.   The owner, operator or agent of the owner or operator of the
facility makes a written or telephonic request for each towing service of a
particular vehicle that complies with section
5-8D-5 of this article; and
         d.   The vehicle is removed to an impound yard that complies with
section
5-8D-6 of this article; or
      8.   The vehicle is parked in an individually marked space of an
uncontrolled parking lot or in an individually marked space in the uncontrolled
portion of a partially controlled lot, and:
         a.   The owner or operator of the facility has posted signs meeting
the requirements of subsection 5-8D-7E of this article;
         b.   At least thirty (30) minutes have passed since the vehicle is
observed in violation of the private property parking regulations described on
the sign required by section
5-8D-7 of this article;
         c.   The owner, operator or agent of the owner or operator of the
facility makes a written or telephonic request for each towing service of a
particular vehicle that complies with section
5-8D-5 of this article; and
         d.   The vehicle is removed to an impound yard that complies with
section
5-8D-6 of this article.
   B.   Other Lawful Remedies Permitted: Nothing in this article restricts a
private property owner from pursuing any other lawful remedy to which such
person may be entitled when a vehicle is parked on the owner's property without
permission, including an action or claim for trespass or the collection of
financial penalties or damages from the vehicle owner or operator.
(Ord. 2016-53, 10-27-2016)
5-8D-5: REQUEST FOR NONCONSENSUAL REMOVAL OF VEHICLE FROM PARKING FACILITY:
A written or telephonic request for the nonconsensual removal of a vehicle from
a parking facility:
   A.   May be made by the owner, the owner's agent or employee in charge of
the parking facility, or by the specific person for whom an individual space
has been marked in accordance with section
5-8D-7 of this article, and who has personal knowledge of a violation of the
private property parking regulations;
   B.   Shall certify the specific conditions of the private property parking
regulations described on the sign required by section
5-8D-7 of this article that the vehicle is violating; and
   C.   May not be made by a person who is employed by, related to, or
affiliated in any way with the wrecker or towing operator.
(Ord. 2016-35, 6-21-2016)
5-8D-6: IMPOUND YARDS:
Each impound yard to which a vehicle is removed under this article shall:
   A.   Be located in Ogden City or within one mile of the city limits;
   B.   Comply with all applicable state laws and regulations;
   C.   Have one or more individuals on site during normal business hours, or
if a request for release of a vehicle is made outside of normal business hours,
who can respond to the yard within thirty (30) minutes of the request for
release of the vehicle and who are authorized to receive payments and release
the vehicle.
(Ord. 2016-53, 10-27-2016)
5-8D-7: SIGNS:
   A.   Each sign required by this article must comply with the size, location,
color, layout, and lettering height requirements of this section.
   B.   A towing operator may not perform a towing service and a booting
service may not be performed at a controlled lot or the controlled portion of a
partially controlled lot unless a sign prohibiting unauthorized vehicles is:
      1.   Facing and conspicuously visible to the driver of a vehicle that
enters the facility;
      2.   A minimum of eighteen inches (18") wide by twenty four inches (24")
high and made of reflective material;
      3.   Located, for a controlled lot, within three feet (3') of the right
or left side of each driveway, curb cut, or entry through which a vehicle is
able to enter the property, including an entry from an alley or other location
abutting the property, except that the sign shall be located on the right side
of the driveway, curb cut or entry if the opening is more than sixteen feet
(16') wide and a sign shall be located on both sides of the driveway, curb cut
or entry if the opening is more than thirty two feet (32') wide;
      4.   Located, for the controlled portion of a partially controlled lot,
within three feet (3') of the right or left side of each driveway, curb cut or
drive lane through which a vehicle is able to enter the controlled portion of
the lot, including an entry from an alley or other location abutting the
property, except that the sign shall be located on the right side of the
driveway, curb cut or entry if the opening is more than sixteen feet (16') wide
and a sign shall be located on both sides of the driveway, curb cut or entry if
the opening is more than thirty two feet (32') wide;
      5.   Permanently mounted on a pole, post, permanent wall, or barrier on
the property; and
      6.   Installed so that the bottom edge of the sign is no lower than three
feet (3') and no higher than five feet (5') above ground level.
   C.   Each sign for a controlled lot or the controlled portion of a partially
controlled lot must be designed and formatted with:
      1.   A bright red international towing symbol as contained in the 2009
edition of the "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices", which is a solid
silhouette of a tow truck towing a vehicle on a generally rectangular white
background, at least four inches (4") in height, on the uppermost portion of
the sign or on a separate sign placed immediately above the sign described in
subsection B of this section;
      2.   The portion of the sign immediately below the international towing
symbol having in white lettering at least two inches (2") in height on a bright
red background, the words, as applicable:
         a.   "Towing And Booting Enforced/Remolque Y Cerradura De Rueda
Forzado";
         b.   "Towing Enforced/Remolque Forzada"; or
         c.   "Booting Enforced/Cerradura De Rueda Forzado";
      3.   The next lower portion of the sign having in bright red letters, at
least one inch (1") in height, on a white background:
         a.   A statement describing who may park on the property and
prohibiting all others; and
         b.   The days and hours of towing and booting enforcement; and
      4.   The bottommost portion of the sign containing white lettering, at
least one inch (1") in height, on a bright red background listing:
         a.   The internet website address that provides access to towing
database information in accordance with Utah Code Annotated section 41-6a-1406;
         b.   The name and phone number of the towing operator that performs
the towing service for the property; or
         c.   The name of the property owner and the phone number of the
property manager or management office that is authorized to order the towing
service.
   D.   The owner of a parking facility who complies with subsection C of this
section may impose further restrictions on individual parking spaces within the
controlled lot or the controlled portion of the partially controlled lot by
installing or painting a weather resistant sign or notice on a pole, post,
permanent wall, or permanent barrier so that the sign or notice is in front of
a vehicle that is parked in the space and the rear of which is at the entrance
of the space so that:
      1.   The top edge of the sign is no higher than six feet (6') above
ground level;
      2.   The sign or notice includes an indication that the space is reserved
for a particular unit number, person, or type of person and stating
"Unauthorized Vehicles May Be Towed"; and
      3.   The letters on the sign or notice are at least two inches (2") in
height and are in contrast to the color of the wall or barrier so they can be
read during the day and at night. The letters are not required to be
illuminated or made of reflective material.
   E.   A towing operator may not perform a towing service and a booting
service may not be performed at an uncontrolled parking lot or the uncontrolled
portion of a partially controlled lot unless:
      1.   The parking space occupied by the vehicle to be removed is marked
with a sign:
         a.   At the end of the restricted parking space so that the sign is in
front of a vehicle that is parked in the space and the rear of which is at the
entrance of the space;
         b.   The letters of which are at least one inch (1") in height and are
in contrast to the color of the curb, wall, or barrier so they can be read
during the day and at night indicating that the space is reserved for a
particular use, person, or type of person and stating in letters which are at
least two inches (2") in height "Unauthorized Vehicles May Be Towed";
         c.   The letters of which are not required to be illuminated or made
of reflective material;
         d.   The bottom of which includes, in letters at least one inch (1")
in height:
            (1)   The internet website address that provides access to towing
database information in accordance with Utah Code Annotated section 41-6a-1406;
            (2)   The name and phone number of the towing operator that
performs the towing service for the property; or
            (3)   The name of the property owner and the phone number of the
property manager or management office that authorized the towing service.
         e.   Permanently mounted on a pole, post, permanent wall, or permanent
barrier; and
         f.   Installed so that the top edge of the sign is no higher than six
feet (6') above ground level; or
      2.   A written notice of an intent to tow or remove said vehicle has been
placed on the windshield or the front driver's side window of a vehicle by the
private property owner or the owner's agent for a period of twenty four (24)
hours prior to the towing or booting service.
(Ord. 2016-35, 6-21-2016; amd. Ord. 2016-53, 10-27-2016)
5-8D-8: DUTY OF VEHICLE OWNER:
If the owner, authorized operator, or authorized agent of the owner of the
vehicle retrieves a vehicle before it has been removed from private property by
a towing operator, such person shall immediately move the vehicle to a lawful
location.
(Ord. 2016-35, 6-21-2016)
5-8D-9: DUTIES OF TOWING OPERATOR OR BOOTING COMPANY:
A towing operator, booting company, or impound yard operator, as applicable:
   A.   Shall release a vehicle that is in the possession of the towing
operator if the owner, authorized operator, or authorized agent of the owner of
the vehicle, is attempting to retrieve said vehicle before the vehicle is
removed from the property and pays the fee established by Utah law.
   B.   May not require the owner, authorized operator, or authorized agent of
the owner of the vehicle to sign any waiver of the owner's right to receive
compensation for damages to the owner's vehicle as a condition of retrieving a
vehicle that was removed without the vehicle owner's, operator's or agent's
consent;
   C.   Shall, prior to mechanically connecting a vehicle to a tow truck for a
nonconsensual towing service or booting a vehicle:
      1.   Document through the use of date and time stamped digital
photography or digital video, the precise nature of the violation of the
private property parking regulations; and
      2.   Document in writing the name of the private property owner or
custodian who requested the nonconsensual towing operation or booting, the time
the request for a towing operation was received, and the conditions of the
private property parking regulations described on the sign required by section
5-8D-7 of this article that the vehicle was violating;
   D.   Shall maintain the information described in subsection C of this
section for a period of one year and make the information available upon
request to the driver or owner of the vehicle that was nonconsensually removed
or booted, or to the vehicle owner or owner's agent, and to any authorized
officer; and
   E.   Within the first seventy two (72) hours after a vehicle has been
nonconsensually removed from private property or booted:
      1.   May only assess and collect the state authorized tow fee, including
any applicable fuel surcharge, and daily storage fee; and
      2.   May not assess or collect additional storage or other fees,
including an after hours fee or any other fee based on inconvenience to the
wrecker, towing operator, booting company or impound yard, as a condition of
releasing the vehicle.
   F.   Shall comply with state law.
(Ord. 2016-35, 6-21-2016)
5-8D-10: FINANCIAL INTEREST OF PROPERTY OWNER AND TOWING OPERATORS:
   A.   A towing operator, impound yard, or any other person may not directly
or indirectly give anything of value to a property owner, lessee, or agent of
the owner in connection with:
      1.   An agreement or proposed agreement to provide nonconsensual removal
and subsequent storage of a vehicle or vehicles from the property;
      2.   The nonconsensual removal and subsequent storage of a vehicle from
the property; or
      3.   The booting of a vehicle located on the property.
   B.   A towing operator may not have a direct or indirect monetary interest
in private property:
      1.   From which the towing operator for compensation conducts the
nonconsensual removal of vehicles; or
      2.   On which a booting company for compensation installs boots on
unauthorized vehicles.
   C.   A property owner, lessee, or an agent of a property owner, may not
directly or indirectly accept anything of value from:
      1.   A towing operator in connection with the nonconsensual removal of a
vehicle from the property; or
      2.   A booting company in connection with booting a vehicle in a parking
facility.
   D.   A property owner may not have a direct or indirect monetary interest
in:
      1.   A towing operator that, for compensation, conducts the nonconsensual
removal of unauthorized vehicles from the property in which the property owner
has an interest; or
      2.   A booting company that for compensation boots vehicles on property
in which the property owner has an interest.
(Ord. 2016-35, 6-21-2016)
5-8D-11: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   A.   If any holder of business license for a towing operator, booting
service or impound yard fails to comply with all applicable laws, ordinances
and regulations provided in this article, the city may revoke such license or
suspend the same until the licensee complies with said laws, ordinances and
regulations.
   B.   A towing operator and impound yard may not collect and shall
immediately refund any fees collected for a towing operation and impound
conducted in violation of this article.
(Ord. 2016-35, 6-21-2016)
5-8D-12: TOWING AUTHORIZATION:
Nothing in this article shall be construed to authorize the towing and/or make
any towing legal where such would otherwise be illegal, whether criminally or
civilly.
(Ord. 2016-35, 6-21-2016)
5-8D-13: EXCLUSION:
The provisions of this article shall not apply to any towing of a vehicle or
storage thereof:
   A.   Where such vehicle is being or has been impounded by the police
department pursuant to title 10, chapter 8 of this code or by Utah law; or
   B.   Where the vehicle is removed from property pursuant to a violation of
this code.
(Ord. 2016-35, 6-21-2016)
5-8D-14: PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article may be
charged with a class C misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished as set forth in title 1, chapter 4, article A of this code.
   B.   A person is subject to a civil penalty pursuant to title 1, chapter 4,
article B of this code of five hundred dollars ($500.00), and no warning period
applies, for a violation of:
      1.   Subsection
5-8D-4A6 of this article;
      2.   Subsection
5-8D-4A7 of this article;
      3.   Subsection
5-8D-4A8 of this article;
      4.   Subsection
5-8D-7B of this article;
      5.   Subsection
5-8D-7E of this article; or
      6.   Section
5-8D-9 of this article.
   C.   Failure of a person to correct a violation of this article not
described in subsection B of this section, after notice of violation and
expiration of any applicable warning period, may be enforced by imposition of
the following daily civil penalties pursuant to title 1, chapter 4, article B
of this code:
      1.   The first civil citation issued after expiration of the warning
period shall subject the responsible party to the initial penalty of one
hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00).
      2.   The second civil citation issued after expiration of the warning
period and the prior imposition of the initial penalty shall subject the
responsible party to the intermediate penalty of two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00).
      3.   Any subsequent civil citation issued after expiration of the warning
period and the prior imposition of the intermediate penalty, or any reoccurring
violation under section
1-4B-6 of this code, shall subject the responsible party to the maximum penalty
of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(Ord. 2016-35, 6-21-2016)
CHAPTER 9
HOTELS, MOTELS, BOARDING HOUSES AND ROOMING HOUSES
SECTION:
5-9-1: Definitions
5-9-2: License Required
5-9-3: Application; Investigation; Issuance; Fee
5-9-4: Revocation Of License; Conditions
5-9-5: Register To Be Kept; Penalty
5-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
BOARDING HOUSE: Any place where rooms are rented, furnished or unfurnished,
together with board, such as a bed and breakfast inn.
ROOMING HOUSE: Any place where rooms are rented or kept for rental for lodging
or sleeping purposes by the day, week or month, where such rental does not
include board, by whatever name such place is denominated, such as hotel,
motel, or residential vacation rental.
(Ord. 2016-61, 12-20-2016)
5-9-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful to keep, conduct, operate, or maintain any rooming house or
boarding house without first obtaining a license to do so from the city.
(1979 Code § 5.32.020; amd. Ord. 88-49, 12-22-1988; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-9-3: APPLICATION; INVESTIGATION; ISSUANCE; FEE:
   A.   Information Required: Application for a rooming house or boarding house
license shall be made to the business license coordinator and shall contain the
following information under oath:
      1.   The location of the rooming house or boarding house;
      2.   The number of rooms for lodging or sleeping purposes contained in
such house;
      3.   The number of persons which such house will accommodate with rooms;
and
      4.   Whether such rooming house is a boarding house which provides board,
or food service, other than by a licensed restaurant located on the premises.
   B.   Investigation By Police Chief: The application described in subsection
A of this section shall be referred to the chief of police, who shall, within
ten (10) days after receiving the application, report to the business license
coordinator whether:
      1.   The applicant is allowing any violation of state statute or city
ordinance to occur on the premises;
      2.   Any alcoholic beverages have been sold or kept for sale on the
premises in a manner contrary to law;
      3.   The owner, keeper or proprietor fails to keep a register as required
or fails to open such register for inspection as required under section
5-9-5 of this chapter; or
      4.   The rooming house or boarding house is not conducted in a quiet,
lawful or peaceable manner.
   C.   Other Investigations: The business license coordinator shall refer the
original application to the county health department, the fire department,
inspection services division and the community development department, which
shall, within ten (10) days after receiving the application, report to the
business license coordinator as to whether the rooming house or boarding house
complies with all applicable laws, ordinances and regulations. Should it
subsequently appear to that any law or ordinance is being violated, such fact
shall at once be reported to the business license coordinator.
   D.   Review; Issuance Conditions: The mayor, or the mayor's designee, after
receiving the recommendation of the chief of police and the other investigating
departments and divisions, shall act upon the application in respect to
granting or denying the same as he or she shall deem just and proper.
   E.   Fee: The fee shall be as determined in chapter 1, article B of this
title.
(1979 Code § 5.32.030; amd. Ord. 88-49, 12-22-1988; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-9-4: REVOCATION OF LICENSE; CONDITIONS:
In addition to the reasons provided for in sections
5-1C-3 and
5-1C-4 of this title, a rooming house or boarding house license may be denied,
suspended or revoked for any of the following reasons:
   A.   Violation Of Law: The licensee is allowing any violation of state
statute or city ordinance to occur on the premises;
   B.   Unlawful Sale Or Maintenance Of Alcoholic Beverages: Any alcoholic
beverages have been sold or kept for sale on the premises in a manner contrary
to law;
   C.   Register Not Maintained: The owner, keeper or proprietor fails to keep
a register as required or fails to open such register for inspection as
required under section
5-9-5 of this chapter; or
   D.   Conducted In Unlawful Manner: If it is determined by the mayor, or the
mayor's designee, that such rooming house or boarding house is not conducted in
a quiet, lawful or peaceable manner.
(1979 Code § 5.32.040; amd. Ord. 88-49, 12-22-1988; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-9-5: REGISTER TO BE KEPT; PENALTY:
   A.   Contents: Every owner, keeper, proprietor of any rooming house shall
keep a register wherein he/she shall require all guests, roomers or lodgers to
inscribe their names and places of residence upon their procuring lodging or a
room or accommodations. Said register shall also show the day of the month and
year when said name was inscribed and the room occupied or to be occupied by
said lodger or roomer or guest in such rooming house or boarding house. In the
event that such guest or his party travels by means of motor vehicle, the
register shall specify the make, type and license number of the motor vehicle
and the year of registration. Said register shall at all times be open for
inspection to all police officers and other "authorized officers" as defined in
section
5-1A-1 of this title. Said register shall be kept in a conspicuous place in
said rooming house or boarding house, and shall at all times be open to
inspection by the lodgers, roomers or guests of said rooming house or boarding
house, and the chief of police or any peace officer or other authorized
officer.
   B.   Guests Must Register: Before furnishing any lodging, room or
accommodations to any guest at any rooming house or boarding house, the
proprietor, manager or owner thereof, shall require the person to whom such
lodgings, room or accommodations are furnished, to inscribe his name and place
of residence in such register kept for that purpose as hereinbefore provided,
and shall set opposite said name the time when said name was so inscribed and
also the room occupied by such lodger, roomer or guest. In the event that such
guest or members of the guest's party travel by means of motor vehicle, the
register shall specify the make, type and license number of the motor vehicle
and the year of registration.
   C.   Penalty: Any person, be he the owner, proprietor, clerk or any other
person having regular or temporary charge of any boarding house or rooming
house, who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be subject
to enforcement as provided in this title.
(Ord. 2011-51, 10-25-2011)
CHAPTER 10
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL DWELLINGS 1
SECTION:
5-10-1: Definitions
5-10-2: License Required
5-10-3: Application For License
5-10-4: Fee; Expiration; Penalties For Late Payment
5-10-5: Approval Of Regulatory License For Multiple-Family Rental Dwellings
5-10-6: Suspension, Revocation Or Denial
5-10-7: Reserved
5-10-8: Code Violations Respecting Two Or Fewer Rental Dwellings
5-10-9: License Amendment
 
Notes
  1. Prior ordinance history: 1979 Code §§ 5.47.010, 5.47.020, 5.47.030,
1 5.47.040, 5.47.050, 5.47.060, 5.47.070; Ord. 95-10, 3-7-1995; Ord. 95-49, 6-
  27-1995; Ord. 97-29, 5-20-1997; Ord. 97-94, 12-16-1997; 1999 Code.
5-10-1: DEFINITIONS: The following terms shall have the designated meanings for
purposes of this chapter:
DWELLING UNIT: As such term is defined in the city's zoning ordinances.
MULTIPLE-FAMILY RENTAL DWELLING: A rental dwelling containing three (3) or more
dwelling units within one building and where all such dwelling units are held
in single ownership.
RENTAL DWELLING: A building or portion of a building that is used or designated
for use as a residence by one or more persons and is either:
   A.   Available to be rented, loaned, leased, or hired out for a period of
one month or longer; or
   B.   Arranged, designed, or built to be rented, loaned, leased, or hired out
for a period of one month or longer.
(Ord. 2004-71, 10-12-2004, eff. 12-31-2004)
5-10-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person, as owner, lessee or agent thereof, to keep,
conduct, operate or maintain any rental dwelling within the city without first
obtaining a valid business license as provided under this chapter. A regulatory
business license shall be required for a multiple-family rental dwelling. Only
a nonregulatory business license shall be required for a rental dwelling
containing two (2) or fewer dwelling units within one building, which license
requirement is imposed for revenue purposes only. Only one regulatory license
shall be required for any person or entity owning or operating multiple-family
rental dwellings subject to licensing and regulation. Only one nonregulatory
business license shall be required for any person or entity owning or operating
rental dwellings containing two (2) or fewer dwelling units within one
building.
(Ord. 2004-71, 10-12-2004, eff. 12-31-2004)
5-10-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Information Required: Application for license shall be made on forms
provided by the city, which shall contain, at a minimum, the following
information:
      1.   The location and address of all buildings containing rental
dwellings, which are owned, operated or maintained by the applicant;
      2.   The number of rental dwelling units in each building;
      3.   The name, address and telephone number of each of the following: the
applicant, the owner, the local operating agent, the resident manager, and the
designation of a legal representative and agent for service of each corporate
owner, who must reside in the state.
Separate forms shall be provided for the regulatory business license required
for multiple-family dwellings and the nonregulatory business license required
for a rental dwelling containing two (2) or fewer rental dwellings per
building.
   B.   Affidavit Of Compliance: The applicant for a regulatory business
license for a multiple-family rental dwelling may provide, as part of the
application, a written affidavit, signed by the applicant, verifying compliance
with applicable codes and ordinances and that the premises are reasonably safe
for occupancy as residential dwellings, which affidavit shall be made on a form
approved by the business license coordinator. Such self-verification of
compliance may be accepted by the business license coordinator as meeting the
investigation and inspection requirements of section
5-10-5 of this chapter; provided, that self-verification shall not be
sufficient if the premises have been found in violation of such applicable
codes and ordinances within the preceding twelve (12) month period.
(Ord. 2004-71, 10-12-2004, eff. 12-31-2004)
5-10-4: FEE; EXPIRATION; PENALTIES FOR LATE PAYMENT:
   A.   License Fee: The license fee for rental dwellings shall be as set forth
in section
5-1B-2 of this title.
   B.   Expiration: All licenses for rental dwellings shall expire at the end
of the licensing term, and thereafter renewed, as provided in section
5-1A-13 of this title.
   C.   Penalties: Penalties for late payment shall be assessed in accordance
with the provisions of section
5-1A-14 of this title.
(Ord. 2004-71, 10-12-2004, eff. 12-31-2004; amd. Ord. 2006-42, 7-11-2006)
5-10-5: APPROVAL OF REGULATORY LICENSE FOR MULTIPLE-FAMILY RENTAL DWELLINGS:
   A.   Referral; Investigation: The original application for a multiple-family
rental dwelling shall be referred to the building official and fire marshal and
to the Weber-Morgan health department. Each of which shall, within ten (10)
days after receiving such application, make an investigation and inspection of
the proposed licensed premises and shall report in writing to the business
license coordinator whether the premises to be licensed meet applicable codes
and ordinances and the same are reasonably safe for occupancy as residential
dwellings.
   B.   Subsequent Inspections: If the city performs an inspection of a
multiple-family rental dwelling under the provisions of this section and
approves it for licensing, the city shall not inspect that multiple-family
rental dwelling during the next thirty six (36) months, under authority of the
provisions of this chapter, unless the city has reasonable cause to believe
that a condition in the multiple-family rental dwelling is in violation of an
applicable law or ordinance. The above restriction shall not apply to self-
verifications of compliance as permitted under section
5-10-3 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2004-71, 10-12-2004, eff. 12-31-2004)
5-10-6: SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OR DENIAL:
A license under this chapter may be denied, suspended or revoked under the
provisions of chapter 1, article C of this title, as such provisions may be
applicable.
(Ord. 2004-71, 10-12-2004, eff. 12-31-2004)
5-10-7: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2004-71, 10-12-2004, eff. 12-31-2004; amd. Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
5-10-8: CODE VIOLATIONS RESPECTING TWO OR FEWER RENTAL DWELLINGS:
If a code violation is determined to exist in a building licensed for two (2)
or fewer rental dwelling units, the violation shall not be cause for denial,
suspension or revocation of the business license required herein. Enforcement
actions respecting such violations shall be taken independently of any
licensing action. Issuance of a license shall not indicate compliance with
other city ordinances.
(Ord. 2004-71, 10-12-2004, eff. 12-31-2004)
5-10-9: LICENSE AMENDMENT:
Any licensee who acquires additional rental dwellings after licensure but
before renewal shall amend the license to add the rental dwellings to the
license within thirty (30) days of acquisition and pay such fees as are
required in section
5-1B-2 of this title, which fees may be prorated as provided in subsection 5-
1A-13B of this title.
(Ord. 2004-71, 10-12-2004, eff. 12-31-2004)
CHAPTER 11
MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS OR RECREATIONAL COACH PARKS
SECTION:
5-11-1: Definitions
5-11-2: License Required
5-11-3: Application For License
5-11-4: Fee For License
5-11-5: Approval Of License
5-11-6: Suspension, Revocation Or Denial
5-11-7: Transfer
5-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
MANUFACTURED HOME: A transportable factory-built housing unit constructed on or
after June 15, 1976, according to the Federal Home Construction and Safety
Standards Act of 1974 (HUD Code), in one or more sections, which, in the
traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet
or more in length, or when erected on-site, is four hundred (400) or more
square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used
as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and
electrical systems.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK: A parcel of land, held and operated in single
ownership, which has been planned and improved for the placement of
manufactured homes for residential use as a single- family dwelling, with or
without a permanent foundation. A manufactured home park may include as an
accessory use an area designated as a recreational coach park. Accessory
buildings or structures for park management or park resident use not exceeding
two (2) stories or twenty four feet (24') in height shall be permitted as part
of such park. A mobile home park approved prior to July 1, 1997, shall be
considered to be a manufactured home park.
MOBILE HOME: A transportable factory-built housing unit built prior to June 15,
1976, in accordance with a state mobile home code which existed prior to the
Federal Manufactured Housing and Safety Standards Act (HUD Code).
MOBILE HOME PARK: A parcel of land, approved prior to June 6, 1997, which was
planned and improved for the placement of mobile homes for residential use.
RECREATIONAL COACH: A vehicle such as a recreational trailer, tent camper,
trailer, truck camper, travel trailer, camp car or other vehicle with or
without motive power, designed and/or constructed to travel on the public
thoroughfare in accordance with the provisions of the Utah Motor Vehicle Code,
and designed for the use of human habitation.
RECREATIONAL COACH PARK: Any area or tract of land or a separate designated
section with a manufactured home park where one or more spaces are rented or
held out for rent to owners or users of recreational coaches for a temporary
time not to exceed two (2) weeks.
(1979 Code § 5.71.010; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-11-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person, as owner, lessee or agent thereof, to keep,
conduct, operate or maintain any manufactured home park or recreational coach
park within the City without first obtaining a valid business license, as
provided in this Chapter, in the name of such person, for the specific park.
(1979 Code § 5.71.020; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-11-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Application for license shall be made on forms provided by the city, which
shall contain, at a minimum, the following information:
   A.   The location and address of the park; and
   B.   The name, address and telephone number of each of the following: the
applicant, the owner, the local operating agent, the resident manager, and the
designation of a legal representative and agent for service of each corporate
owner, who must reside in the state.
(1979 Code § 5.71.030; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-11-4: FEE FOR LICENSE:
The license fee for a manufactured home park or recreational coach park shall
be as set forth in section
5-1B-2 of this title.
(1979 Code § 5.71.040; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-11-5: APPROVAL OF LICENSE:
The application shall be referred to the manager of inspection services and
fire marshal and to the county health department, each of which shall, within
ten (10) days after receiving such application, make an investigation and
inspection of the proposed licensed premises and shall report in writing to the
business license coordinator whether the premises to be licensed meets
applicable codes and ordinances and the same are reasonably safe for
residential occupancy.
(1979 Code § 5.71.050; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-11-6: SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OR DENIAL:
A license may be denied, suspended or revoked under the provisions of chapter
1, article C of this title.
(1979 Code § 5.71.060; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-11-7: TRANSFER:
Every person holding a license shall give notice in writing to the city,
through the business license coordinator, within five (5) days after having
sold, transferred, given away, or otherwise disposed of interest in or control
of any manufactured home park or recreational coach park. Such notice shall
include the name and address of the person succeeding to the ownership or
control of such park. Upon application in writing for transfer of the license
and deposit of a fee of ten dollars ($10.00), the license shall be transferred
if the park is in compliance with all applicable provisions of this code and
regulations issued hereunder.
(1979 Code § 5.71.070; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
CHAPTER 12
PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS
ARTICLE A.  PAWNBROKERS 1
SECTION:
5-12A-1: Definition
5-12A-2: License
5-12A-3: Application; Approval
5-12A-4: Rules And Regulations
5-12A-5: Prohibited Acts
5-12A-6: Denial, Suspension Or Revocation Of License
 
Notes
1 1. UCA §§
  11-6-1 et seq., 76-6-408.
5-12A-1: DEFINITION:
"Pawnbroker" means any person or persons who lend money on deposit or pledge of
personal property; or deal in the purchase or possession of personal property
on condition of selling the same back again to the vendor or pledgor at a
stipulated price; or who purchase or take any personal property, with an
agreement or understanding to resell at any time for a stipulated price or any
price to the vendor; or who take such personal property on condition that it
may be redeemed; or who lend or advance money on personal property, and take or
receive such personal property in their possession.
(1979 Code § 5.38.010; amd. 1999 Code)
5-12A-2: LICENSE:
   A.   Required: It is unlawful for any person to carry on the business of
pawnbroker without first having obtained the license required by this article
and having paid the license fee therefor as prescribed in chapter 1, article B
of this title. Any person engaging in or carrying on the business of a
pawnbroker without first having obtained the license required in this article
shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day that such business
shall be carried on without such license.
   B.   Bond: Prior to the issuance of any license for the business of a
pawnbroker, the applicant therefor shall file with the business license
coordinator a bond with at least two (2) sufficient sureties in the penal sum
of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), in such form as shall be approved by the
city attorney, conditioned for the faithful observance of all laws and
ordinances respecting pawnbrokers. The form of the bond and the sufficiency of
sureties, which shall be at least two (2) in number, shall be approved by the
city attorney.
(1979 Code §§ 5.38.020, 5.38.030; amd. Ord. 97-94, 12-16-1997; 1999 Code)
5-12A-3: APPLICATION; APPROVAL:
All applications for a license to carry on the business of a pawnbroker shall
be submitted to the business license coordinator and shall be accompanied by a
petition signed by at least ten (10) owners of real property in the city
certifying to the good character of the applicant. The mayor or the mayor's
designee has the authority to grant or deny the license. In the event of a
denial, the applicant may appeal the denial to the district court.
(1979 Code § 5.38.040; amd. 1999 Code)
5-12A-4: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   Licensee Liable For Employee Acts: The holder of a pawnbroker's license
is liable for any and all acts of his employees and for any violation by them
of any of the provisions of this article.
   B.   Hours Of Business: It is unlawful for any pawnbroker to receive any
goods by way of pawn or pledge before the hour of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. or
after ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
   C.   Ordinances Posted: It is unlawful for any person to conduct or transact
a pawnbroking business unless he shall keep posted in a conspicuous place in
his place of business a copy of all ordinances relating to pawnbrokers.
   D.   Recordkeeping; Inspection: Every pawnbroker shall keep a book in which
shall be written in ink, in the English language, at the time of each loan or
receipt of personal property, an accurate account and description of the goods,
articles or things pawned or received, which shall include the number and make
of all articles, where such articles have a number or are manufactured by any
particular manufacturer; the amount loaned or advanced thereon; the time, both
day and hour, of pawning or receiving such goods, article or thing; and the
true name and residence of the person pawning or delivering the goods, article
or thing; and no entry made in said book shall be erased, obliterated or
defaced, and the said book, as well as every article or thing pawned, pledged
or deposited, shall be open to the inspection of any peace officer or other
"authorized officer" as defined in section
5-1A-1 of this title at all reasonable times.
   E.   Receipts; Inspection: It is unlawful for any pawnbroker to receive or
accept any article of personal property as a pawn or pledge, or upon which
money is lent or advanced, without issuing and delivering to the person or
persons delivering such article a receipt for the same, which shall bear the
date, both day and hour, when such goods are received and a description of the
article so pawned or deposited with the pawnbroker, as set out in subsection D
of this section, and the pawnbroker shall keep on file in his office a
duplicate of said receipt, which shall be open to the inspection of any peace
officer or other authorized officer at all reasonable times. Said receipts
shall be numbered and a record kept thereof.
   F.   Pledged Articles: When a pledge is redeemed, the pawnbroker shall place
and keep on file the returned pawn ticket or receipt for such pledge, which
ticket or receipt shall at all times be open to the inspection of any peace
officer or other authorized officer. In the event of the loss of the pawn
ticket or receipt by the pledgor of any pledge, the pawnbroker, before allowing
a redemption of the pledge, shall require the pledgor to summon a peace officer
in whose presence the pledge shall be redeemed and restored to the pledgor.
   G.   Forfeited Articles: It is unlawful, in all cases in which articles
pledged have been forfeited, for a sale or other disposition thereof to be made
by the pledgee within the period of three (3) months after such forfeiture.
(Ord. 2011-51, 10-25-2011)
5-12A-5: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   Receiving Goods From Designated Persons: It is unlawful for any
pawnbroker to receive any goods, articles or things in pawn or pledge from a
person who is intoxicated or known to be a habitual drunkard, a thief or a
mentally deficient person, or from a person under the age of eighteen (18),
except as permitted in subsection C of this section.
   B.   Employment Of Persons Under Sixteen: It is unlawful for any pawnbroker
to employ any clerk or person under the age of sixteen (16) years to receive
any pledge or make any loan.
   C.   Receiving Goods From Minors: No person licensed as set forth in this
article shall take or receive any bond or pledge for money loaned, any
property, bonds, notes or securities, articles or other valuable things, or
purchase any such property from any minor, or the ownership of which is in or
is claimed by any minor, or which may be in the possession of, or under the
control of, any minor, without the written consent or authority of the parent
or guardian of said minor.
(1979 Code §§ 5.38.130, 5.38.140, 5.38.150; amd. Ord. 88-39, 9-22-1988; 1999
Code)
5-12A-6: DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Denials, suspensions or revocations shall be handled in accordance with the
provisions of chapter 1, article C of this title, or its successor.
(1979 Code § 5.38.050; amd. 1999 Code)
ARTICLE B.  SECONDHAND AND JUNK DEALERS 1
SECTION:
5-12B-1: Definitions
5-12B-2: Records Maintained
5-12B-3: Daily Report
5-12B-4: Rules And Regulations
 
Notes
1 1. UCA §§
  11-6-1 et seq., 76-6-408, 76-10-901 et seq.
5-12B-1: DEFINITIONS:
JUNK DEALER: Any person engaged in buying old metals, glass, rags, paper or
other junk for the purpose of reselling in substantially the same form is
declared to be a "junk dealer".
SECONDHAND DEALER: Any person who keeps a store, office or place of business
for the purchase or sale of secondhand clothing or garments of any kind, or
secondhand goods, wares, musical instruments, curiosities, or other
merchandise, except books, stamps and coins, or who engages in the business of
dealing in secondhand goods, is declared to be a "secondhand dealer". Persons
whose principal business is the sale of new musical instruments, new appliances
or new furniture and who acquire such secondhand items only as trade ins
incidental to their principal business are not secondhand dealers.
(1979 Code § 5.52.010)
5-12B-2: RECORDS MAINTAINED:
   A.   Secondhand Dealer:
      1.   It is unlawful for any secondhand dealer to fail to keep a
substantial and well bound book in which he shall enter at the time of
purchase, in the English language:
         a.    A true and accurate description of every article purchased by
him;
         b.   An accurate description of the vendor, to include: name, age,
address, height, weight and color of hair and eyes;
         c.   The amount paid;
         d.   The date and hour of purchase.
      2.   All entries shall be made with ink in a legible manner, and no
erasures shall be submitted therein. All records of secondhand dealers shall be
open to the inspection of any peace officer or other "authorized officer" as
defined in section
5-1A-1 of this title at any time.
   B.   Junk Dealers:
      1.   It is unlawful for any junk dealer to fail to keep a permanent
record in which he shall enter at the time of purchase, in the English
language:
         a.   A true and accurate listing of the weight and metallic
description of metal purchased by him. If the purchase involves other material,
then a description by weight and description by class of the purchased
material, e.g., glass or paper;
         b.   An accurate description of the vendor, to include name, age,
address, height, weight, color of hair and eyes;
         c.   The amount paid;
         d.   The date and hour of purchase.
      2.   All entries shall be made with ink in a legible manner, and no
erasures shall be permitted therein. All records of junk dealers shall be open
to the inspection of any peace officer or other authorized officer during
business hours.
(Ord. 2011-51, 10-25-2011)
5-12B-3: DAILY REPORT:
   A.   Secondhand Dealer: Every secondhand dealer shall make a daily record
available to the chief of police of all articles received, sold or pledged, on
the day following such transactions.
   B.   Junk Dealer: Every junk dealer shall make a daily report available to
the chief of police of all purchases and sales on the day following such
transactions.
(1979 Code §§ 5.52.040, 5.52.050)
5-12B-4: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   Time Limit For Sale Of Secondhand Goods: It is unlawful for any person
or persons engaged in conducting a secondhand business in the city to sell or
otherwise dispose of any jewelry, boots and shoes, or any wearing apparel of
any kind, or secondhand goods, wares, musical instruments, curiosities or other
merchandise, the purchase of which must be reported under this chapter, for a
period of at least two (2) weeks after the same have been purchased, without
the written consent or permission of the chief of police.
   B.   Dealing With Minors: It is unlawful for any secondhand or junk dealer
by himself, his agent or servant to purchase or receive any personal property
of or from any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years without the written
consent of his guardians or parents.
(1979 Code §§ 5.52.060, 5.52.070)
ARTICLE C.  PRECIOUS METAL PURCHASERS
SECTION:
5-12C-1: Definitions
5-12C-2: Application For License; Denial
5-12C-3: Records Maintained
5-12C-4: Daily Report
5-12C-5: Rules And Regulations
5-12C-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following terms mean:
COIN: A piece of currency, usually metallic and usually in the shape of a disc
that is:
   A.   Stamped metal, and issued by a government as monetary currency; or
   B.   Is worth more than its current value as currency and is also worth more
than its metal content value.
COIN DEALER: Any person whose sole business activity is the selling and
purchasing of coins and commercial grade precious metals.
COMMERCIAL GRADE PRECIOUS METALS: Ingots, monetized bullion, art bars,
medallions, medals, tokens, and currency that are marked by the refiner or
fabricator indicating their fineness and include:
   A.   .99 fine or finer ingots of gold, silver, platinum, palladium, or other
precious metals; or
   B.   .925 fine sterling silver ingots, art bars, and medallions.
PRECIOUS METAL PURCHASER: Any person engaged in purchasing precious metals,
including scrap jewelry, from the general public, whether or not the metal is
part of a finished product or in pure form; except that a precious metal
purchaser may not purchase coins or commercial grade precious metals.
Pawnbrokers and persons whose principal business includes the sale of the same
types of forms of precious metal that the person buys, such as jewelers or coin
dealers, are not precious metal purchasers.
SCRAP JEWELRY: Any item purchased primarily for its gold, silver, or platinum
content and for the purpose of reuse or resale of the metal content.
(Ord. 2012-6, 1-24-2012)
5-12C-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; DENIAL:
   A.   Each application for a license shall be made on the form Ogden City
requires, and the applicant shall certify that the information given is true
and correct under the penalties of law.
   B.   Each application for a license under this article shall contain such
information as deemed necessary by the chief of police and the business license
coordinator of Ogden City.
   C.   All applicants for a precious metal purchaser license, and any owner or
manager of such business, shall submit a criminal history background report at
the time of initial business license application. The applicant shall also
obtain and keep a copy of a criminal history background report for each
employee available for inspection upon request by an authorized officer.
   D.   An applicant for a precious metal purchaser license shall not be issued
a license until such time as the Ogden City police department has reviewed the
application, has conducted any background investigation it deems necessary, and
recommended favorable consideration of the application. No such applicant shall
be authorized to conduct any business until the application has been approved
by the Ogden City police department and the applicant has complied with all
other licensing and bonding provisions contained in this title.
   E.   Ogden City may refuse to grant a license under this title and may
suspend, revoke or refuse to renew the license of any applicant or licensee if
it finds:
      1.   The applicant or licensee has violated or is attempting to violate
any provisions of this article, city ordinances or state law pertaining to such
business;
      2.   A similar license issued to the applicant or licensee or owner of
the business, has been suspended, revoked or refused in another jurisdiction
for a reason which would justify such action under this section;
      3.   Any officer, manager, agent or employee of the applicant or licensee
has violated or is attempting to violate any provisions of this article, city
ordinance or state law pertaining to such business unless the applicant or
licensee establishes that it: had no knowledge of the wrongful conduct and in
the exercise of reasonable diligence could not have known of the conduct; and
was unable to prevent the violation or attempted violation with the exercise of
reasonable diligence; or
      4.   The applicant, licensee, owner, or an employee or agent of the
licensee has been convicted of any felony or, within the past five (5) years,
of a misdemeanor for attempted burglary, any class of theft or attempted theft,
receiving stolen property or attempting to receive stolen property, or
attempted forgery.
(Ord. 2012-6, 1-24-2012)
5-12C-3: RECORDS MAINTAINED:
   A.   Each precious metal purchaser shall keep a permanent record, capable of
being reproduced or generated upon request by an authorized officer, in which
shall be recorded for each purchase, the following:
      1.   A complete description of the property purchased, including weight
of the article or articles, metallic content, and the fineness or purity of
each type of precious metal purchased;
      2.   The full name, residence address, contact phone number, e-mail
address and date of birth of the person or persons selling the precious metal;
      3.   The price per ounce and the amount paid for each type of precious
metal purchased;
      4.   The date and time of the purchase;
      5.   The type and identifying number of positive identification provided
pursuant to subsection B3 of this section, and notations of discrepancies if
the person's physical description, including gender, height, weight, race, age,
hair color, and eye color, does not correspond with the identification provided
by the person;
      6.   A color photograph of the seller together with a copy of the
identification provided in subsection B3 of this section;
      7.   An accurate description of the article or articles purchased,
including available identifying marks, such as: names, brand names, numbers,
serial numbers, model numbers, color, manufacturers' names, and size; metallic
composition and any jewels, stones, or glass; and any other marks of
identification or indicia of ownership on the article; and
      8.   A digital photograph in a format and with sufficient detail and
clarity of all items sold to such purchaser to enable the items to be easily
identified as to their color, size, and unique characteristics.
   B.   Each precious metal purchaser, or the agent, employee, or
representative of a precious metal purchaser shall require the seller to
provide:
      1.   A signature on a certificate in writing that the seller has the
legal rights to sell the property;
      2.   A legible fingerprint of the seller's right thumb, or if the right
thumb cannot be fingerprinted, a legible fingerprint with a written notation
identifying the fingerprint and the reason why the thumbprint was unavailable,
at the bottom of the certificate next to the seller's signature; and
      3.   At least one currently valid form of positive picture identification
that appears to be the person selling the item.
   C.   No entry in the permanent record may be erased, deleted, mutilated, or
changed.
   D.   All records of precious metal purchasers shall be maintained for at
least three (3) years from the date of transaction and shall be open to the
inspection of an authorized officer at any time.
(Ord. 2012-6, 1-24-2012)
5-12C-4: DAILY REPORT:
   A.   Every precious metal purchaser shall, upon request, make a daily report
available to the chief of police or an authorized officer of all purchases and
sales on the day following such transactions.
   B.   In addition to the registration and other requirements established by
any applicable state law, a precious metal purchaser shall, upon request by the
Ogden City police department, make digital photographs available of all items
sold to such purchaser of sufficient detail and clarity to enable the items to
be easily identified as to their color, size, and unique characteristics. The
photographs shall be produced in a format and shall be accompanied by such
additional information as determined necessary by the Ogden City police
department.
   C.   It is unlawful for any precious metal purchaser to fail to comply with
the requirements of Utah Code Annotated title 13, chapter 32a and section 76-6-
408, or their successor provisions.
(Ord. 2012-6, 1-24-2012)
5-12C-5: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   Holding Period: Each article or item purchased by a precious metal
purchaser shall be held for a period of fifteen (15) days. The items may be
held at a reasonably near central location so long as they are segregated by
purchasing location and are available for personal inspection or viewing during
the holding period.
   B.   Alteration Of Identifying Marks: A precious metal purchaser may not
accept any precious metal if, upon inspection, it is apparent that serial
numbers or identifying characteristics have been intentionally defaced on the
precious metal.
   C.   Dealing With Minors: It is unlawful for any precious metal purchaser,
or any employee or agent of such purchaser, to purchase or receive any personal
property of or from any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years.
   D.   Required Disclosures: For each transaction entered into, a precious
metal purchaser shall provide to the seller, in writing, the fineness or purity
of each type of precious metal purchased, the total weight of each type of
precious metal purchased, and the closing value of the metal, in equivalent
units of measurement, based on the most recent business day from the New York
Mercantile Exchange or Commodity Exchange, Inc. The seller shall retain a copy
of the disclosure in its permanent records as described in section
5-12C-3 of this article.
   E.   Licensed Location: A license for a precious metal purchaser may not be
issued to a motel or hotel room or other temporary location; as a home
occupation; or as a temporary license.
   F.   Business Location; Assignment Of License: No person may carry on any
activities of a precious metal purchaser other than at a business location
licensed for such business. A business license issued to a precious metal
purchaser may not be assigned.
(Ord. 2012-6, 1-24-2012)
CHAPTER 13
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND VENDORS
ARTICLE A.  DOOR TO DOOR SOLICITORS AND PEDDLERS
SECTION:
5-13A-1: Definitions
5-13A-2: License Required; Exemptions
5-13A-3: Application For License
5-13A-4: Fees
5-13A-5: Registration; Identification Cards; License Issuance
5-13A-6: Expiration And Renewal
5-13A-7: Denial, Suspension, Or Revocation
5-13A-8: Written Disclosures
5-13A-9: Regulation Of Licensed And Unlicensed Peddlers And Solicitors
5-13A-10: Buyer's Right To Cancel
5-13A-11: Penalties
5-13A-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms, and phrases, and their derivations, when used in
this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CHARITABLE: Means and includes the words patriotic, philanthropic, social
service, health, welfare, benevolent, educational, civic, cultural or
fraternal, either actual or purported.
CONTRIBUTION: Means and includes the words alms, money, subscription, property
or any donations under the guise of a loan or money or property.
FIXED PLACE OF BUSINESS: A place of business continuously maintained in the
city for at least ninety (90) days immediately preceding any act of
solicitation or peddling.
PEDDLER: Any person who goes upon the premises of any private residence in the
city, not having been invited by the occupant thereof, carrying or transporting
goods, wares, merchandise or personal property of any nature and offering the
same for sale. This definition also includes any person who solicits orders and
as a separate transaction makes deliveries to purchasers as part of a scheme to
evade the provisions of this article.
PEDDLING: Includes all activities ordinarily performed by a peddler as
indicated under the definition of "peddler", as defined herein.
PRIVATE RESIDENCE: Every separate living unit occupied for residential purposes
by one or more persons, contained within any type of building or structure.
SOLICITATION: Includes all activities ordinarily performed by a solicitor as
indicated under the definition of "solicitor", as defined herein.
SOLICITOR: Any person who goes upon the premises of any private residence in
the city, not having been invited by the occupant thereof, for the purpose of
taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, merchandise, wares,
or other personal property of any nature for future delivery, or for services
to be performed in the future. This definition also includes any person who,
without invitation, goes upon the premises of any private residence in the
city, to request contribution of funds or anything of value, or to sell goods
or services to obtain funds for political, charitable, religious, or other
noncommercial purposes. This definition shall not include solicitations made by
any persons licensed and regulated under state law governing the insurance
business, the real estate business, the securities and investment business, or
any other person exempt under state or federal law.
(Ord. 2007-30, 6-5-2007)
5-13A-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in peddling or
solicitation within the city without first obtaining a license issued by the
business license coordinator; provided, however, that the following are
exempted from the licensing provisions of this section, although still subject
to the applicable regulatory provisions of this article:
      1.   Persons soliciting or requesting contribution of funds or anything
of value, in exchange for goods or services for political, charitable,
educational, religious, or other noncommercial purposes; and
      2.   Persons who represent a fixed place of business in the city who
regularly make deliveries, normally not involving personal contact with
customers for the purpose of making sales or obtaining orders, over an
established route and who only occasionally make calls on persons residing
within the area covered by such route for the purpose of obtaining additional
customers for such regular deliveries. The foregoing provision is intended to
cover only such persons as milkmen, newspaper delivery persons and other
persons engaged in substantially similar activities.
   B.   It is the option of any organization or entity employing one or more
solicitor or peddler to obtain a license in the name of such organization or
entity. In such event, the employer shall pay the fee for the employer, plus
the individual, employee fee for each licensed employee as established under
chapter 1, article B of this title. A completed application form shall be
submitted for each covered employee actually engaged in solicitation or
peddling.
   C.   Any individual who engages in peddling or solicitation as an element of
a home occupation or other business, and maintains a fixed place of business
within the city, may obtain a license under the provisions of this article in
combination with the license for such fixed place of business. The fee shall be
as established in chapter 1, article B of this title.
(Ord. 2007-30, 6-5-2007)
5-13A-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Every person required to have a license under the provisions of this article
shall file with the business license coordinator an application in writing, on
or attached to a form to be furnished by the coordinator, which shall provide
the following information:
   A.   Address: Proof of residence address and business address, and
identification of the applicant, to be provided through the applicant's
driver's license, articles of incorporation, or other legally recognized form
of identification;
   B.   Description Of Activity: A brief description of the business or
activity to be conducted;
   C.   Employer, Agent Information: If employed, the name, address and
telephone number of the employer; or if acting as an agent, the name, address
and telephone number of the principal who is being represented;
   D.   State Registration: Proof that either the applicant, or the
organization(s) for which the applicant will be soliciting, has registered with
the Utah state department of commerce;
   E.   Sales Tax Number: A special events sales tax number for either the
applicant, or for the organization(s) for which the applicant will be
soliciting;
   F.   Civil Judgments: Whether the applicant is a person against whom a civil
judgment based upon fraud, deceit, misrepresentation, false statements, or
dishonesty has been entered within five (5) years of the date of application;
   G.   Injunctions And Orders: Whether the applicant has, within five (5)
years of the date of application, been enjoined by any court, or is the subject
of an administrative order issued in this or another state, if the injunction
or order includes a finding or admission of fraud, material misrepresentation,
or if the injunction or order was based on a finding of lack of integrity or
truthfulness;
   H.   Criminal Convictions: Whether the applicant has been convicted of any
felony, or a misdemeanor involving fraud, deceit, misrepresentation, false
statements, dishonesty, sex offenses of any kind, or violent or aggravated
conduct involving persons or property, within five (5) years of the date of
application, or whether the applicant currently has charges pending for any
such crimes;
   I.   Parole Or Probation: Whether the applicant is currently on parole or
probation to any court, penal institution, or governmental entity, including
being under house arrest or subject to a tracking device;
   J.   Previous License Denial: Whether the applicant has been denied a
license under the provisions of this article within the year preceding the date
of application, and whether the applicant has corrected the deficiency on which
the denial of the previous application was based;
   K.   Previous License Revocation Or Suspension: Whether the applicant has
had a license under the provisions of this article revoked or suspended within
the year preceding the date of application, and whether the applicant has
corrected the reason for which the license was revoked or suspended;
   L.   Violations Of This Article: Whether the applicant has been convicted of
a violation of the provisions of this article within one year preceding the
date of application;
   M.   BCI Check: An original or copy of a background check on the applicant
conducted by the Utah bureau of criminal investigations ("BCI") within the last
one hundred eighty (180) days. The applicant may apply for this service at the
BCI offices at 3888 West 5400 South, Salt Lake City, or at such other location
as the BCI shall provide from time to time. The application shall not be deemed
complete until the applicant has delivered the BCI background check and its
findings to the business license coordinator, and receipt of the background
check by the business license coordinator and the police department shall be a
condition precedent to issuance of a license and issuance of an identification
card or badge under the provisions of this article; and
   N.   Acknowledgment: An acknowledgment that solicitation will not commence
until the applicant is in full compliance with this article.
(Ord. 2007-30, 6-5-2007)
5-13A-4: FEES:
At the time the application is filed with the division, the applicant shall pay
a fee to cover the cost to the city of processing the application and
registration. The license fee shall be the fee established in chapter 1,
article B of this title. The fee shall not exceed reasonable administrative
costs incurred by the city to process an application and maintain the related
records.
(Ord. 2007-30, 6-5-2007)
5-13A-5: REGISTRATION; IDENTIFICATION CARDS; LICENSE ISSUANCE:
   A.   Referral To Police Department: Upon receipt of an application, the
business license coordinator, or authorized representative, shall refer the
application to the police department for registration and issuance of an
identification card or badge.
   B.   Photographs: At the time of registering, each individual applicant who
is not an organization or other entity shall furnish the police department with
two (2) photographs of the applicant which shall have been taken within sixty
(60) days immediately prior to the date of filing the license application. The
photographs shall be of a size determined by the business license coordinator
which will attach to the identification card and show the head and shoulders of
the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner. If photographs are not
provided or if the provided photographs are inadequate, the police department
will provide the photographs for the fee established in chapter 1, article B of
this title. One of the photographs shall be attached to the identification card
issued to the applicant, and the other shall be retained in the city files and
records. At the time of registering, the applicant shall sign his name to the
registration record.
   C.   Conditions For Issuance: The business license coordinator, upon payment
of the prescribed fee, shall immediately approve the license if:
      1.   The coordinator finds the application to be in compliance with the
provisions of this article;
      2.   The completed application contains nothing on its face that would
constitute grounds for denial under the provisions of this article; and
      3.   The applicant has registered with the police department and an
identification card or badge has been prepared by the police department.
   D.   No City Guarantee Or Certification: By approving a license and issuing
an identification card or badge, the city does not guarantee the accuracy of
any representation contained in the application, the license, or the
registration card or badge, nor does it warrant that any statement made by the
solicitor is truthful. The city makes no certification as to the worthiness of
any organization, or its products or services, on whose behalf a solicitation
is made nor as to the moral character of the solicitor.
   E.   City Disclaimer: The following statement shall appear on the license,
and on the registration card or badge:
THE CITY MAKES NO CERTIFICATION AS TO THE WORTHINESS OF ANY ORGANIZATION, OR
ITS PRODUCTS OR SERVICES, ON WHOSE BEHALF A SOLICITATION IS MADE NOR AS TO THE
MORAL CHARACTER OF THE SOLICITOR.
(Ord. 2007-30, 6-5-2007)
5-13A-6: EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL:
   A.   All licenses and identification cards or badges issued under the
provisions of this article shall expire one year from the date of issuance,
unless an earlier expiration date is noted on the license.
   B.   Any currently licensed solicitor in good standing may have his or her
license and registration card or badge renewed for an additional period not to
exceed one year, upon request within thirty (30) days prior to the expiration
of the license and payment of a fee as established in chapter 1, article B of
this title; provided, however, that the total of any such fee shall not exceed
reasonable administrative costs incurred by the city to process the license and
registration renewal and maintain the related records. A solicitor is not in
good standing if he or she satisfies one or more grounds for denial, suspension
or revocation within the meaning of this article. An applicant desiring to
obtain a license and registration card or badge upon expiration of any renewal
period shall make a new application in accordance with the provisions of this
article.
(Ord. 2007-30, 6-5-2007)
5-13A-7: DENIAL, SUSPENSION, OR REVOCATION:
Pursuant to the provisions of chapter 1, article C of this title and subject to
appeal as specified therein, any application for a license under this article
may be denied without a hearing, and any license previously issued under this
article may be revoked or suspended after notice and hearing, for any of the
following reasons:
   A.   Fraud, Misrepresentation Or False Statement: Fraud, misrepresentation
or false statement contained in the application for a license;
   B.   Activities Contrary To This Article: Conducting peddling or
solicitation activities contrary to the provisions of this article;
   C.   Civil Judgments: The applicant is a person against whom a civil
judgment based upon fraud, deceit, misrepresentation, false statements, or
dishonesty has been entered within five (5) years of the date of application;
   D.   Injunctions And Orders: The applicant has, within the past five (5)
years, been enjoined by any court, or is the subject of an administrative order
issued in this or another state, if the injunction or order includes a finding
or admission of fraud, material misrepresentation, or if the injunction or
order was based on a finding of lack of integrity or truthfulness;
   E.   Criminal Convictions: The applicant has been convicted of any felony,
or a misdemeanor involving fraud, deceit, misrepresentation, false statements,
dishonesty, sex offenses of any kind, or violent or aggravated conduct
involving persons or property, within five (5) years of the date of
application, or when the applicant currently has charges pending for any such
crimes;
   F.   Parole Or Probation: The applicant is currently on parole or probation
to any court, penal institution, or governmental entity, including being under
house arrest or subject to a tracking device;
   G.   Previous License Denial: The applicant has been denied a license under
the provisions of this article within the year preceding the date of
application, and the applicant has not corrected the deficiency on which the
denial of the previous application was based;
   H.   Previous License Revocation Or Suspension: The applicant has had a
license under the provisions of this article revoked or suspended within the
year preceding the date of application, and the applicant has not corrected the
reason for which the license was revoked or suspended; or
   I.   Violations Of This Article: The applicant has been convicted of a
violation of the provisions of this article within one year preceding the date
of application.
(Ord. 2007-30, 6-5-2007)
5-13A-8: WRITTEN DISCLOSURES:
The application form shall be accompanied by written disclosures notifying the
applicant of the following:
   A.   Authority To Verify: The applicant's submission of the application
authorizes the city to verify information submitted with the completed
application including:
      1.   The applicant's address;
      2.   The applicant's state tax identification and special use tax
numbers, if any; and
      3.   The validity of the applicant's proof of identity;
   B.   Sources Of Information: The city may consult any available sources for
information on the applicant, including, but not limited to, databases for any
outstanding warrants, protective orders, or civil judgments;
   C.   Proof Of Identity: Establishing proof of identity is required before
licensing and registration is allowed;
   D.   Fee Amount: Identification of the fee amount that must be submitted by
the applicant with a completed application;
   E.   BCI Check: The applicant must submit a BCI background check with a
completed application;
   F.   BCI Check Confidential: To the extent permitted by state and/or federal
law, the applicant's BCI background check shall remain a confidential,
protected, private record not available for public inspection;
   G.   Records: The city will maintain copies of the applicant's application
form, proof of identity, and registration identification card or badge. These
copies will become public records available for inspection on demand at the
city offices whether or not a license is denied, granted, or renewed; and
   H.   Denial, Suspension Or Revocation: The criteria for denial, suspension
or revocation of a license under the provisions of this article.
(Ord. 2007-30, 6-5-2007)
5-13A-9: REGULATION OF LICENSED AND UNLICENSED PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS:
   A.   License Exhibition: Every person required to obtain a license under the
provisions of this article shall exhibit the identification card or badge when
requested to do so by any prospective customer or city employee.
   B.   Transfer Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person other than the
licensee to use or wear any identification card or badge issued under the
provisions of this article.
   C.   Entry Upon Signed Premises Unlawful: It shall be unlawful for any
person, whether licensed or unlicensed, while conducting the business of a
peddler or solicitor, to enter upon the premises of any private residence in
the city where the owner, occupant or person legally in charge of the premises
has posted, at the entry to the premises, or at the entry to the principal
building on the premises, a sign bearing the words "No Peddlers", "No
Solicitors", or words of similar import.
   D.   Hours Of Solicitation: No person, while conducting the activities of a
peddler or solicitor, whether licensed or unlicensed, shall enter upon any
private property, knock on doors or otherwise disturb persons in their private
residences between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and nine o'clock (9:
00) A.M.
   E.   Noise Restriction: It is unlawful for any peddler or solicitor to use
any sound producing device or to cry his wares for sale, except in accordance
with section
11-5-6 of this code.
   F.   Ruse, Deception, Or Fraudulent Concealment: It is unlawful for any
solicitor through ruse, deception, or fraudulent concealment of a purpose to
solicit, to take action calculated to secure an audience with an occupant at a
private residence.
   G.   Immediate Departure: Any solicitor who is at any time asked by an
occupant of a private residence or dwelling to leave shall immediately and
peacefully depart.
   H.   Physical Contact: The solicitor shall not intentionally or recklessly
make any physical contact with, or touch another person without the person's
consent.
   I.   Follow Into Residence: The solicitor shall not follow a person into a
private residence or dwelling without their explicit consent.
   J.   Repeated Soliciting: The solicitor shall not continue repeated
soliciting after a person has communicated clearly and unequivocally their lack
of interest in the subject, goods or services of the solicitor.
   K.   Obscene Language Or Gestures: The solicitor shall not use obscene
language or gestures in the course of a solicitation.
(Ord. 2007-30, 6-5-2007)
5-13A-10: BUYER'S RIGHT TO CANCEL:
In any home solicitation sale, unless the buyer requests the solicitor to
provide goods or services without delay in an emergency, the seller or
solicitor shall present to the buyer and obtain buyer's signature to a written
statement which informs the buyer of the right to cancel within the third
business day after signing an agreement to purchase. Such notice of "buyer's
right to cancel" shall be in the form required by section 70C-5-103, Utah Code
Annotated, as amended, or any state or federal law modifying or amending such
provision.
(Ord. 2007-30, 6-5-2007)
5-13A-11: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates any term or provision of this article shall be guilty
of a class B misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or a jail sentence not to exceed six (6)
months.
(Ord. 2007-30, 6-5-2007)
ARTICLE B.  SIDEWALK VENDORS
SECTION:
5-13B-1: Definition
5-13B-2: License Required
5-13B-3: Fee
5-13B-4: Insurance
5-13B-5: Application And Approval Process
5-13B-6: General Requirements
5-13B-7: Cart Standards
5-13B-8: Prohibited Activities
5-13B-9: Impoundment
5-13B-10: Suspension, Revocation Or Denial
5-13B-11: Enforcement; Violations; And Penalties
5-13B-1: DEFINITION:
A "sidewalk vendor" means any person licensed under this article, who sells, or
offers to sell food, nonalcoholic beverages, balloons, cut flowers, caps, T-
shirts, souvenirs or handmade crafts on a public sidewalk.
(Ord. 2009-75, 12-22-2009)
5-13B-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to display, offer for sale,
or sell any retail goods on a public sidewalk without having first complied
with the provisions of this article and without having first obtained a
business license as a sidewalk vendor. The provisions of this article shall not
apply to sales or displays allowed by section
7-2-13 of this code.
(Ord. 2009-75, 12-22-2009)
5-13B-3: FEE:
The license fee and renewal period for sidewalk vending shall be as prescribed
in chapter 1 of this title. In addition to the license fee, a sidewalk vendor
shall provide Ogden City with a damage deposit in the amount of two hundred
dollars ($200.00), which the city may draw upon for cleaning or repair
necessitated by the vendor operation, after at least one notice and an
opportunity to correct the violation has been issued to the licensee. Any
remaining funds on deposit shall be returned to the licensee within thirty (30)
days after the expiration of the license year. In the event it is necessary for
the city to utilize all or part of the damage deposit for cleaning or repair
prior to the expiration of the license year, the business license coordinator
may revoke the license or require a deposit of additional funds as a condition
of continuing operations.
(Ord. 2009-75, 12-22-2009)
5-13B-4: INSURANCE:
The applicant shall agree to hold the city and its employees and agents
harmless and to indemnify and defend the city, its employees and agents,
against all claims, liability, loss, damage, or expense, including attorney
fees, resulting from the activities of the licensee upon public sidewalks. The
applicant shall maintain a commercial general liability insurance policy with
minimum limits of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per person in any
one occurrence and two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) for two (2) or more
persons in any one occurrence for personal injury, and five hundred thousand
dollars ($500,000.00) for property damage for any one occurrence, or such
greater amounts as set forth in section 63G-7-604, Utah Code Annotated, 1953,
as amended, or its successor section. Any deductible or self-insured retention
must be declared to and approved by the city. A current certificate of
insurance must be kept on file with the city recorder verifying continuing
coverage and naming the city as an additional insured. The certificate shall
provide thirty (30) days' written notice to the city upon cancellation,
nonrenewal or material change in the policy.
(Ord. 2009-75, 12-22-2009)
5-13B-5: APPLICATION AND APPROVAL PROCESS:
   A.   Information Required: Applications for a sidewalk vending license shall
be on forms provided by the city, and subject to the requirements of any
administrative rules adopted pursuant to subsection 5-13B-6B of this article.
The application shall include the following information:
      1.   The name and mailing address of the applicant.
      2.   A description of all products to be sold.
      3.   A valid copy of all applicable health permits required by federal,
state or local authorities.
      4.   A description of the cart to be used in conducting business,
including scaled drawings or a photograph and proposed colors, including
signage to be used.
      5.   The number of carts proposed to be operated.
      6.   A list of all persons or employees operating the vending unit or
preparing food to be sold from the vending unit and proof of a current food
handler's permit.
      7.   A valid copy of a bathroom agreement as required by the Weber Morgan
health department for use of a bathroom within three hundred feet (300') of the
cart location, specifying times of use. A copy of the document shall be
maintained with the cart at all times and made available for inspection upon
request by a city official. The bathroom agreement shall be renewed annually.
Licensee shall notify the business license coordinator of any changes to the
agreement during the license year, and provide a valid copy of any revised
agreement.
      8.   A Utah sales tax number.
      9.   Proof of insurance as required by this article.
      10.   Any other information as the business license coordinator deems
necessary to enforce this article.
   B.   Departments; Review: All applications for sidewalk vending shall be
referred to the current planning division, the county health department, fire
prevention division, police department and inspection services division for
review and compliance with applicable codes and ordinances. After review and
recommendation, the application shall be referred to the mayor or mayor's
designee for approval.
(Ord. 2009-75, 12-22-2009)
5-13B-6: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Approved Cart: All sidewalk vendors are required to conduct their
business from an approved cart.
   B.   Location Specified; Location Restrictions:
      1.   Each license shall specify the location where the cart is approved
to be operated. No operation shall occur at locations other than the approved
site.
      2.   Sidewalk vending shall be limited to approved locations within the
central business district, as hereby established and shown on the map entitled
"approved street vendor locations", and all boundaries, notations and other
data shown on said map is made by this reference as much a part of this section
as if fully described and detailed herein. Said map shall be filed in the
custody of the city recorder and may be examined by the public subject to any
reasonable regulations established by the city recorder. Said map, and any
changes thereto, shall include the criteria used to determine each approved
location. At no time shall the number of approved locations in the city exceed
twenty three (23), which shall include a maximum of twelve (12) food vendors.
The city council deems the sidewalk vendor limits and locations set forth
herein to be in furtherance of the goal of this article to bring foot traffic
to the central business district without creating an obstruction to pedestrian
or vehicle traffic, or interfering with sidewalk structures or other permitted
uses.
      3.   Each licensed cart shall be assigned a specific location from among
the approved locations for a maximum period of three (3) license years. The
mayor shall adopt rules necessary for the administration of a location
assignment process.
      4.   Vendors shall operate on a continuous basis. The business license
division may reassign to another location any licensed cart that does not
operate for a period of ninety (90) days or more.
   C.   Hours Of Operation: Hours of operation will be from seven o'clock (7:
00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M., subject to the terms of a bathroom
agreement as required herein, and compliance with applicable light and food
handling requirements referenced in this section. No carts shall remain on the
sidewalk except during the above hours of operation.
   D.   Lighting: Vendors selling food shall operate at all times with lighting
of at least two hundred fifteen (215) lux (20 foot-candles) on areas where food
is being handled, as measured by a light meter.
   E.   Food Handling Requirements: Vendors selling food shall at all times
adhere to applicable regulations set forth in Utah department of health, food
service sanitation rule, R392-100, as amended, including, but not limited to,
standards for temperature control, adequate storage, and safe handling.
   F.   Location: Each license shall specify the designated cart location, and
shall indicate any dates of operation that are precluded by city approved
special events. Vendors may apply to participate in a special event by
contacting the event organizers and shall comply with all fees and location
assignments of the special event organizer. The city shall give vendors thirty
(30) days' written notice of any additional special events precluding vendor
operations, in addition to those indicated on the license. If the city fails to
give thirty (30) days' written notice of any special event not indicated on the
license, the vendor may operate, subject to suspension pursuant to subsection G
of this section.
   G.   Temporary Suspension: In addition to the emergency enforcement
authorization set forth in subsection 5-13B-11C of this article, the city
reserves the right to temporarily suspend a vendor operation, upon forty eight
(48) hours' notice to the licensee, when unusually heavy pedestrian or vehicle
traffic or temporary obstructions to the sidewalk are anticipated, such as in
the event of a parade, demonstration, motorcade, or similar activity. Other
unanticipated situations may require temporary suspension of vendor operations
without notice, such as an accident, fire, or other unanticipated emergency
situation involving a threat to public health or safety. A vendor shall be
notified of a temporary suspension by a police officer, code enforcement
officer, or other authorized employee or officer of the city. A vendor shall
not resume operations until notified by an authorized employee or officer of
the city that the temporary suspension has been lifted.
   H.   Notices: Delivery of any notice by first class mail to the address
provided on the application shall constitute proof of notice. Notice served on
any person employed to conduct business under the sidewalk vendor license shall
be deemed actual notice to the licensee.
(Ord. 2009-75, 12-22-2009)
5-13B-7: CART STANDARDS:
   A.   Size: A cart shall not be larger than four feet (4') wide, nine feet
(9') long, and eight and a half feet (8.5') high to the top of the canopy
measured from the sidewalk. Any canopies, umbrellas or awnings attached to the
cart shall have a minimum of six and one-half feet (6.5') vertical clearance to
the sidewalk. The shading device shall not extend more than three feet (3')
from the edge of the cart in any direction, and shall not exceed a height of
eight and one-half feet (81/2') measured from the sidewalk.
   B.   Signage: Only business signs applied directly on the cart or canopy
advertising the items being sold from the cart shall be permitted. Signage
shall not extend above the opaque sides of the cart or hang below the awnings
of the cart. Carts shall display appropriate approvals from the health
department and city business license at all times in a conspicuous location on
the cart.
   C.   Product Display: All displays, products and accessory items, other than
as specified in subsections D and G of this section, shall be contained within
the cart. No product or accessory items shall be attached to the side or awning
of the cart or exceed eight and one-half feet (81/2') above the sidewalk.
   D.   Coolers, Chairs: Each vendor may maintain a maximum of two (2) standard
3.75 cubic foot coolers, and one chair for employee use, adjacent to the cart.
Any coolers maintained outside the cart shall be stacked at all times. Health
department requirements for food storage shall apply.
   E.   Construction: Carts shall be constructed of wood, washable plastic,
fiberglass or noncorrosive metal, except that the exterior surface of food
carts shall be constructed of a weather resistant material. All interior
surfaces of food carts shall be constructed of a smooth, nonporous, easily
cleanable material, and shall not be painted. Additional health department
requirements for food cart construction, including, but not limited to, water
tank and waste receptacle requirements, shall apply. All carts shall be
designed to be movable by one person and shall have a minimum of two (2) rubber
or rubberlike wheels as part of the cart for ease of movement. Vehicles may be
used to transport carts to designated site, however, licensee shall be
responsible for any damage to city structures caused by such transport.
   F.   Cleaning: Vendors shall maintain vendor's designated site clean of
litter, grease and liquid residue on a daily basis. Vendors shall not utilize
the city storm drainage system to dispose of any solid or liquids that are on
the cart.
   G.   Trash Receptacle: Each vendor shall provide a suitable container for
the placement of trash by customers or other persons, and shall remove such
container daily, or more frequently as necessitated by use. The receptacle
shall have a tightfitting lid and be fitted with a plastic liner.
(Ord. 2009-75, 12-22-2009)
5-13B-8: PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES:
No sidewalk vendor shall:
   A.   Leave any cart unattended.
   B.   Store, park or leave any cart beyond hours of operation on any street
or sidewalk.
   C.   Sell from other than the approved location.
   D.   Conduct sales at times other than herein permitted.
   E.   Leave any location without first picking up, removing and disposing of
all trash and refuse remaining within a twenty five foot (25') radius. Each
vendor shall be responsible for maintaining a twenty five foot (25') radius
around the cart clean of any trash or refuse.
   F.   Solicit from or conduct business with any persons in motor vehicles
located within any traffic lane on a public street.
   G.   Use any noisemaking or sound producing device that calls attention to
its operation.
   H.   Unreasonably interfere with or obstruct the free flow of pedestrian
traffic or access to businesses.
   I.   Utilize tarps at any time, except in conjunction with transport to and
from designated site.
   J.   Utilize electrical cords that extend beyond the cart, liquid fuel
powered generators, or city owned electrical outlets.
   K.   Violate any federal, state, or local ordinance, statute or regulation.
(Ord. 2009-75, 12-22-2009)
5-13B-9: IMPOUNDMENT:
Placement or operation of any street vending cart in violation of the
provisions of this article is declared to be a public nuisance. The police
department may cause the removal of any cart found on a public sidewalk in
violation of this article and is authorized to store such cart until the owner
shall redeem it by paying the reasonable removal and storage charges.
(Ord. 2009-75, 12-22-2009)
5-13B-10: SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OR DENIAL:
Denials, suspensions or revocations shall be handled in accordance with the
provisions of chapter 1, article C of this title, or its successor.
(Ord. 2009-75, 12-22-2009)
5-13B-11: ENFORCEMENT; VIOLATIONS; AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Enforcement: The code enforcement officer shall be responsible to
enforce the provisions of this article.
   B.   Civil Penalties: Failure to correct a violation of this article after
notice of violation and expiration of the ten (10) day warning period may be
enforced by imposition of the following civil penalties pursuant to title 1,
chapter 4, article B of this code:
      1.   The first civil citation issued after expiration of the warning
period shall subject the responsible party to the initial civil penalty of one
hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00).
      2.   The second civil citation issued after expiration of the warning
period and the prior imposition of the initial penalty shall subject the
responsible party to the intermediate penalty of two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00).
      3.   Any subsequent civil citation issued after expiration of the warning
period and the prior imposition of the intermediate penalty, or any reoccurring
violation under section
1-4B-6 of this code, shall subject the responsible party to the maximum penalty
of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
   C.   Emergency Enforcement: If the code enforcement officer finds that an
emergency condition exists that requires immediate action to protect the public
health, safety, or welfare, he or she may issue a notice of violation, without
a warning period, requiring that immediate action be taken as he or she deems
necessary to remedy the condition. In the event the condition cannot be
remedied by immediate action, the code enforcement officer may abate the
condition by ordering closure of the vendor operation. The vendor operator
shall comply with the notice, but may request a hearing through the appeal
process set forth in title 1, chapter 4, article B of this code. Nothing in
this subsection is intended to preclude enforcement by the Weber Morgan health
department of its rules and regulations pertaining to food carts, however, the
emergency enforcement authority granted to the code enforcement officer in this
subsection is deemed necessary to enhance cooperation between the city and the
Weber Morgan health department for the protection of public health.
   D.   Other Remedies: This article may also be enforced by injunction,
mandamus, judicial abatement or any other appropriate action in law or equity.
(Ord. 2009-75, 12-22-2009)
ARTICLE C.  SWAP MEETS
SECTION:
5-13C-1: Definition
5-13C-2: License Required
5-13C-3: Application And Investigation
5-13C-4: Sellers; Individual License
5-13C-5: Daily Business License
5-13C-6: Forms; Disposition
5-13C-7: Rules And Regulations
5-13C-8: Revocation And Suspension
5-13C-9: Prohibitions
5-13C-1: DEFINITION:
"Swap meet" means a business operated entirely within an enclosed building
where, under direction of the swap meet proprietor, individual sellers occupy a
designated area where goods are sold or exchanged. For purposes of this
article, a "flea market" shall be considered a swap meet.
(1979 Code § 5.57.010; Ord. 87-6, 1-22-1987)
5-13C-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or charity to hold a swap meet
or flea market without having first obtained a license therefor, as is herein
provided; but the license for a charity may be waived by the mayor upon
application.
(1979 Code § 5.57.020; Ord. 87-6, 1-22-1987; amd. 1999 Code)
5-13C-3: APPLICATION AND INVESTIGATION:
An application for swap meet license shall be made to the business license
coordinator and shall state thereon the name of the applicant, the place of
business and the number of employees intended to be engaged. The applicant
shall provide a faithful performance bond for the amount of one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) acceptable to the business license coordinator, as an agent
of the city engaged in selling of business licenses as required in section
5-13C-4 of this article. The license fee shall be as established in chapter 1,
article B of this title. The chief of police or any other official designated
by the chief of police shall investigate each applicant for such license and
shall report back on whether or not such applicant is a person who has been
convicted of a felony or theft related offense. In addition, an inspection by
the city inspections and city fire prevention shall be conducted to verify
compliance with applicable building and fire code requirements prior to
referral to the city council for approval of and issuance of the business
license.
(1979 Code § 5.57.030; Ord. 87-6, 1-22-1987; amd. Ord. 97-94, 12-16-1997)
5-13C-4: SELLERS; INDIVIDUAL LICENSE:
All sellers shall either apply for a separate business license to sell on the
premises of a swap meet licensee, or shall pay to the city the daily individual
seller fee, as determined in chapter 1, article B of this title and shall
furnish to the swap meet licensee a written application containing the
following information:
   A.   Personal Information: His or her name, address, occupation and driver's
license number and state of issue. If the applicant has no driver's license, he
or she shall show some other form of positive picture identification and the
identifying numbers shall be recorded on the application.
   B.   Description Of Articles: A general description of the articles he or
she is offering for sale. If any of the articles have serial numbers, the
specific article, its description and its serial number shall be listed.
   C.   Certification By Applicant: The following certification to be signed by
the applicant:
I certify that I am the lawful and legal owner of the listed property which is
free and clear from all liens and encumbrances. I further certify that the
property descriptions are true and correct, and I am aware that a copy of this
application shall be forwarded to the Chief of Police immediately after it is
submitted to the owner of the premises where the sale is held.
(1979 Code § 5.57.040; Ord. 87-6, 1-22-1987; amd. Ord. 97-94, 12-16-1997)
5-13C-5: DAILY BUSINESS LICENSE:
A swap meet licensee shall have the right to issue daily business licenses to
individual sellers upon receiving the required daily, individual seller one
dollar ($1.00) per sales fee, as determined in chapter 1, article B of this
title, and the signed application required by this article. This fee shall be
remitted to the city and shall be applied toward the city's added costs of
printing application forms and policing swap meets for stolen goods. A licensee
shall have the right to refuse to issue a daily business license to any
applicant who does not have positive identification or who the licensee has
reasonable cause to believe is attempting to sell stolen property.
(1979 Code § 5.57.050; Ord. 87-6, 1-22-1987; amd. Ord. 97-94, 12-16-1997)
5-13C-6: FORMS; DISPOSITION:
The information required in section
5-13C-4 of this article shall be recorded in triplicate on a form provided by
the city. One copy shall be delivered to the business license division along
with the proceeds from licenses sold on a weekly basis. The reports are due on
Monday mornings. One copy shall be delivered to the seller and the licensee
shall retain the remaining copy.
(1979 Code § 5.57.060; Ord. 87-6, 1-22-1987)
5-13C-7: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   Restricted Items: No sales of firearms, pyrotechnics, ammunition,
explosives, alcoholic beverages, pornography, medicines, drinks or food shall
be made by daily sellers of the swap meet licensee's premises; except the sale
of food and drink prepared on the premises where the seller thereof has applied
for and obtained the necessary county health department permits and snack bar
or restaurant business license; or where such sale of food and drink only
involves packaged or canned goods obtained from another licensed and regulated
business.
(1979 Code § 5.57.070; Ord. 87-6, 1-22-1987; amd. 1999 Code)
   B.   Suspicious Items; Reporting Required: It is the duty of every swap meet
licensee to report to the police department any article he or she has reason to
believe was stolen or lost, and found by the person attempting to sell it.
(1979 Code § 5.57.080; Ord. 87-6, 1-22-1987)
5-13C-8: REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION:
In addition to the other penalties provided by law, any swap meet licensee
violating the provision of this article may have his or her license revoked or
suspended in accordance with the provisions of chapter 1, article C of this
title.
(1979 Code § 5.57.090; Ord. 87-6, 1-22-1987; amd. 1999 Code)
5-13C-9: PROHIBITIONS:
A seller shall be deemed to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter
if:
   A.   Failure To List Property Sold: He or she fails to list all property
proposed to be sold or exchanged; or
   B.   Failure To Identify: He or she fails to list the correct serial number
or identifying marks of said property; or
   C.   False Information: He or she gives false information as to his or her
identity or the property's identity even though such information is not
specifically required by this article.
(1979 Code § 5.57.100; Ord. 87-6, 1-22-1987; amd. 1999 Code; Ord. 2005-29, 5-
24-2005)
CHAPTER 14
RESTAURANTS
SECTION:
5-14-1: Definition
5-14-2: License Required
5-14-3: Application For License
5-14-4: Compliance With Health Regulations
5-14-5: Interior Visibility
5-14-6: Lighting
5-14-7: Alcoholic Beverage Licensing
5-14-8: Compliance With Laws
5-14-1: DEFINITION:
Restaurant means any place where food and beverages are prepared, served and
sold for human consumption on or off the premises.
(1979 Code § 5.56.005; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-14-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to operate a restaurant in the City without first
obtaining a restaurant license.
(1979 Code § 5.56.006; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-14-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Information: Applications shall be made to the Business License
Coordinator and shall show the location of the restaurant and state the
greatest number of persons that can be furnished with food, for on-site
consumption, at any one time in such restaurant.
   B.   Referral; Recommendation: All applications for a restaurant license
shall be referred to the County Health Department for investigation and
recommendation. Initial applications shall also be referred to the following
departments and divisions:
      1.   The Fire Department, to determine compliance with all fire codes;
      2.   The Inspection Services Division, to determine compliance with all
building codes; and
      3.   The Community Development Department, to determine compliance with
all zoning ordinances.
(1979 Code § 5.56.007; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-14-4: COMPLIANCE WITH HEALTH REGULATIONS:
It is unlawful for any person to operate a restaurant in the City without
complying strictly with all laws, regulations and ordinances relating to food
preparation and service.
(1979 Code § 5.56.008; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-14-5: INTERIOR VISIBILITY:
A clear, unobstructed view of the entire interior of the restaurant area
available to patrons, excluding restrooms, kitchens or other portions of the
premises to which patrons are excluded, shall be maintained by the licensee at
all times. The required view must be visible from either the entrance or from
another location open to plain view. The licensee shall not erect or maintain
any enclosed booth, blinds or stalls within the interior which obstructs such
view of all tables, chairs and occupants.
(1979 Code § 5.56.010; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-14-6: LIGHTING:
All restaurants shall maintain throughout the premises and during business
hours a minimum of two (2) candlepower light measured at a level five feet (5')
above the floor.
(1979 Code § 5.56.020; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-14-7: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE LICENSING:
It shall be unlawful to own or operate a restaurant which sells or allows the
consumption of alcoholic beverages on its premises without having obtained a
license as provided in Chapter 3 of this Title or such licenses as required
under the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, Utah Code Annotated title 32A, as
amended.
(1979 Code § 5.56.030; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-14-8: COMPLIANCE WITH LAWS:
No license shall be issued for a restaurant unless and until it shall be found
that the premises for which it is issued complies with and conforms to all
laws, ordinances and health and fire regulations applicable thereto and is
properly ventilated and has available separate and sufficient restroom
conveniences for each sex and is a safe and proper place for the purposes for
which it shall be used pursuant to such license.
(1979 Code § 5.56.040; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
CHAPTER 15
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES 1
SECTION:
5-15-1: Title
5-15-2: Purpose And Application
5-15-3: Definitions
5-15-4: Business Licenses
5-15-5: Legitimate Artistic Modeling
5-15-6: Categories; Number Of Licenses
5-15-7: Application For License
5-15-8: License; Bond
5-15-9: Issuance Of License
5-15-10: Location Restrictions
5-15-11: Design Of Premises
5-15-12: Hours Of Operation
5-15-13: License; Specific Regulations
5-15-14: General Regulations
5-15-15: Prohibited Activities
5-15-16: Outcall Services; Operation Requirements
5-15-17: Inspection Of Premises
5-15-18: Nudity; Defenses To Prosecution
5-15-19: Violations
5-15-20: Appeal Procedure
5-15-21: Reserved
5-15-22: Applicability Of Regulations To Existing Businesses
 
Notes
  1. Prior ordinance history: 1979 Code §§ 5.50.010, 5.50.020, 5.50.030,
  5.50.040, 5.50.050, 5.50.060, 5.50.070, 5.50.080, 5.50.085, 5.50.090,
  5.50.100, 5.50.110, 5.50.120, 5.50.130, 5.50.140, 5.50.150, 5.50.160,
1 5.50.170, 5.50.180, 5.50.190, 5.50.200, 5.50.210, 5.50.220, 5.50.230,
  5.50.240, 5.50.250, 5.50.260, 5.50.270, 5.50.280, 5.50.290, 5.50.300,
  5.50.320, 5.50.330, 5.50.340, 5.50.350, 5.50.360; Ord. 90-22, 5-10-1990; 1999
  Code.
5-15-1: TITLE:
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known and may be referred to as
the SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS AND EMPLOYEE LICENSING ORDINANCE.
(Ord. 2000-39, 7-18-2000)
5-15-2: PURPOSE AND APPLICATION:
   A.   Reasonable And Uniform Regulations: It is the purpose and objective of
this chapter that the city establish reasonable and uniform regulations
governing the operation of sexually oriented businesses and their employees in
the city. This chapter shall be construed to protect the governmental interests
recognized by this chapter in a manner consistent with constitutional
protection provided by the United States and Utah constitutions.
   B.   Certain Business Activities: This chapter imposes regulatory standards
and license requirements on certain business activities, which are
characterized as sexually oriented businesses, and certain employees of those
businesses characterized as sexually oriented business employees. Except where
the context or specific provisions require, this chapter does not supersede or
nullify any other related ordinances, including, but not limited to, those
codified in chapter 3 of this title, regarding the sale, storage or consumption
of alcoholic beverages.
(Ord. 2000-39, 7-18-2000)
5-15-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
ADULT BOOKSTORE OR ADULT VIDEO STORE: A commercial establishment:
   A.   Which excludes minors from more than fifteen percent (15%) of the
retail floor or shelf space of the premises; or
   B.   Which, as one of its principal purposes, offers for sale or rental, for
any form of consideration, any one or more of the following: books, magazines,
periodicals, or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures,
videocassettes or video reproductions, slides or other visual representations,
the central theme of which depicts or describes "specified sexual activities"
or "specified anatomical areas"; or instruments, devices or paraphernalia which
are designated for use in connection with "specified sexual activities", except
for legitimate medically recognized contraceptives.
ADULT BUSINESS: An inclusive term including an adult motion picture theater,
adult bookstore or adult video store.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT DANCING AGENCY: Any person, agency, firm, corporation,
partnership, or any other entity or individual which offers to furnish, book or
otherwise engage the service of a professional dancer licensed pursuant to this
chapter for performance or appearance at a business licensed as an adult live
entertainment business or adult theater.
ADULT LIVE ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS: A business, including adult theater, where
employees perform or appear in the presence of patrons of the business in a
state of seminudity. A business shall also be presumed to be an adult live
entertainment business if the business holds itself out as such a business.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: A commercial establishment which:
   A.   Excludes minors from the showing of two (2) consecutive exhibitions
(repeated showings of any single presentation shall not be considered a
consecutive exhibition); or
   B.   As its principal business, shows, for any form of consideration, films,
motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions
which are primarily characterized by the depiction or description of "specified
sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
ADULT THEATER: A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial
establishment which:
   A.   Holds itself out as such a business; or
   B.   Excludes minors from the showing of two (2) consecutive exhibitions
(repeated performance of the same presentation shall not be considered a
consecutive exhibition); or
   C.   As its principal business, features persons who appear in live
performances in a state of nudity or seminudity or which are characterized by
the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual
activities".
BUSINESS LICENSE AUTHORITY: The city's business license coordinator or
designee.
EMPLOY: Hiring an individual to work for pecuniary compensation or any other
form of compensation, whether such person is hired on the payroll of the
employer, as an independent contractor, as an agent or in any other form of
employment relationship.
ESCORT: Any person who, for pecuniary compensation, dates, socializes, visits,
consorts with or accompanies or offers to date, consort, socialize, visit or
accompany another or others or about social affairs, entertainment or places of
amusement, or within any place of public or private resort or any business or
commercial establishment or any private quarters. "Escort" shall not be
construed to include persons who provide business or personal services such as
licensed private nurses, aides for the elderly or handicapped, social
secretaries or similar service personnel whose relationship with their patron
is characterized by a bona fide contractual relationship having a duration of
more than twelve (12) hours and who provide a service not principally
characterized as dating or socializing. "Escort" shall also not be construed to
include persons providing services such as singing telegrams, birthday
greetings or similar activities characterized by appearances in a public place,
contracted for by a party other than the person for whom the service is being
performed and of a duration not longer than one hour.
ESCORT SERVICE RUNNER: Any third person, not an escort, who, for pecuniary
compensation, acts in the capacity of an agent or broker for an escort service,
escort or patron by contracting or meeting with escort services, escorts or
patrons at any location within the city, whether or not such third person is
employed by such escort service, escort, patron, or by another business, or is
an independent contractor or self-employed.
ESCORT SERVICES: An individual or entity who, for pecuniary compensation,
furnishes or offers to furnish escorts, or provides or offers to introduce
patrons to escorts.
MODEL: Any person who appears nude or seminude or who displays specified
anatomical areas and who is provided pecuniary compensation or any form of
consideration to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured,
photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons.
NUDE, NUDITY OR STATE OF NUDITY: A state of dress in which the female breast
below a point immediately above the top of the areola, or the male or female
genitals, the buttocks, the pubic area or the anus are not fully covered by
opaque clothing.
OUTCALL SERVICE OR SERVICES: Services of a type performed by a sexually
oriented business employee outside of the premises of the licensed sexually
oriented business, including, but not limited to, escorts, models, dancers and
other similar employees.
PATRON: Any person who contracts with or employs any escort services or escort;
or any person who is a customer of any sexually oriented business which is or
is required to be licensed pursuant to this chapter.
PECUNIARY COMPENSATION: Any commission, fee, salary, tip, gratuity, hire,
profit, reward or any other form of consideration.
PERFORMER: Dancer, model and/or other entertainer appearing in a state of
seminudity.
PERSON: Any person, unincorporated association, corporation, partnership or
other legal entity.
SEMINUDE, SEMINUDITY, STATE OF SEMINUDITY: A state of dress in which opaque
clothing covers no more than the nipple and areola of the female breast and the
male or female genitals, pubic area and anus, which covering of the genitals,
pubic area and anus is no narrower than four inches (4") wide in the front and
five inches (5") wide in the back, and does not taper to less than one inch
(1") wide at the narrowest point.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: An inclusive term used to describe collectively
adult live entertainment businesses, outcall services, adult businesses and
"adult entertainment dancing agency", as defined by this chapter.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEES: Those employees who work on the premises
of the sexually oriented business in activities related to the sexually
oriented portion of the business. This includes all managing employees,
dancers, escorts, models and other similar employees whether or not hired as
employees, agents or as independent contractors. Employees shall not include
individuals whose work is unrelated to the sexually oriented portion of the
business, such as janitors, bookkeepers and similar employees. Sexually
oriented business employees shall not include cooks, serving persons, and
similar employees, except where they may be managers or supervisors of the
business. All persons making outcall meetings under this chapter, including
escorts, models, guards, escort runners, drivers, chauffeurs and other similar
employees, shall be considered sexually oriented business employees.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: The human male or female genitals, pubic area or
anus with less than a full opaque covering, or the human female breast below a
point immediately above the top of the areola, with less than full opaque
covering.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: A. Acts of:
      1.   Masturbation,
      2.   Human sexual intercourse,
      3.   Sexual copulation between a person and a beast,
      4.   Fellatio,
      5.   Cunnilingus,
      6.   Bestiality,
      7.   Pederasty,
      8.   Buggery, or
      9.   Any anal copulation between a human male and another human male,
human female, or beast;
   B.   Manipulating or caressing or fondling by any person of:
      1.   The genitals of a human,
      2.   The pubic area of a human, or
      3.   The uncovered female nipple and areola;
   C.   Flagellation or torture by or upon a person clad in undergarments, a
mask or bizarre costume, or the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise
physically restrained on the part of the one so clothed.
(Ord. 2000-39, 7-18-2000)
5-15-4: BUSINESS LICENSES:
   A.   Sexually Oriented Business: It shall be unlawful for any person to
operate a sexually oriented business as specified below, without first
obtaining a sexually oriented business license. The business license shall
specify the type of business for which it is obtained.
   B.   Sexually Oriented Business Employee: It shall be unlawful for any
sexually oriented business to employ or for any individual to be employed by a
sexually oriented business in the capacity of a sexually oriented business
employee, unless that employee first obtains a sexually oriented business
employee license.
   C.   Adult Entertainment Dancing Agencies:
      1.   It is unlawful for any individual or entity to furnish, book, or
otherwise engage the services of a professional dancer, model or performer to
appear in a state of seminudity for pecuniary compensation in, or for, any
adult live entertainment business or adult theater licensed pursuant to this
chapter unless such agency is licensed pursuant to this chapter.
      2.   It is unlawful for any individual or entity to furnish, book or
otherwise engage or permit any person to perform as a professional dancer,
model or performer in a state of seminudity, either gratuitously or for
compensation, in, or for, any business licensed pursuant to this chapter,
unless such person is licensed pursuant to this chapter.
   D.   Exemptions: The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any sex
therapist or similar individual licensed by the state to provide bona fide
sexual therapy or counseling, licensed medical practitioner, licensed nurse,
psychiatrist, psychologist, nor shall it apply to any educator licensed by the
state for activities in the classroom.
(Ord. 2000-39, 7-18-2000)
5-15-5: LEGITIMATE ARTISTIC MODELING:
   A.   Intent: The city does not intend to unreasonably or improperly prohibit
legitimate modeling which may occur in a state of nudity for purposes protected
by the First Amendment or similar state protection. The city does intend to
prohibit prostitution and related offenses occurring under the guise of nude
modeling. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection 5-15-14D of this
chapter, a licensed outcall employee may appear in a state of nudity before a
customer or patron providing that a written contract for such appearance was
entered into between the customer or patron and the employee and signed at
least twenty four (24) hours before the nude appearance. All of the other
applicable provisions of this chapter shall still apply to such nude
appearance.
   B.   Contract; Unlawful Activities: In the event of a contract for nude
modeling or appearance signed more than forty eight (48) hours in advance of
the modeling or appearance, the individual to appear nude shall not be required
to obtain a license pursuant to this chapter. During such unlicensed nude
appearance, it is unlawful to:
      1.   Appear nude in the presence of persons under the age of eighteen
(18);
      2.   Allow, offer or agree to any touching of the contracting party or
other person by the individual while appearing in a state of nudity;
      3.   Allow, offer or agree to commit prostitution, solicitation of
prostitution, solicitation of a minor, or committing activities harmful to a
minor;
      4.   Allow, offer, commit or agree to any sex act as validly defined by
city ordinances or state statute;
      5.   Allow, offer or agree to the contracting party or other person
masturbating in the presence of the individual contracted to appear nude;
      6.   Allow, offer or agree for the individual appearing nude to be within
five feet (5') of any other person while performing, modeling or appearing in a
state of nudity.
(Ord. 2000-39, 7-18-2000)
5-15-6: CATEGORIES; NUMBER OF LICENSES:
   A.   Scope: It is unlawful for any business premises to operate or be
licensed for more than one category of sexually oriented business, except that
a business may have a license for both outcall services and adult entertainment
dancing agency on the same premises.
   B.   Categories: The categories of sexually oriented businesses are:
      1.   Outcall services;
      2.   Adult businesses, including adult bookstores, adult video stores,
and adult motion picture theaters;
      3.   Adult live entertainment businesses;
      4.   Adult entertainment dancing agency.
(Ord. 2000-39, 7-18-2000)
5-15-7: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Before any applicant may be licensed to operate a sexually oriented business or
as a sexually oriented business employee pursuant to this chapter, the
applicant shall submit, on a form to be supplied by the business license
coordinator, the following:
   A.   Correct Legal Name: The correct legal name of each applicant,
corporation, partnership, limited partnership or entity doing business under an
assumed name;
   B.   Corporations; Partnerships: If the applicant is a corporation,
partnership or limited partnership or individual or entity doing business under
an assumed name, the information required below for individual applicants shall
be submitted for each partner and each principal of an applicant and for each
officer, director of a corporation and any shareholder (corporate or personal)
of more than ten percent (10%) of the stock of any applicant. Any holding
company, or any entity holding more than ten percent (10%) of an applicant
shall be considered an applicant for purposes of disclosure under this chapter;
   C.   Personal Information: For all applicants or individuals, the
application must also state:
      1.   Any other names or aliases used by the individual;
      2.   The age, date and place of birth;
      3.   Height, weight, color of hair, color of eyes;
      4.   Present business address and telephone number;
      5.   Present residence and telephone number;
      6.   Utah driver's license or identification number; and
      7.   Social security number;
   D.   Proof Of Age: Acceptable written proof that any individual is at least
eighteen (18) years of age;
   E.   Photographs: Attached to the form as provided above, two (2) color
photographs taken by the Ogden police department of the applicant clearly
showing the individual's face and the individual's fingerprints on a form
provided by the police department. For persons not residing in the city, the
fingerprints shall be on a form from the law enforcement jurisdiction where the
person resides. Fees for the fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant
directly to the issuing agency; fees for the photographs shall be covered as
part of the business license fee;
   F.   Previous Employment History And Residences: A statement of the
business, occupation, or employment history and all previous residence
addresses, if any, of each individual applicant, for the three (3) years
immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application;
   G.   License And Permit History: A statement detailing the business license
and permit history of the applicant for the five (5) year period immediately
preceding the date of the filing of the application for any license or permit
identical to or similar to those regulated by this chapter; and whether the
applicant, previously operating or seeking to operate such business or engaging
in such occupation in this or in any other county, city or state, has ever had
a license or permit denied, revoked or suspended. In the event of any such
denial, revocation or suspension, state the date, the name of the issuing or
denying jurisdiction, and state in full the reasons for the denial, revocation
or suspension;
   H.   Criminal Convictions: All criminal convictions or pleas of nolo
contendere, except those which have been expunged, for the applicant,
individual or other entity subject to disclosure under this chapter for five
(5) years prior to the date of application. This disclosure shall include
identification of all ordinance violations, excepting minor traffic offenses
(any traffic offense designated as a felony shall not be construed as a minor
traffic offense), stating the date, place, nature of each conviction or plea of
nolo contendere and sentence of each conviction or other disposition;
identifying the convicting jurisdiction. Application for a sexually oriented
business or employee license shall constitute a waiver of disclosure of any
criminal conviction or plea of nolo contendere for the purposes of any
proceeding involving the business or employee license;
(Ord. 2000-39, 7-18-2000)
   I.   Owner Of Property: In the event the applicant is not the owner of
record of the real property upon which the business or proposed business is or
is to be located, the application must be accompanied by a notarized statement
from the legal or equitable owner of the property specifically acknowledging
the type of business for which the applicant seeks a license for the property.
In addition to furnishing such notarized statement, the applicant shall furnish
the name, address and phone number of the owner of record of the property, as
well as a copy of the lease;
(Ord. 2001-66, 11-27-2001, eff. 12-13-2001)
   J.   Description Of Services: A description of the services to be provided
by the business, with sufficient detail to allow reviewing authorities to
determine what business will be transacted on the premises, together with a
schedule of usual fees for services to be charged by the licensee, and any
rules, regulations or employment guidelines under or by which the business
intends to operate. This description shall also include:
      1.   The hours that the business or service will be open to the public,
and the methods of promoting the health and safety of the employees and patrons
and preventing them from engaging in illegal activity,
      2.   The methods of supervision preventing the employees from engaging in
acts of prostitution or other related criminal activities,
      3.   The methods of supervising employees and patrons to prevent
employees and patrons from charging or receiving fees for services or acts
prohibited by this chapter or other statutes or ordinances,
      4.   The methods of screening employees and customers in order to promote
the health and safety of employees and customers and prevent the transmission
of disease and prevent the commission of acts of prostitution or other criminal
activity;
   K.   Unlawful: It is unlawful to knowingly submit false or materially
misleading information on or with a sexually oriented business license
application or to fail to disclose or omit information for the purpose of
obtaining a sexually oriented business or employee license.
(Ord. 2000-39, 7-18-2000)
5-15-8: LICENSE; BOND:
Each applicant for a sexually oriented business license shall post, with the
city's business license coordinator, a cash or corporate surety bond payable to
Ogden City in the amount of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Any fines or
penalties assessed against the business, officers, or managers for violations
of city ordinances related to the licensed premises shall be taken from this
bond if not paid in cash within ten (10) days after notice of the fine, unless
an appeal is filed as provided by this chapter. In the event the funds are
drawn against the cash or surety bond to pay such fines or penalties, the bond
shall be replenished to two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) within fifteen (15)
days of the date of notice of any draw against it.
(Ord. 2000-39, 7-18-2000)
5-15-9: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
   A.   Within Thirty Days; Exceptions: The city business license coordinator
shall approve the license application within thirty (30) days after receipt of
an application, unless the business license coordinator finds one or more of
the following:
      1.   An applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age.
      2.   The applicant is overdue in payment to the city of fees, taxes,
fines, or penalties assessed against the applicant or imposed on the applicant
in relation to a sexually oriented business.
      3.   The applicant has falsely answered a material question or request
for information as authorized by this chapter.
      4.   The applicant has violated a provision of this chapter or similar
provisions found in statutes or ordinances from any jurisdiction within two (2)
years immediately preceding the application; a conviction for a violation of a
provision of this chapter or similar provisions from any jurisdiction, whether
or not it is being appealed, is conclusive evidence of a violation, but a
conviction is not necessary to prove a violation.
      5.   The premises to be used for the business has been disapproved by the
county health department, the city fire department, the city police department
and the city building officials or the city zoning officials as not being in
compliance with applicable laws and ordinances of the city. If any of the
foregoing reviewing agencies cannot complete their review within the thirty
(30) day approval or denial period, the agency or department may obtain from
the business license coordinator an extension of time for their review of no
more than fifteen (15) days. The total time for the city to approve or deny a
license shall not exceed forty five (45) days from the receipt of an
application and payment of all fees. Businesses located outside of the
corporate boundaries of the city, but requiring a license under this chapter,
may be denied a license pursuant to this chapter if the business does not have
a valid business license to conduct business at the business location from the
appropriate jurisdiction for that location.
         a.   Upon receipt of an application all departments required to review
the application shall determine within seven (7) days whether or not the
application is incomplete in items needed for processing. Incomplete
applications shall immediately be returned to the applicant with a
specification of the items which are incomplete.
         b.   The time for processing applications specified in this section
shall begin to run from the receipt of a complete application.
         c.   In the event that a license for an adult live entertainment
business, an adult entertainment dancing agency or an adult business, has not
been disapproved within thirty (30) days or the forty five (45) days allowed
after an extension, the city shall issue the license pending completion of the
city's review.
         d.   Any license issued pursuant to subsection A5c of this section may
be revoked by the city pursuant to the revocation procedures of chapter 1,
article C of this title and subsections 5-15-19A and B of this chapter if the
completed review determines that the license should have been denied.
      6.   The required license fees have not been paid.
      7.   All applicable sales and use taxes have not been paid.
      8.   An applicant for the proposed business is in violation of or not in
compliance with this chapter or similar provisions found in statutes or
ordinances from any jurisdiction.
      9.   An applicant has been convicted of or pleaded nolo contendere to a
crime:
         a.   Involving prostitution; exploitation of prostitution; aggravated
promotion of prostitution; solicitation of sex acts; sex acts for hire;
compelling prostitution; aiding prostitution; sale, distribution or display of
material harmful to minors; sexual performance by minors; possession of child
pornography; public lewdness; indecent exposure; any crime involving sexual
abuse or exploitation of a child; sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault;
rape; forcible sodomy; forcible sexual abuse; incest; harboring a runaway
child; the unlawful possession or use of controlled substances; criminal
attempt, conspiracy or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses or
offenses involving similar elements from any jurisdiction regardless of the
exact title of the offense for which:
            (1)   Less than two (2) years have elapsed from the date of
conviction, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense, or less than five
(5) years, if the convictions are of two (2) or more misdemeanors within the
five (5) years; or
            (2)   Less than five (5) years have elapsed from the date of
conviction, if the offense is a felony.
         b.   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect
on the disqualification pursuant to this section.
(Ord. 2001-66, 11-27-2001, eff. 12-13-2001)
   B.   License Term: Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire at
the end of the licensing term, and thereafter renewed, as provided in section
5-1A-13 of this title.
   C.   Employee Licenses: The license for sexually oriented business employees
shall contain the license number; the name of the licensee; the stage names of
performers; a physical description; a photograph of the employee; the name of
the agent or agency, if applicable; and the expiration date of the license.
(Ord. 2000-39, 7-18-2000; amd. Ord. 2006-42, 7-11-2006)
5-15-10: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Adult Live Entertainment Businesses: It is unlawful for any business
licensed as an adult live entertainment business to be located within three
hundred thirty feet (330') of a business licensed for the sale or consumption
of alcohol; provided, such restriction is not intended to prohibit an adult
live entertainment business from obtaining a license for the sale and
consumption of alcoholic beverages for its premises, under the provisions of
chapter 3, article C of this title.
   B.   Zoning: It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business to do
business at any location within the city not zoned for such business. Sexually
oriented businesses shall only be allowed in areas zoned for their use pursuant
to the zoning ordinance.
(Ord. 2000-39, 7-18-2000)
5-15-11: DESIGN OF PREMISES:
   A.   Adult Business Or Live Entertainment Businesses; Diagram: In addition
to the general requirements of disclosure for a sexually oriented business, any
applicant for a license as an adult business or adult live entertainment
business shall also submit a diagram, drawn to scale, of the premises of the
license. The design and construction, which must be completed prior to granting
a license or opening for business, shall conform to subsection D of this
section and the following provisions as applicable:
      1.   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view from the manager's station of every area of
the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding
restrooms.
      2.   Restrooms may not contain any video reproduction equipment or any of
the business merchandise. Signs shall be posted requiring only one person be
allowed in the restroom per stall, and only one person in any stall at a time,
and requiring that patrons shall not be allowed access to the manager's station
areas.
      3.   For businesses which exclude minors from the entire premises, all
windows, doors and other apertures to the premises shall be darkened or
otherwise constructed to prevent anyone outside the premises from seeing the
inside of the premises. Businesses which exclude minors from less than all of
the premises shall be designed and constructed so that minors may not see into
the area from which they are excluded. The above restriction shall not apply to
a reception area or foyer where no depictions or displays of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas can be seen while standing within said
foyer area.
      4.   The diagram required shall not necessarily be a professional
engineer's or architect's blueprint; however, the diagram must show marked
internal dimensions, all overhead lighting fixtures, and ratings for
illumination capacity.
   B.   Manager's Station; Unobstructed View: It shall be the duty of the
licensee and the licensee's employees to ensure that the views from the
manager's station in subsection A1 of this section remain unobstructed by any
doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or any other materials, at all times
that any patron is present in the premises, and to ensure that no patron is
permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an
area in which patrons will not be permitted.
   C.   Lighting Fixtures: The premises shall at all times be equipped and
operated with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate
every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not
less than one foot-candle, measured at floor level. It shall be the duty of the
licensee and the licensee's employees present on the premises to ensure that
the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is
present on the premises.
   D.   Adult Live Entertainment Business; Additional Requirements:
      1.   In addition to the requirements in subsections A through C of this
section, it is unlawful for any adult live entertainment business premises
licensed under this chapter to:
         a.   Permit a bed, sofa, mattress or similar item in any room on the
premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the
public or in any office to which patrons are not admitted, and except that in
an adult theater such items may be on the stage as part of a performance.
         b.   Allow any door on any room used for the business, except for the
door to an office to which patrons shall not be admitted, outside doors and
restroom doors, to be lockable from the inside.
         c.   Provide any room in which the employee or employees and the
patron or patrons are alone together.
      2.   Adult live entertainment businesses, including adult theaters, shall
also require that any performance area be on a stage raised at least two feet
(2') from the level of the main floor separated from the patrons by a minimum
of three feet (3'), which separation shall be delineated by a physical barrier
at least three feet (3') high.
(Ord. 2000-39, 7-18-2000)
5-15-12: HOURS OF OPERATION:
No adult live entertainment business shall provide entertainment between the
hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M.
(Ord. 2000-39, 7-18-2000)
5-15-13: LICENSE; SPECIFIC REGULATIONS:
   A.   Notice Of Change Of Information: Any change in the information required
to be submitted under this chapter for either a sexually oriented business
license or sexually oriented business employee license shall be given, in
writing, to the business license coordinator and the police department within
fourteen (14) days after such change.
   B.   Transfer Limitations: Sexually oriented business licenses granted under
this chapter shall not be transferable. It is unlawful for a license held by an
individual to be transferred. It is unlawful for a license held by a
corporation, partnership or other noncorporate entity to transfer any part in
excess of ten percent (10%) thereof, without filing a new application and
obtaining prior city approval. If any transfer of the controlling interest in a
business licensee occurs, the license is immediately null and void, and the
business shall not operate until a separate new license has been properly
issued by the city as provided in this chapter.
   C.   Display Of License: It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business
location within the boundaries of the city to fail to display the license
granted pursuant to this chapter in a prominent location within the business
premises. It is unlawful for any individual licensed pursuant to this chapter
to fail to carry, at all times while engaged in licensed activities within the
corporate limits of the city, carry their employee license on their person. If
the individual is performing, such license shall be visibly displayed within
the same room as the employee is performing. When requested by police, city
licensing or other enforcement personnel, it is unlawful to fail to show the
appropriate licenses while engaged in licensed activities within the corporate
boundaries of the city.
   D.   Advertisements; Statement: It is unlawful for any advertisement by the
sexually oriented business or employee to fail to state that the business or
employee is licensed by the city and shall include the city license number.
(Ord. 2000-39, 7-18-2000)
5-15-14: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Obscenity: Notwithstanding anything contained in this chapter, nothing
in this chapter shall be deemed to permit or allow the showing or display of
any matter which is contrary to the provisions of this code, or other
applicable federal or state statutes prohibiting obscenity.
   B.   Premises Location: It is unlawful to conduct business under a license
issued pursuant to this chapter at any location other than the licensed
premises. Any location to which telephone calls are automatically forwarded by
such business shall require a separate license.
   C.   Business Name: It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business to do
business in the city under any name other than the business name specified in
the application.
   D.   Unlawful Activities: It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business
or sexually oriented business employee to:
      1.   Allow persons under the age of eighteen (18) years on the licensed
premises, or under the age of twenty one (21) years if the premises are
licensed for the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages, except that in
adult businesses which exclude minors from less than all of the business
premises, minors shall not be permitted in excluded areas;
      2.   Allow, offer or agree to conduct any outcall business with persons
under the age of eighteen (18) years;
      3.   To allow the sale, storage, supply, or consumption of alcoholic
beverages on the licensed premises unless a Class C or Class D license has been
issued for the premises pursuant to chapter 3, article C of this title;
      4.   Allow the outside door to the premises to be locked while any patron
or customer is on or in the licensed premises;
      5.   Allow, offer or agree to gambling on the licensed premises;
      6.   Allow, offer or agree to any sexually oriented business employee
touching or being touched by any patron or customer, except that outcall
employees and customers may touch, provided that any touching of specified
anatomical areas, whether clothed or unclothed, is prohibited;
      7.   Allow any sexually oriented business employee to perform or appear
on the premises of an adult live entertainment business in a state of nudity or
for the employee to perform or appear in a state of nudity on such premises,
except that a performer may be allowed to perform or appear in a state of
seminudity on a stage or within a performance area designed and separated as
required in subsections 5-15-11D1c and D2 of this chapter;
      8.   Allow, offer or agree to illegal possession, use, sale or
distribution of controlled substances on the licensed premises;
      9.   Allow sexually oriented business employees to possess, use, sell or
distribute controlled substances while engaged in the activities of the
business;
      10.   Allow, offer or agree to commit prostitution, solicitation of
prostitution, solicitation of a minor or committing activities harmful to a
minor to occur on the licensed premises or, in the event of an outcall employee
or business, the outcall employee committing, offering or agreeing to commit
prostitution, attempting to commit prostitution, soliciting prostitution,
soliciting a minor, or committing activities harmful to a minor;
      11.   Allow, offer, commit or agree to any specified sexual activity as
validly defined by city ordinances or state statute in the presence of any
customer or patron;
      12.   Allow, offer or agree to any outcall employee appearing before any
customer or patron in a state of nudity;
      13.   Allow, offer or agree to allow a patron or customer to masturbate
in the presence of the sexually oriented business employee or on the premises
of a sexually oriented business;
      14.   To engage or allow any employee to engage in activity for the
purpose of soliciting, beckoning, requesting or suggesting to any person to
enter such premises as a patron within twenty five feet (25') of any sexually
oriented business;
      15.   To allow an employee to act in a capacity of what is commonly known
as a "lookout" to be stationed or maintained to give warning of the approach of
any police officer to the premises of a sexually oriented business or to
maintain or operate any electrical or other device which is used or capable of
being used to give warning to persons within the premises of a sexually
oriented business of the approach of any police officer.
   E.   Manager Responsibilities:
      1.   Unless an owner is present, a manager shall be on duty at an adult
live entertainment business at all times adult live entertainment is being
provided or that customers are on the premises. The name of the manager on duty
shall be prominently posted during business hours.
      2.   Unless an owner is present, a manager shall be on duty at an adult
business at all times that the business is open. The name of the manager on
duty shall be prominently posted during business hours.
(Ord. 2000-39, 7-18-2000)
5-15-15: PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES:
   A.   Performers: It is unlawful for any professional dancer, model or
performer, while performing in any business licensed pursuant to this chapter
to:
      1.   Touch in any manner any other person;
      2.   Throw any object or clothing off the stage area;
      3.   Accept any money, drink or any other object directly from any
person; or
      4.   Allow another person to touch such performer or to place any money
or object on the performer or within the costume or person of the performer;
      5.   Fail to be costumed at all times with opaque clothing covering the
nipple and areola of the female breast and the male or female genitals, pubic
area and anus, which covering of the genitals, pubic area and anus shall be no
narrower than four inches (4") wide in the front and five inches (5") wide in
the back, and shall not taper to less than one inch (1") wide at the narrowest
point;
      6.   Wear or expose any device, costume, or covering which gives the
appearance of or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, natal cleft, perineum anal
region or pubic hair region; or wear or expose any device worn as a cover over
the nipples and/or areola of the female breast, which device simulates and
gives the realistic appearance of nipples; or
      7.   To touch or cross over the barrier separating the patrons from the
stage.
   B.   Patrons: It is unlawful for any person, or any patron of any adult live
entertainment business to touch in any manner any performer; to place any money
or object on or within the costume or person of any performer; to cross over
the barrier separating the patrons from the stage during a seminude
performance; to bring into the premises any alcoholic beverage for on premises
consumption; or to give or offer to give to any such performer any drinks,
money or object while such performer is performing; except that money may be
placed on the stage which shall not be picked up by the performer except by
hand.
(Ord. 2000-39, 7-18-2000; amd. Ord. 2001-66, 11-27-2001, eff. 12-13-2001)
5-15-16: OUTCALL SERVICES; OPERATION REQUIREMENTS:
It is unlawful for any business or employee providing outcall services
contracted for in the city, to fail to comply with the following requirements:
   A.   Written Contract: All businesses licensed to provide outcall services
pursuant to this chapter shall provide to each patron a written contract in
receipt of pecuniary compensation for services. The contract shall clearly
state the type of services to be performed, the length of time such services
shall be performed, the total amount such services shall cost the patron, and
any special terms or conditions relating to the services to be performed. The
contract need not include the name of the patron. The business licensee shall
keep and maintain a copy of each written contract entered into pursuant to this
section for a period of not less than one year from the date of provision of
services thereunder. The contracts shall be numbered and entered into a
register listing the contract number, date, names of all employees involved in
the contract and pecuniary compensation paid.
   B.   Maintain Office Or Telephone: All outcall businesses licensed pursuant
to this chapter shall maintain an open office or telephone at which the
licensee or licensee's designated agent may be personally contacted during all
hours outcall employees are working. The address and phone number of the
license location shall appear and be included in all patron contracts and
published advertisements. For outcall businesses which premises are licensed
within the corporate limits of the city, private rooms or booths where the
patrons may meet with the outcall employee shall not be provided at the open
office or any other location by the service, nor shall patrons meet outcall
employees at the business premises.
   C.   Advertise; Manner: Outcall services shall not advertise in such a
manner that would lead a reasonably prudent person to conclude that specified
sexual activities would be performed by the outcall employee.
   D.   Employee Licensing: All employees of outcall services who provide
outcall services within the city shall be licensed in accordance with this
chapter, regardless of the primary location of the business.
(Ord. 2000-39, 7-18-2000)
5-15-17: INSPECTION OF PREMISES:
A police officer or other "authorized officer" as defined in section
5-1A-1 of this title, may, during the hours that the establishment is open for
business, upon presentation of proper identification, inspect those portions of
any premises in which a sexually oriented business regulated under this chapter
is conducted that are open to or frequented by patrons and the records kept on
the premises as required by subsection
5-15-16A of this chapter. Such inspection shall be limited in scope to that
necessary to determine compliance with the regulatory provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 2000-39, 7-18-2000)
5-15-18: NUDITY; DEFENSES TO PROSECUTION:
It is a defense to prosecution or violation under this chapter that a person
appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
   A.   Proprietary School: By a proprietary school licensed by the state, or a
college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation;
   B.   Private College Or University: By a private college or university which
maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable
to a college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation.
(Ord. 2000-39, 7-18-2000)
5-15-19: VIOLATIONS:
   A.   Injunction: An entity or individual who operates or causes to be
operated a sexually oriented business, without a valid license, or who employs
or is employed as an employee of a sexually oriented business, or who operates
such a business or functions as such an employee in violation of the provisions
of this chapter, is subject to a suit for injunction in addition to the civil
and criminal violations provided herein, and any other remedy available at law
or in equity.
   B.   Suspension Or Revocation:
      1.   The city may issue a notice suspending or revoking a sexually
oriented business or employee license granted under this chapter if a licensee,
or an employee of the licensee has:
         a.   Violated or is not in compliance with the provisions of this
chapter;
         b.   Refused to allow any inspection of the premises of the sexually
oriented business specifically authorized by this chapter, or by any other
statute or ordinance;
         c.   Submitted materially false or misleading information in obtaining
the license;
         d.   A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the sexually
oriented business or worked under the employee license during the period when
the business licensee or employee licensee's license was suspended;
         e.   A licensee has committed an offense which would be grounds for
denial of a license for which the time period required has not elapsed;
         f.   On two (2) or more occasions within a twelve (12) month period, a
person committed in or on, or solicited for in or on the licensed premises, or
an outcall employee solicited or committed on or off the premises, an offense
which would be grounds for denial of a license for which a conviction has been
obtained, and the person or persons were employees, whether or not licensed, of
the sexually oriented business at the time the offenses were committed;
      2.   Suspension or revocation shall take effect within ten (10) days of
the issuance of notice, unless an appeal is filed as provided by this chapter.
      3.   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on
the revocation of the license.
      4.   When a license issued pursuant to this chapter is revoked, the
revocation shall continue for one year from its effective date, and the
licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business or employee license
for one year from the date of such revocation.
(Ord. 2000-39, 7-18-2000)
5-15-20: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
   A.   Filing: If the license is denied or approved with qualifications, or if
a notice of suspension or revocation is given, the applicant or licensee may
file an appeal with the business license coordinator.
   B.   Time Limitation; Hearing Scheduled: Filing of an appeal must be within
ten (10) days of the date of service of the notice of any denial, qualified
approval, suspension or revocation. Upon receiving the notice of such appeal,
the business license coordinator shall schedule a hearing before a designated
hearing officer within twenty (20) days from the date of the appeal unless such
time shall be extended for good cause.
   C.   Hearing: The hearing officer shall hold a hearing on the record, and
take such facts and evidence as necessary to determine whether the denial,
qualified approval, suspension or revocation was proper under the law.
   D.   Burden Of Proof: The burden of proof shall be on the city.
   E.   Recommended Decision: After the hearing, the hearing officer shall have
seven (7) working days, unless extended for good cause, in which to render
findings of fact, conclusions of law, and recommended decision to the mayor.
   F.   Objections: Either party may object to the recommendation of the
hearing officer by filing the party's objection and reasons, in writing, to the
mayor within seven (7) days following the recommendation. In the event the
hearing officer recommends upholding a suspension or revocation, the license
shall be immediately suspended, and shall remain suspended until any subsequent
appeal is decided. If no objections are received within the seven (7) days, the
mayor may immediately adopt the recommendation of the hearing officer.
   G.   Consideration: If objections are received, the mayor shall have ten
(10) working days to consider such objections before issuing the mayor's final
decision. The mayor may, in the mayor's discretion, take additional evidence or
require written memorandum on issues of fact or law. The standard by which the
mayor shall review the decision of the hearing officer is whether substantial
evidence exists in the record to support the hearing officer's recommendation.
   H.   Judicial Review: An applicant aggrieved by the mayor's decision shall
have judicial review of such decision pursuant to rule 65.B., Utah rules of
civil procedure, or any other applicable ordinance, statute or rule providing
for such review.
(Ord. 2000-39, 7-18-2000)
5-15-21: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2000-39, 7-18-2000; amd. Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
5-15-22: APPLICABILITY OF REGULATIONS TO EXISTING BUSINESSES:
   A.   The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all persons and
businesses described herein, whether the herein described activities were
established before or after the effective date of the provisions codified in
this chapter and regardless of whether such persons and businesses are
currently licensed to do business in the city.
   B.   The following persons or businesses shall have the following periods of
time to comply with the provisions of this chapter:
      1.   A tavern or private club licensed and operating as a cabaret on July
18, 2000, which is classified under the provisions of this chapter as an adult
live entertainment business, shall have until January 2, 2001, to comply with
the provisions of this chapter.
      2.   Any person licensed as a professional dancer on July 18, 2000, who
is classified under the provisions of this ordinance as a sexually oriented
business employee, shall have until January 2, 2001, to comply with the
provisions of this chapter.
   C.   Compliance with location, site, or signage restrictions or requirements
under the sexually oriented zoning ordinances shall be governed by the
provisions of this title.
(Ord. 2000-39, 7-18-2000)
CHAPTER 16
TRANSPORTATION
ARTICLE A.  AMBULANCES
SECTION:
5-16A-1: Services; Authority
5-16A-2: License Required; Fee; Exemptions
5-16A-3: Verification Of State License
5-16A-1: SERVICES; AUTHORITY:
Ambulance service may be provided within the corporate limits of the City by
those persons or entities authorized to supply that service within those limits
provided under the Emergency Medical Service Systems Act of the State, Utah
Code Annotated title 26, chapter 8, the implementing regulations thereof and
any amendments thereto or other applicable State laws.
(1979 Code § 5.06.010; Ord. 91-35, 8-29-1991)
5-16A-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE; EXEMPTIONS:
No person shall engage in the business of operating a private ambulance within
the corporate limits of the City without first obtaining a City business
license. "Engaging in the business of operating a private ambulance" shall
include the operation of a private ambulance service from a business location
established within the City or the operation of any ambulance upon the streets
of the City by a private ambulance service while transporting a sick or injured
person. The transport to any place located in the City of any sick, injured,
wounded or otherwise incapacitated or helpless person from a point or origin
outside the City limits, the nonstop transport through the City by an ambulance
and operations by all ambulances exempt from the Emergency Medical Service
Systems Act of the State are exempt from this licensing requirement. Also
exempt from licensing under this Section is the operation of an ambulance
merely as back-up to another ambulance operator; provided, that the transport
of the sick or injured person was requested by the governmental agency
responsible for dispatching emergency medical services. Persons licensed under
this Section shall pay a license fee under Chapter 1, Article B of this Title.
(1979 Code § 5.06.020; Ord. 91-35, 8-29-1991; amd. Ord. 97-94, 12-16-1997)
5-16A-3: VERIFICATION OF STATE LICENSE:
No license shall be issued for the operation of a private ambulance business
within the City except to those persons or entities who have been licensed by
the State and no license shall be issued for the operation of an ambulance
service if such operation is in conflict with service areas established by the
State. The Business License Coordinator shall require verification from the
State of the existence of a current and valid license and verification of the
approved service area under the State license.
(1979 Code § 5.06.030; Ord. 91-35, 8-29-1991)
ARTICLE B.  CERTIFICATE OF PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY
SECTION:
5-16B-1: Certificate Required For Operation
5-16B-2: Application; Information Required
5-16B-3: Insurance Required
5-16B-4: Additional Authority By Holders; Application
5-16B-5: Fees For Certificate; Additional Authority
5-16B-6: Issuance; Determination Authority
5-16B-7: Transfer Restrictions
5-16B-8: Suspension And Revocation; Conditions
5-16B-9: Vehicles; List Filed With Police Department
5-16B-1: CERTIFICATE REQUIRED FOR OPERATION:
All persons required by any ordinance of the City to obtain a certificate of
public convenience and necessity as a condition of operating a public
transportation for hire business within the City shall be governed by this
Article. Nothing herein shall relieve any persons of the requirements of any
other applicable City ordinance.
(1979 Code § 5.60.010; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-16B-2: APPLICATION; INFORMATION REQUIRED:
   A.   Submission; Information: An application for a certificate shall be
filed with the Business License Coordinator upon forms provided by the City,
and the application shall be verified under oath and shall furnish the
following information:
      1.   The name and business address of the applicant and, in the event the
application is made a corporation, a certified copy of the articles of
incorporation. No application shall be made on behalf of another person,
without disclosing that fact and stating the name of the person on whose behalf
the application if filed. The application shall also include the residence
address of all sole proprietor applicants, of all partners of partnership
applicants and of all officers and directors of corporate applicants.
      2.   The number of vehicles actually operated by such applicant for
public transportation for hire as of the date of such application.
      3.   The number of vehicles for which a certificate of public convenience
and necessity is desired for public transportation for hire.
      4.   The location of the proposed central place of business and any other
office to be maintained.
      5.   The financial status of the applicant, including any unpaid or
nonbonded judgments of record against such applicant, the title of all actions
and the amount of all such judgments, and the nature of the transaction or acts
giving rise to such judgment.
      6.   The experience of applicant in public transportation of passengers
for hire.
      7.   The color scheme or insignia to be used to designate the vehicle or
vehicles of the applicant.
      8.   Any facts which the applicant believes tend to establish that public
convenience and necessity would be served by the granting of a certificate.
   B.   Application; Public Hearing: Upon the filing of an application, the
Mayor, or the Mayor's designee, shall fix a time and place for a public hearing
thereon.
   C.   Hearing; Notice To Applicant, Other Holders And Public: Notice of the
public hearing shall be given to the applicant, and to all persons to whom
certificates of public convenience and necessity have been theretofore issued,
by United States mail, and notice shall be given the general public of the City
by posting a notice of such hearing in the office of the City Recorder and
publishing, at least once, in a newspaper of general circulation in the City.
Said notices shall be given at least ten (10) calendar days prior to said
hearing.
(1979 Code § 5.60.020; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-16B-3: INSURANCE REQUIRED:
No certificate of public convenience and necessity shall be issued or continued
in operation, unless there is on file with the city recorder a certificate of
insurance executed by an insurance company or association authorized to
transact business in this state, approved as to form by the city attorney, that
there is in full force and effect a comprehensive general liability policy of
insurance covering the operation of applicant's business operations with
minimum limits of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per person in any
one occurrence and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for two (2) or more
persons in any one occurrence for personal injury, and five hundred thousand
dollars ($500,000.00) for property damage for any one occurrence. Such policy
or policies shall include coverage of all vehicles and horses used or to be
used for public transportation for hire, all stables and other buildings and
structures occupied or used, and all motor vehicles used in connection with
applicant's business. A current certificate of insurance shall be kept on file
with the city recorder at all times that a certificate of convenience and
necessity is held verifying such continuing coverage and naming the city as an
additional insured. The certificate shall contain a statement that the city
will be given written notification at least thirty (30) days prior to
cancellation or material change in the coverage without reservation of
nonliability for failure to so notify the city. Cancellation shall constitute
grounds for revocation of the certificate of convenience and necessity issued
hereunder unless another insurance policy complying herewith is provided and is
in effect at the time of cancellation/termination.
(1979 Code § 5.60.030; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998; amd. Ord. 2008-52, 10-21-2008)
5-16B-4: ADDITIONAL AUTHORITY BY HOLDERS; APPLICATION:
Upon the filing of an application for a certificate, any present holder of a
certificate may apply for additional authority under such certificate for the
same or any other number of vehicles for which authority is asked in the
application, and such request for additional authority shall be heard in
conjunction with the application initially filed.
(1979 Code § 5.60.040; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-16B-5: FEES FOR CERTIFICATE; ADDITIONAL AUTHORITY:
   A.   An application for a certificate of public convenience and necessity or
an application for a certificate of additional authority hereunder shall be
accompanied by a payment of a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00), the same to
be applied toward payment of the costs of hearings and proceedings on same. If
the costs to the city of such hearings and proceedings exceed one hundred
dollars ($100.00), the applicant shall reimburse the city for such excess. If
the cost is less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), the city shall refund the
difference to the applicant after the final conclusion of such hearings and
proceedings. Said fee shall be in addition to the fees required to be paid
under chapter 1, article B of this title, or its successor.
   B.   No certificate shall be issued or continued in operation unless the
holder thereof has paid the annual city business license fees as established in
chapter 1, article B of this title for the business and for each vehicle
authorized under a certificate of public convenience and necessity, and any
other fees or charges established by proper authority and applicable to the
holder or to those vehicles under the holder's operation and control.
(1979 Code § 5.60.050; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-16B-6: ISSUANCE; DETERMINATION AUTHORITY:
   A.   Issuance; Content: If the mayor, or the mayor's designee, finds that
further public transportation for hire in the city serves the public
convenience and necessity and that the applicant is fit financially and willing
and able to perform such public transportation and to conform to the provisions
of this article, then the city shall issue a certificate stating the name and
address of the applicant and the number of vehicles authorized under the
certificate.
   B.   Considerations: In making the above findings, the mayor, or the mayor's
designee, shall take into consideration the number of vehicles already in
operation, whether existing transportation is adequate to meet the public
convenience, the probable effect of the issuance on the present carriers, the
probable effect of increased service on local traffic conditions, the
character, experience and financial responsibility of the applicant, the
number, kind and type of equipment, and the ability of the applicant to earn a
fair return on the capital invested.
(1979 Code § 5.60.060; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-16B-7: TRANSFER RESTRICTIONS:
No certificate of public convenience and necessity may be sold, assigned,
mortgaged, leased or otherwise transferred or encumbered, without the formal
consent of the mayor, or the mayor's designee, after a public hearing conducted
in accordance with this article.
(1979 Code § 5.60.070; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-16B-8: SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION; CONDITIONS:
   A.   Conditions: A certificate issued under the provisions of this Chapter
may be revoked or suspended by the Mayor, or the Mayor's designee, if the
holder thereof has:
      1.   Violated any of the provisions of this Title;
      2.   Abandoned operations for more than sixty (60) days;
      3.   Violated any ordinances of the City or the laws of the United States
or the State, the violation of which reflects unfavorably on the fitness of the
holder to offer public transportation; or
      4.   Become financially irresponsible to a degree that reflects
unfavorably upon the holder's ability to offer public transportation.
   B.   Notice; Hearing: Prior to suspension or revocation, the holder shall be
given notice of the proposed action to be taken and shall have an opportunity
to be heard by the Mayor, or the Mayor's designee, according to the procedures
set forth in Chapter 1, Article C of this Title.
(1979 Code § 5.60.080; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-16B-9: VEHICLES; LIST FILED WITH POLICE DEPARTMENT:
Holders shall at all times have on file with the Police Department an up-to-
date list of the vehicles operated under their certificates, which list shall
contain the make, type, year of manufacture, serial number and passenger
capacity of each vehicle operated under said certificate.
(1979 Code § 5.60.090; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
ARTICLE C.  HORSEDRAWN CARRIAGES
SECTION:
5-16C-1: Definitions
5-16C-2: Number Limitation
5-16C-3: License Required
5-16C-4: Certificate Required
5-16C-5: Application And Qualification Requirements
5-16C-6: Carriage Driver's License Required
5-16C-7: Approval Procedure
5-16C-8: Records Maintained
5-16C-9: Routes Designated
5-16C-10: Rules And Regulations
5-16C-11: Prohibited Acts
5-16C-12: Suspension, Revocation Or Denial
5-16C-1: DEFINITIONS:
CERTIFICATE: A certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by the
mayor, or the mayor's designee, authorizing the holder thereof to conduct in
Ogden City a business in the transportation of persons by horsedrawn carriage
pursuant to the provisions of this article.
HOLDER: A person to whom a certificate of public convenience and necessity has
been issued.
HORSEDRAWN CARRIAGE: A nonmotorized vehicle propelled by a horse used for the
purpose of transporting persons for hire, or for tips or gratuities, within the
city.
(1979 Code § 5.31.010; Ord. 88-23, 6-9-1988; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-16C-2: NUMBER LIMITATION:
The mayor may limit the number of horsedrawn carriages that may be licensed to
operate upon the streets of the city on the basis of public convenience,
welfare and necessity, under the provisions of section
5-1A-2 of this title.
(1979 Code § 5.31.030; Ord. 88-23, 6-9-1988; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-16C-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation owning or having under its
control any horsedrawn carriage to operate the same or to suffer the same to be
operated or to suffer or allow the same to be upon the streets of the city
unless a horsedrawn carriage license has been issued pursuant to the provisions
of this article and is in full force and effect at the time of the operation or
presence of said carriage upon the streets of the city as aforesaid. No license
shall be issued for any such carriage business except to a holder of a
certificate as provided under section
5-16C-4 of this article. A horsedrawn carriage license for each carriage shall
be issued only to the owner thereof and after compliance with the provisions of
this article.
(1979 Code § 5.31.020; Ord. 88-23, 6-9-1988; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-16C-4: CERTIFICATE REQUIRED:
No person shall operate, or permit to be operated, a horsedrawn carriage owned
or controlled by him upon the streets of the city without having first obtained
a certificate of public convenience and necessity, as provided under article B
of this chapter, authorizing the operation of a horsedrawn carriage.
(1979 Code § 5.31.015; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-16C-5: APPLICATION AND QUALIFICATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Contents Of Application: Applications for horsedrawn carriage licenses
shall be made on forms furnished by the city. The applications must set forth
the full name and address of the applicant, the number of carriages, and shall
also contain such other information as the city may from time to time specify.
It shall be unlawful to make any false statement on an application for any such
license.
(1979 Code § 5.31.040; Ord. 88-23, 6-9-1988; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
   B.   Fee For License: The fees for horse-drawn carriage licenses shall be as
established in Chapter 1, Article B of this Title.
(1979 Code § 5.31.050; Ord. 88-23, 6-9-1988; amd. Ord. 97-94, 12-16-1997; Ord.
98-54, 8-18-1998)
   C.   Carriage Inspection: No license shall be granted for any horse-drawn
carriage, until it has been thoroughly and carefully inspected and examined by
or under the direction of the Chief of Police and found to be in a thoroughly
safe condition for the transportation of passengers, clean, fit, of good
appearance and well painted and varnished, and, further, found to comply with
all applicable laws, ordinances and regulations of the State. The Chief of
Police shall at all intervals, in his discretion, after the issuance of the
license, make regular and thorough inspection of the licensed carriage. The
Business License Coordinator shall refuse a license to, or if already issued,
the Mayor, or the Mayor's designee, may revoke or suspend the license of, any
carriage found by the Chief of Police to be unfit or unsuited for public
patronage. It is unlawful to operate or to place in service or allow to be
operated on the streets of the City any public carriage which fails to meet the
minimum requirements specified in this subsection.
(1979 Code § 5.31.060; Ord. 88-23, 6-9-1988; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
   D.   Common Carrier Status: Licensee shall be responsible to obtain the
approval and comply with any terms that may be imposed by the Public Service
Commission of the State, should it be required.
(1979 Code § 5.31.100; Ord. 88-23, 6-9-1988; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
   E.   Card Issuance; Contents: Upon satisfactory proof of the successful
passing of the inspection made by the Chief of Police and the payment of the
necessary fees and the compliance with all other sections of this Article, the
Business License Coordinator shall issue to any person, firm or corporation
operating a horse-drawn carriage business in the City a carriage license card
for each carriage license. The form and size of the card shall be prescribed by
the Business License Coordinator and shall contain a description of the
carriage, together with any identification number or numbers, the date of its
issuance and a statement to the effect that in case of any complaint, the Chief
of Police and the horse-drawn carriage licensee shall be notified. The card
shall be signed by the Business License Coordinator and shall be good for the
license year of its issuance unless sooner revoked or suspended, and shall
contain blank spaces upon which entries shall be made of the date of every
inspection of the vehicle by the Chief of Police.
(1979 Code § 5.31.070; Ord. 88-23, 6-9-1988; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-16C-6: CARRIAGE DRIVER'S LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to drive a horse-drawn carriage upon the streets
of the City without first having obtained a carriage driver's license as
provided herein. It is also unlawful for any person to drive any other public
vehicle in the City unless he is duly licensed in the manner prescribed by law
to drive such vehicle, or for any person to drive such vehicle without
complying with any of the applicable provisions of this Article.
(1979 Code § 5.31.120; Ord. 88-23, 6-9-1988; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-16C-7: APPROVAL PROCEDURE:
   A.   Licensing Requirements: Every person driving a licensed carriage must
be licensed as such. Each applicant for a carriage driver's license must:
      1.   Be licensed by the Utah Department of Motor Vehicles as an operator;
      2.   Be of the age of twenty one (21) years or over;
      3.   Be of sound physique, with good eyesight, and not subject to
epilepsy, vertigo, heart trouble or any other infirmity of body or mind which
might render him unfit for the safe operation of a public vehicle;
      4.   Be able to read and write the English language;
      5.   Not be habituated or addicted to the use of intoxicating liquors or
drugs;
      6.   Produce affidavits of his good character from two (2) reputable
citizens of the City who have known him personally, and a similar affidavit
from his last employer, unless, in the opinion of the Chief of Police,
sufficient reason is given for its omission;
      7.   Fill out upon a blank form, to be provided by the Chief of Police, a
statement giving his full name, residence, places of residence for five (5)
years previous to date of application, age, color, height, color of eyes and
hair, place of birth, length of time he has resided in the City, whether a
citizen of the United States, places of previous employment, whether married or
single, whether he has ever been arrested or convicted of a felony or
misdemeanor, whether he has previously been a licensed driver or chauffeur and,
if so, whether his license has ever been revoked and for what cause; which
statement shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant and filed with the
Chief of Police as a permanent record. It shall be unlawful for the applicant
to make any false statement on said form.
(1979 Code § 5.31.130; Ord. 88-23, 6-9-1988; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
   B.   Examination By Chief Of Police: Each applicant for a carriage driver's
license under the provisions of this Article shall be examined by the Chief of
Police as to his knowledge of the provisions of this Article, the traffic
regulations and the geography of the City, and, if the result of the
examination is unsatisfactory, he shall be refused a license. Each such
applicant must, if required by the Chief of Police, demonstrate his skill and
ability to safely handle his carriage in and among motorized vehicles in an
urban setting.
(1979 Code § 5.31.140; Ord. 88-23, 6-9-1988; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
   C.   Photographs: Each applicant for a driver's license must file with his
application four (4) unmounted, unretouched, photographs of himself in such
position as the Chief of Police may direct, taken within the thirty (30) days
preceding the filing of his application. The photographs are to be of a size
which may be attached to his license. One photograph shall be attached to the
license when issued, one shall be attached to the plastic badge, one shall be
filed with the Business License Coordinator and the fourth with the Chief of
Police. The photograph should be so attached to the license that it cannot be
removed and another photograph substituted without a detection. Each licensed
driver shall, upon demand of any police officer or passenger, exhibit his
license and photograph for inspection. Where the application for a license is
denied, three (3) copies of the photograph shall be returned to the applicant
and one retained by the Chief of Police.
(1979 Code § 5.31.150; Ord. 88-23, 6-9-1988; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
   D.   Fee; Issuance; Term: The fee for a driver's license shall be as
established in Chapter 1, Article B of this Title. Upon payment of the fee and
compliance with the other requirements therefor, the Business License
Coordinator shall issue the applicant a driver's license and the badge required
by this Article. The driver's license shall expire two (2) years after date of
issue. It shall be in such form as to contain the photograph and signature of
the licensee and a blank space upon which a record may be made of any arrest,
revocation, suspension or serious complaint against the licensee. It shall be
unlawful for any license to deface, remove or obliterate an official entry made
upon his license.
(1979 Code § 5.31.160; Ord. 88-23, 6-9-1988; amd. Ord. 97-94, 12-16-1997; Ord.
98-54, 8-18-1998)
   E.   Driver's Badge: There shall be delivered to each licensed driver a
plastic badge of such form and style as the Chief of Police may prescribe, with
the driver's picture, signature and license number thereon, which must, under
penalty of the revocation of the license, be constantly and conspicuously
displayed on the driver's cap or person when he is engaged in his employment as
a horse-drawn carriage driver. Such badge shall be nontransferable, and it
shall be unlawful for any person to wear any such badge or one so similar as to
deceive any person, unless the same has been regularly issued, as provided in
this Article, to the person wearing it.
(1979 Code § 5.31.170; Ord. 88-23, 6-9-1988; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
   F.   License Denial, Suspension, Revocation:
      1.   Denials, suspensions or revocations shall be handled in accordance
with the provisions of Chapter 1, Article C of this Title, or its successor.
      2.   In addition to the grounds stated in Chapter 1, Article C of this
Title, the driver's license may be suspended or revoked for a violation of any
of the provisions of this Article, or for violation of any ordinance of the
City or the State that involves a crime against the person or property of
another. Any such suspension shall be noted on the license, together with a
statement of the reasons thereof, and the driver shall thereupon be suspended
or deprived of his badge, the badge to be returned at the expiration of the
period for which the license was suspended. A second suspension of any license
shall revoke such license. No driver whose license has been revoked shall again
be licensed as a driver for licensed public vehicles in the City except upon
presentation of persons satisfactory to the Mayor, or the Mayor's designee.
(1979 Code § 5.31.190; Ord. 88-23, 6-9-1988; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-16C-8: RECORDS MAINTAINED:
There shall be kept in the office of the Business License Coordinator a
complete record of each license issued to a driver and of all renewals and
revocations or suspensions thereof, which record shall be kept on file with the
original application of the driver for a license.
(1979 Code § 5.31.180; Ord. 88-23, 6-9-1988; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-16C-9: ROUTES DESIGNATED:
The City authorizes licensee to operate its horse-drawn carriage business upon
streets within the City according to streets, routes and restrictions
authorized by the City's Traffic Engineer in coordination with the Chief of
Police. The authorized routes shall be subject to amendment from time to time
by the City.
(1979 Code § 5.31.110; Ord. 88-23, 6-9-1988; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-16C-10: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   Schedule Of Rates: It shall be the duty of every operator of a horse-
drawn carriage to file with the City a current schedule of rates to be charged
by him/her in the operation of carriage, and no transportation shall be
performed or service rendered except in conformity therewith. The City Council,
upon its own motion or upon the request of any person, may review those fares
and charges and may establish maximum fares in the event it determines the
charges are unreasonable.
(1979 Code § 5.31.210; Ord. 88-23, 6-9-1988; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
   B.   Use Of Taxicab Stands: Horse-drawn carriages may use existing taxicab
stands as established by the City in the business district in Section
10-3-2 of this Code.
(1979 Code § 5.31.240; Ord. 88-23, 6-9-1988; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
   C.   Driver To Remain Near Carriage: It is unlawful for any person, while
engaged as a driver, chauffeur, solicitor or attache of a licensed horse-drawn
carriage, to leave the immediate vicinity of the carriage except for the
purpose of assisting passengers or securing or delivering their baggage upon
the request of his patrons.
(1979 Code § 5.31.250; Ord. 88-23, 6-9-1988; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
   D.   Driver May Demand Payment In Advance: The owner or driver of any
licensed horse-drawn carriage shall have the right to demand in advance the
minimum fare of any person employing him and may refuse to convey or transport
any person who shall not comply with such demand.
(1979 Code § 5.31.260; Ord. 88-23, 6-9-1988; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
   E.   Occupant To Have Exclusive Use: When a carriage is engaged, the
occupant shall have the exclusive right to the full and free use to the
passenger compartment, and it is unlawful for the owner or driver of the
carriage to solicit or carry additional passengers therein except with the
consent of the passenger.
(1979 Code § 5.31.280; Ord. 88-23, 6-9-1988; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
   F.   Most Direct Route Required: Any driver employed carrying passengers to
a definite point shall take the most direct route possible that will carry the
passenger safely and expeditiously to his destination.
(1979 Code § 5.31.290; Ord. 88-23, 6-9-1988; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
   G.   Manifest:
      1.   Maintenance Required: Every carriage driver shall maintain a daily
manifest which shall be returned to the owner by the driver at the conclusion
of his tour of duty. The forms for the manifest shall be furnished to the
driver by the owner of the horse-drawn carriage business and shall be of a
character approved by the Mayor.
(1979 Code § 5.31.300; Ord. 88-23, 6-9-1988; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998; 1999
Code)
      2.   Retention; Right Of Inspection: Every owner of a horse- drawn
carriage business shall retain and preserve all manifests in a safe and
convenient place for a period of time covering at least the current calendar
year and the calendar year immediately preceding the current calendar year. All
manifests shall be available for inspection by the Chief of Police, the City
Attorney and the Mayor, or any of them, or any person or person designated by
any of them.
(1979 Code § 5.31.310; Ord. 88-23, 6-9-1988; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
   H.   Display Of License Card; Driver's License: There shall be displayed in
a suitable holder, in a conspicuous place inside of each carriage, within the
plain view of any passenger, the card issued by the Business License
Coordinator containing the official license number for the carriage, the
driver's license of the driver, with his picture, the telephone number of the
horse-drawn carriage company and a statement that the Chief of Police and the
carriage company are to be notified in case of any complaint about the quality
of the service.
(1979 Code § 5.31.320; Ord. 88-23, 6-9-1988; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
   I.   Driver Or Owner To Give Name And Number: It is unlawful for the owner
or driver of any licensed public passenger carriage upon being requested to do
so to refuse to give the number of the vehicle and the name of the driver
thereof.
(1979 Code § 5.31.330; Ord. 88-23, 6-9-1988; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
   J.   Signage Required: Each carriage must display a standard "Slow Moving
Vehicle" sign on the rear of each carriage as approved by the Chief of Police
who shall be authorized to require other signage or illuminations that he may
deem necessary for the reasonable safety of the operation of the carriage, its
passengers, animals, traffic, pedestrians and the public.
(1979 Code § 5.31.360; Ord. 88-23, 6-9-1988; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
   K.   Animal Treatment And Sanitation: No horse shall be treated cruelly or
in violation of animal control regulations regardless of whether it is stabled
or working. Licensee shall comply with all requirements of the County Health
Department and Animal Services Division, particularly those relating to
stabling and working conditions. While on the streets, each horse must be
attended at all times. Each must also be fitted with a device to catch all
manure or solid waste. Each driver must flush all liquid waste from the horse
immediately and spray it with appropriate chemicals to eliminate all noxious
odor and bacteria. The driver shall be responsible to store, in approved
containers only, and discard the manure in approved locations to avoid
contaminating storm drains. The County Health Department or Animal Services
Division may, upon request, require a veterinarian certificate of health for
any horse pulling carriages and may preclude the use of any horse that is found
unfit.
(1979 Code § 5.31.370; Ord. 88-23, 6-9-1988; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-16C-11: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   Permitting Unlicensed Or Illegal Operation: It is unlawful for any
owner or person in charge of any carriage to permit such carriage to be driven
by any person who has not been licensed in the manner prescribed by law or to
permit such carriage to be driven in violation of any provisions of this
Article or any other ordinance or law of the City or the State.
(1979 Code § 5.31.200; Ord. 88-23, 6-9-1988; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
   B.   Charging Other Than Approved Rates: No operator of horse- drawn
carriages in the City shall charge or attempt to charge any passenger a rate or
fare other or different than that which he has filed with the City, in
accordance with the provisions of this Article.
(1979 Code § 5.31.220; Ord. 88-23, 6-9-1988; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
   C.   Soliciting Of Passengers; Obstruction Of Traffic: Horse- drawn carriage
drivers may solicit passengers for hire by cruising the streets of the City,
but it shall be unlawful for the driver of any horse-drawn carriage to solicit
passengers for hire or to invite or to call the attention of the public to his
horse-drawn carriage by word of mouth, signals, nods, whistles, shouts or other
signs from his horse-drawn carriage while traveling on the streets of the City.
Nothing contained in this subsection shall be construed as prohibiting horse-
drawn carriages from receiving or discharging passengers at public places of
gatherings, such as theaters, hotels, public buildings, stadiums,
transportation terminals, etc. Horse- drawn carriage drivers shall at all times
drive their horse- drawn carriages so as not to constrict, congest or interfere
with the normal flow of traffic in any manner whatsoever.
(1979 Code § 5.31.230; Ord. 88-23, 6-9-1988; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
   D.   Refusing To Convey Passengers: It is unlawful for the owner or driver
of any licensed horse-drawn carriage, when not otherwise engaged, to refuse to
convey any person for any lawful purpose, with or without baggage, upon demand
and tender of the lawful fare, or, having undertaken to convey such person,
thereafter wilfully to refuse or neglect to do so.
(1979 Code § 5.31.270; Ord. 88-23, 6-9-1988; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
   E.   Fraud And Misrepresentation: It is unlawful for the driver of any
licensed public carriage, or for any person soliciting patronage for any public
carriage, to induce or attempt to induce any person to employ him, by knowingly
or wantonly misinforming or misleading such person as to the time or place of
the arrival or departure of any railroad train or other conveyance, or the
location of any railroad depot, office, station or ticket office, or the
location of any hotel, public place or private residence within the city, or to
practice any deceit, fraud or misrepresentation in any manner whatever relative
to matters pertaining to his business.
(1979 Code § 5.31.340; Ord. 88-23, 6-9-1988; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
   F.   Disorderly Conduct: It is unlawful for the driver, porter, chauffeur,
solicitor or runner of any licensed public carriage, at any time or place, when
waiting for or engaged in his employment, to obstruct any street or sidewalk;
make any loud or unusual noise, disturbance or outcry; use any indecent,
profane or obscene language; be guilty of boisterous or loud talking, or any
disorderly conduct; harass, vex, annoy or disturb any person; interfere with,
obstruct or impede the free passage of passengers or other persons to or from
any depot, theater, hall, hotel, public resort, train or depot grounds, or to
seize or grasp, or interfere with any person or any baggage carried by or
belonging to said passenger or persons; or, while soliciting employment, to
stand on any public street or place other than at a designated public stand or
authorized pick up point.
(1979 Code § 5.31.350; Ord. 88-23, 6-9-1988; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-16C-12: SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OR DENIAL:
Denials, suspension or revocations of any license under this article shall be
handled in accordance with the provisions of chapter 1, article C of this
title. The denial, suspension or revocation of any certificate of public
convenience and necessity shall be handled in accordance with article B of this
chapter.
(1979 Code § 5.31.390; Ord. 88-23, 6-9-1988; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
ARTICLE D.  TAXICABS
SECTION:
5-16D-1: Definitions
5-16D-2: License Required
5-16D-3: Certificate Required
5-16D-4: Application And Qualification Requirements
5-16D-5: Taxicab Driver's License
5-16D-6: Approval Procedure
5-16D-7: Records Maintained
5-16D-8: Rules, Regulations And Requirements
5-16D-9: Prohibited Acts
5-16D-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms shall have the designated meanings whenever they are used
in this article:
CERTIFICATE: A certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by the
mayor, or the mayor's designee, authorizing the holder thereof to conduct, in
Ogden City, a taxicab business, pursuant to the provisions of this article.
HOLDER: A person to whom a certificate of public convenience and necessity has
been issued.
MANIFEST: A daily record prepared by the taxicab driver of all trips made by
the driver, showing time and place of origin, destination and place of
discharge of passengers, number of passengers and the amount of fare of each
trip.
PUBLIC VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle used for the transportation of persons for
hire, or for tips or gratuities, within the city.
TAXICAB: Any motor vehicle used for the purpose of transporting persons for
hire, or for tips or gratuities, within the city, except vehicles with a
seating capacity of seven (7) or more persons used in what is commonly known as
a motorbus operation.
(1979 Code § 5.58.010; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-16D-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation owning or having
under its control any taxicab to operate the same for hire upon the streets of
the city unless a taxicab license has been issued pursuant to the provisions of
this article and is in full force and effect at the time of the operation or
presence of said taxicab upon the streets of the city as aforesaid. No taxicab
license shall be issued for any such taxicab except to the registered owner
thereof and after compliance with the provisions of this article.
   B.   For the purpose of this section, the term "operate for hire upon the
streets of the city" shall not include the transporting, by a taxicab properly
licensed in a jurisdiction outside the corporate limits of the city, of a
passenger or passengers for hire where a trip shall originate with the
passenger or passengers being picked up outside of the corporate limits of the
city and where the destination is either within or beyond the corporate limits
of the city. The term "operate for hire upon the streets of the city" means and
shall include the soliciting or picking up of a passenger or passengers within
the corporate limits of the city, whether the destination is within or outside
of the corporate limits of the city.
(1979 Code § 5.58.020; amd. Ord. 97-94, 12-16-1997; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-16D-3: CERTIFICATE REQUIRED:
No taxicab license shall be issued to any person, firm or corporation unless
such person, firm or corporation has first obtained a certificate of public
convenience and necessity from the city in accordance with article B of this
chapter, or its successor. All persons having taxicab licenses on the effective
date hereof shall have a certificate of public convenience and necessity
awarded to them, allowing them to operate the same number of vehicles as they
are presently authorized to operate, without the required public hearing and
the public convenience and necessity having heretofore been demonstrated.
Existing licensees shall not be required to comply with the other requirements
of Article B of this Chapter, until January 2, 1999.
(1979 Code § 5.58.015; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-16D-4: APPLICATION AND QUALIFICATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Application; Contents: Applications for taxicab licenses shall be made
on forms to be furnished by the Business License Coordinator. In addition to
the requirements of Chapter 1, Article A of this Title, the applications must
set forth the following information concerning each vehicle for which a license
is sought: the kind of vehicle, the name of the manufacturer, the model and
year of manufacture, the seating capacity, the State license number for the
current year, the engine and factory numbers or serial number, and the insignia
and color scheme proposed to be used. The applications shall also contain such
other information as the Business License Coordinator may from time to time
specify. It shall be unlawful to make any false statement on an application for
any such taxicab license.
(1979 Code § 5.58.030; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
   B.   Fee For License: The fees for taxicab licenses shall be established in
Chapter 1, Article B of this Title.
(1979 Code § 5.58.040; amd. Ord. 97-94, 12-16-1997; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
   C.   Vehicle Inspection; Compliance With Standards: No license shall be
granted for any motorbus, carriage, omnibus, taxicab or other passenger vehicle
until it has been thoroughly and carefully inspected and examined by or under
the direction of the Chief of Police and found to be in a thoroughly safe
condition for the transportation of passengers, clean, fit, of good appearance
and well painted and varnished, and, further, found to comply with all
applicable laws, ordinances and regulations of the State. No license shall be
granted for any such vehicle unless it is equipped with a speedometer properly
connected and functioning. The Chief of Police shall, at intervals, in his
discretion, after the issuance of the license, make regular and thorough
inspection of the licensed vehicle. The Business License Coordinator shall
refuse a license to, or if already issued, the license for any vehicle found by
the Chief of Police to be unfit or unsuited for public patronage may be revoked
or suspended in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 1, Article C of this
Title. The Chief of Police shall examine any taximeter attached to any licensed
public vehicle to see that the same is accurate before a license for said
vehicle may be issued. It is unlawful to operate or to place in service or
allow to be operated on the streets of the City any public vehicle which fails
to meet the minimum requirements specified in this subsection.
(1979 Code § 5.58.050; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
   D.   License Card; Issuance: Upon satisfactory proof of the successful
passing of the inspection made by the Chief of Police and the payment of the
necessary fees and the compliance with all other sections of this Article, the
Business License Coordinator shall issue to any person, firm or corporation
operating a taxicab business in the City a taxicab license card for each
taxicab license. The form and size of the card shall be prescribed by the
Business License Coordinator and shall contain the official license number of
the vehicle, the date of its issuance and a statement to the effect that in
case of any complaint, the Chief of Police and the taxicab company shall be
notified. The card shall be good for the license year of its issuance unless
sooner revoked or suspended.
(1979 Code § 5.58.090; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
   E.   Transfer; Replacement Vehicle; Report: The holder of an existing
taxicab license may retire the licensed taxicab from service and operate
another taxicab in the place thereof under the existing license, provided the
licensee first reports in writing the proposed replacement, with all
information on the replacing taxicab which would be required for an original
license thereof, to the Business License Coordinator and receives a written
permit to transfer said taxicab license. No such permit shall be issued unless
the replacing taxicab conforms in all respects to the requirements of this
Article.
(1979 Code § 5.58.110; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-16D-5: TAXICAB DRIVER'S LICENSE:
It is unlawful for any person to drive a taxicab upon the streets of the City
without first having obtained a taxicab driver's license as provided herein. It
is also unlawful for any person to drive any other public vehicle in the City
unless he is duly licensed in the manner prescribed by law to drive such
vehicle, or for any person to drive such vehicle without complying with any of
the applicable provisions of this Article.
(1979 Code § 5.58.120; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-16D-6: APPROVAL PROCEDURE:
   A.   Licensing Requirements: Every person driving a licensed taxicab must be
licensed as such. Each applicant for a taxicab driver's license must:
      1.   Be of the age of twenty one (21) years or over;
      2.   Be of sound physique, with good eyesight, and not subject to
epilepsy, vertigo, heart trouble or any other infirmity of body or mind which
might render him unfit for the safe operation of a public vehicle;
      3.   Be able to read and write the English language;
      4.   Be clean in dress and person, and not be habituated or addicted to
the use of intoxicating liquor or drugs;
      5.   Produce affidavits of his good character from two (2) reputable
citizens of the City who have known him personally, and a similar affidavit
from his last employer, unless, in the opinion of the Chief of Police,
sufficient reason is given for its omission;
      6.   Fill out upon a blank form, to be provided by the Chief of Police, a
statement giving his full name, residence, places of residence for five (5)
years previous to date of application, age, color, height, color of eyes and
hair, place of birth, length of time he has resided in the City, whether a
citizen of the United States, places of previous employment, whether married or
single, whether he has ever been arrested or convicted of a felony or
misdemeanor, whether he has previously been a licensed driver or chauffeur and,
if so, whether his license has ever been revoked and for what cause; which
statement shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant and filed with the
Chief of Police as a permanent record. It shall be unlawful for the applicant
to make any false statement on said form; and
      7.   Produce evidence that the applicant has a current motor vehicle
license, with a taxicab endorsement, issued by the State.
(1979 Code § 5.58.130; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
   B.   Examination By Chief Of Police: Each applicant for a driver's license
under the provisions of this Article shall be examined by the Chief of Police
as to his knowledge of the provisions of this Article, the traffic regulations
and the geography of the City, and, if the result of the examination is
unsatisfactory, he shall be refused a license. Each such applicant must, if
required by the Chief of Police, demonstrate his skill and ability to safely
handle his vehicle and his knowledge of the mechanism of an automobile.
(1979 Code § 5.58.140; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
   C.   Photographs: Each applicant for a driver's license must file with his
application four (4) unmounted, unretouched, photographs of himself in such
position as the Chief of Police may direct, taken within the thirty (30) days
preceding the filing of his application. The photographs are to be of a size
which may be attached to his/her license. One photograph shall be attached to
the license when issued, one shall be attached to the plastic badge, one shall
be filed with the Business License Coordinator and the fourth with the Chief of
Police. The photograph should be so attached to the license that it cannot be
removed and another photograph substituted without a detection. Each licensed
driver shall, upon demand of any police officer or passenger, exhibit his
license and photograph for inspection. Where the application for a license is
denied, three (3) copies of the photograph shall be returned to the applicant
and one retained by the Chief of Police.
(1979 Code § 5.58.150; amd. Ord. 81-27, 6-25-1981; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
   D.   Fingerprints: Each applicant for a driver's license shall, upon
submitting his application, file with the Chief of Police the impressions of
the fingerprints of his right and left hands. Such impressions shall be placed
upon file forms furnished by the Chief of Police. Applications, with
photographs and fingerprint impressions attached, shall be inspected and
examined by the Chief of Police, and no driver's license shall be issued until
the receipt in writing from the Chief of Police of a report showing the result
of the investigation of the applicant and an examination of the fingerprint
impressions.
(1979 Code § 5.58.160; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
   E.   Fee; Issuance; Term: The fee for a driver's license shall be as
established in chapter 1, article B of this title. Upon payment of the fee and
compliance with the other requirements therefor, the business license
coordinator shall issue the applicant a driver's license and the badge required
by this article. The driver's license shall expire two (2) years after date of
issue. It shall be in such form as to contain the photograph and signature of
the licensee and a blank space upon which a record may be made of any arrest,
revocation, suspension or serious complaint against the licensee. It shall be
unlawful for any licensee to deface, remove or obliterate an official entry
made upon his license.
(1979 Code § 5.58.170; amd. Ord. 81-27, 6-25-1981; Ord. 97-94, 12-16-1997; Ord.
98-54, 8-18-1998)
   F.   Driver's Badge: There shall be delivered to each licensed driver a
plastic badge of such form and style as the chief of police may prescribe, with
the driver's picture, signature and license number thereon, which must, under
penalty of the revocation of the license, be constantly and conspicuously
displayed on the driver's cap or person when he is engaged in his employment as
a taxicab driver. Such badge shall be nontransferable, and it shall be unlawful
for any person to wear any such badge or one so similar as to deceive any
person, unless the same has been regularly issued, as provided in this article,
to the person wearing it.
(1979 Code § 5.58.180; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
   G.   License Suspension, Revocation: The driver's license may be suspended
or revoked, in accordance with chapter 1, article C of this title, upon the
recommendation of the chief of police, for a violation of any of the provisions
of this article, or for violation of any ordinance of the city or the state
that involves a crime against the person or property of another. Any such
suspension shall be noted on the license, together with a statement of the
reasons thereof, and the driver shall thereupon be suspended or deprived of his
badge, the badge to be returned at the expiration of the period for which the
license was suspended. A second suspension for the same reason or a third
suspension for any reason shall be cause to permanently revoke the driver's
license. No driver whose license has been so revoked shall again be licensed as
a driver for licensed public vehicles in the city except upon presentation of
reasons satisfactory to the mayor.
(1979 Code § 5.58.200; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-16D-7: RECORDS MAINTAINED:
There shall be kept in the office of the business license coordinator a
complete record of each license issued to a driver and of all renewals and
revocations or suspensions thereof, which record shall be kept on file with the
original application of the driver for a license.
(1979 Code § 5.58.190; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-16D-8: RULES, REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Maximum Rates; Filing:
      1.   a. An owner or driver of a taxicab may establish and charge mileage
rates lower than, but shall not establish and charge any mileage rates for the
use of a taxicab greater than, three dollars fifty cents ($3.50) for flag drop,
which flag drop includes up to the first one-tenth (1/10) mile traveled, and
thirty five cents ($0.35) for each additional one-tenth (1/10) mile or fraction
thereof. An owner or driver of a taxicab may establish and charge a rate for
waiting time lower than, but shall not establish any rate for waiting time
greater than, thirty five dollars ($35.00) per hour.
         b.   An owner or driver of a taxicab may establish and charge a
surcharge to the rates set forth in subsection A1a of this section for
increases in the cost of fuel as reported by American Automobile Association
for average fuel costs for Utah. The rates indicated in subsection A1a of this
section contemplate a fuel cost of four dollars ($4.00) per gallon of regular
unleaded fuel. For each additional ten cent ($0.10) increase in fuel costs, the
owner or driver may charge not more than an additional five cent ($0.05) per
mile surcharge. The owner or driver of the taxicab must keep records which
support the imposition of the fuel surcharge, which records shall be available
to the mayor or the mayor's designee, or such other regulatory agency that may
have jurisdiction over taxicabs.
      2.   It shall be the duty of every holder of a certificate and operator
of a taxicab to file with the city a schedule of its maximum rates with the
business license coordinator and shall notify the business license coordinator
in writing of any change in the maximum rate at least fifteen (15) days prior
to such new rate being placed into effect.
   B.   Taximeters:
      1.   Computation Of Fare: The fares for transportation by taxicabs shall
be computed by taximeters in accordance with the rates allowed in this article.
      2.   Maintenance; Operation: It shall be the duty of every person owning
or operating a taxicab to keep the taximeter thereon in good and workable
condition and to set the taximeter at the beginning of every work shift in the
usual way so that it will register and compute fares on a basis of mileage and
waiting time, and such taximeter shall be so placed that the face thereof where
the fare is registered will be plainly visible to passengers within the
vehicle.
      3.   Inspection Required; Allowable Error: No license shall be issued to
a taxicab until the taximeter attached thereto shall have been inspected by the
chief of police and found to be correct, and no person shall use or permit to
be used upon any taxicab a taximeter which shall be in such a condition as to
be over five percent (5%) incorrect to the prejudice of any passenger.
   C.   Driver Remain Near Vehicle: It is unlawful for any person, while
engaged as a driver, chauffeur, solicitor or attache of a licensed public
vehicle, to leave the immediate vicinity of the vehicle except for the purpose
of assisting passengers or securing or delivering their baggage upon the
request of his patrons.
   D.   Driver May Demand Payment In Advance: The owner or driver of any
licensed public passenger vehicle shall have the right to demand in advance the
minimum fare of any person employing him and may refuse to convey or transport
any person who shall not comply with such demand.
   E.   Occupant To Have Exclusive Use: When a taxicab is engaged, the occupant
shall have the exclusive right to the full and free use to the passenger
compartment, and it is unlawful for the owner or driver of the taxicab to
solicit or carry additional passengers therein except with the consent of the
passenger.
   F.   Most Direct Route Required: Any driver employed carrying passengers to
a definite point shall take the most direct route possible that will carry the
passenger safely and expeditiously to his destination.
   G.   Manifest:
      1.   Maintenance Required: Every taxicab driver shall maintain a daily
manifest which shall be returned to the owner by the driver at the conclusion
of his tour of duty. The forms for the manifest shall be furnished to the
driver by the owner of the taxicab business and shall be of a character
approved by the mayor.
      2.   Retention; Right Of Inspection: Every owner of a taxicab business
shall retain and preserve all manifests in a safe and convenient place for a
period of time covering at least the current calendar year and the calendar
year immediately preceding the current calendar year. All manifests shall be
available for inspection by the chief of police and the city attorney, or any
of them, or any person or persons designated by any of them.
   H.   Display Of License Card; Driver's License: There shall be displayed in
a suitable holder, in a conspicuous place inside of each cab, within the plain
view of any passenger, the card issued by the city containing the official
license number for the taxicab, the driver's license of the driver, with his
picture, the telephone number of the taxicab company and a statement that the
chief of police and the holder of the taxicab license are to be notified in
case of any complaint about the quality of the taxicab service.
   I.   Driver Or Owner To Give Name And Number: It is unlawful for the owner
or driver of any licensed public passenger vehicle upon being requested to do
so to refuse to give the number of the vehicle and the name of the driver
thereof.
(1979 Code §§ 5.58.220, 5.58.230, 5.58.240, 5.58.250, 5.58.280, 5.58.290,
5.58.320, 5.58.330, 5.58.340, 5.58.350, 5.58.360, 5.58.370; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-
18-1998; 1999 Code; Ord. 99-45, 12-7-1999; Ord. 2004-9, 2-3-2004; Ord. 2006-21,
4-25-2006; Ord. 2008-50, 10-21-2008)
5-16D-9: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   Permitting Unlicensed Or Illegal Operation Of Vehicle: It is unlawful
for any owner or person in charge of any carriage, omnibus, taxicab or other
public vehicle to permit such vehicle to be driven by any person who has not
been licensed in the manner prescribed by law or to permit such vehicle to be
driven in violation of any provisions of this article or any other ordinance or
law of the city or the state.
(1979 Code § 5.58.210; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
   B.   Charging Other Than Approved Rates: No operator of taxicabs in the city
shall charge or attempt to charge any passenger a rate or fare other or
different than that which he has filed with the city or which exceeds the
maximum rates provided herein.
(1979 Code § 5.58.260; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
   C.   Soliciting Of Passengers; Obstruction Of Traffic: Taxicab drivers may
solicit passengers for hire by cruising the streets of the city, but it shall
be unlawful for the driver of any taxicab to solicit passengers for hire or to
invite or to call the attention of the public to his taxicab by word of mouth,
signals, nods, whistles, shouts or other signs from his taxicab while traveling
on the streets of the city. Nothing contained in this subsection shall be
construed as prohibiting taxicabs from receiving or discharging passengers at
public places or gatherings, such as theaters, hotels, public buildings,
stadiums, transportation terminals, etc. Taxicab drivers shall at all times
drive with the normal flow of traffic in any manner whatsoever.
(1979 Code § 5.58.270; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
   D.   Refusal To Pay Fare: It is unlawful for any person having hired any
licensed public passenger vehicle and having ridden therein to fail or refuse
to pay his fare, not exceeding the rate fixed by this article.
(1979 Code § 5.58.300; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
   E.   Refusing To Convey Passengers: It is unlawful for the owner or driver
of any licensed public vehicle, when not otherwise engaged, to refuse to convey
any persons for any lawful purpose, with or without baggage, upon demand and
tender of the lawful fare, or, having undertaken to convey such person,
thereafter wilfully to refuse or neglect to do so.
(1979 Code § 5.58.310; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
   F.   Fraud And Misrepresentation: It is unlawful for the driver of any
licensed public vehicle, or for any person soliciting patronage for any public
vehicle, to induce or attempt to induce any person to employ him, by knowingly
or wantonly misinforming or misleading such person as to the time or place of
the arrival or departure of any railroad train or other conveyance, or the
location of any railroad depot, office, station or ticket office, or the
location of any hotel, public place or private residence within the city, or to
practice any deceit, fraud or misrepresentation in any manner whatever relative
to matters pertaining to his business.
(1979 Code § 5.58.380; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
   G.   Disorderly Conduct: It is unlawful for the driver, porter, chauffeur,
solicitor or runner of any licensed public vehicle, at any time or place, when
waiting for or engaged in his employment, to obstruct any street or sidewalk;
make any loud or unusual noise, disturbance or outcry; use any indecent,
profane or obscene language; be guilty of boisterous or loud talking, or any
disorderly conduct; harass, vex, annoy or disturb any person; interfere with,
obstruct or impede the free passage of passengers or other persons to or from
any depot, theater, hall, hotel, public resort, train or depot grounds, or to
seize or grasp, or interfere with any person or any baggage carried by or
belonging to said passengers or persons; or, while soliciting employment, to
stand on any public street or place other than at a designated public stand or
authorized pick up point.
(1979 Code § 5.58.390; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
ARTICLE E.  TRANSPORTATION OF HANDICAPPED PERSONS
SECTION:
5-16E-1: Definitions
5-16E-2: Enforcement; Authority
5-16E-3: License Required
5-16E-4: Certificate Required
5-16E-5: Fees
5-16E-6: Term Of Certificate
5-16E-7: Rules, Regulations And Requirements
5-16E-8: Exemptions
5-16E-9: Violations; Reporting
5-16E-1: DEFINITIONS:
The words and phrases used in this Article shall have the meanings defined and
set forth as follows:
CERTIFICATE: A certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by the
Mayor, or the Mayor's designee, authorizing the holder thereof to conduct, in
Ogden City, a business in the transportation of handicapped persons, pursuant
to the provisions of this Article.
HANDICAPPED PERSON: A person who is not acutely ill, who does not, for any
reason, require the service of an ambulance, and who, by reason of physical or
mental infirmity may not be conveniently transported in public mass
transportation, or in a taxicab without the special equipment provided for in
this Article.
HOLDER: A person to whom a certificate of public convenience and necessity has
been issued.
MANIFEST: A daily record prepared by a driver of a "special transportation
vehicle", as defined in this Article, of all trips made by said driver showing
times and places of origin and destination, number of passengers, and the
charge for each trip, and generally the nature of the illness or handicap of
each person transported.
PERSON: Includes an individual, a corporation or other legal entity, a
partnership and any unincorporated association, excluding, however, the United
States, the State of Utah, or any political subdivision or instrumentality
thereof.
SPECIAL TRANSPORTATION VEHICLE: Any specially constructed motor vehicle which
is designed, and equipped and used for the transportation of "handicapped
persons", as defined in this Article.
TRANSPORTATION: The carrying or movement by "special transportation vehicles"
of handicapped persons. Such transportation shall not include, however, the
movement of sick, injured or infirm persons who require the use of a stretcher
or litter.
(1979 Code § 5.63.010; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-16E-2: ENFORCEMENT; AUTHORITY:
The Police Department is hereby given the authority and is instructed to watch
and observe the conduct of holders and drivers operating under this Article.
(1979 Code § 5.63.230; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-16E-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation owning or having under its
control any taxicab to operate the same for hire upon the streets of the City
unless a taxicab license has been issued pursuant to the provisions of this
Article and is in full force and effect at the time of the operation or
presence of said taxicab upon the streets of the City as aforesaid. No taxicab
license shall be issued for any such taxicab except to the registered owner
thereof and after compliance with the provisions of this Article.
(1979 Code § 5.63.020 1 ; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
 
Notes
1 1. 5.63.020 duplicate numbers.
5-16E-4: CERTIFICATE REQUIRED:
   A.   No person shall operate, or permit to be operated, a "special
transportation vehicle" owned or controlled by him upon the streets of the City
without having first obtained a certificate of public convenience and necessity
as provided under Article B of this Chapter, authorizing the operations of a
"special transportation vehicle", as defined herein.
   B.   All persons having a certificate of public convenience and necessity
for the operation of special transportation vehicle, issued by the City Council
before January 6, 1992, and who were licensed under the former provisions of
this Article for the 1998 calendar year, shall have a certificate of public
convenience and necessity awarded to them, allowing them to operate the same
number of vehicles as they are presently authorized to operate, without
additional public hearing and without a determination by the Mayor that the
public convenience and necessity has been demonstrated. Such existing licensees
shall not be required to comply with other requirements of Article B of this
Chapter, until January 2, 1999.
(1979 Code § 5.63.020 1  ; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
 
Notes
1 1. 5.63.020 duplicate numbers.
5-16E-5: FEES:
The holder of any certificate, under this Article, shall apply for and obtain a
business license under the provisions of Chapter 1, Article A of this Title and
shall pay the fees as determined in Chapter 1, Article B of this Title.
(1979 Code § 5.63.100; amd. Ord. 97-94, 12-16-1997; Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-16E-6: TERM OF CERTIFICATE:
All certificates for the transportation of handicapped persons issued prior to
January 6, 1992, shall expire ten (10) years after the date of issue. The
holder may apply for a new certificate, but all applicants shall be subject to
any amendments made in this Title.
(1979 Code § 5.63.140; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-16E-7: RULES, REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Manifests:
      1.   Required: Every driver shall maintain a daily manifest upon which
are reported all trips made during his hours of work, showing time and place of
origin and destination of each trip and the name of the passenger transported
and all of such manifests shall be returned to the holder by the driver at the
conclusion of his/her working day.
(1979 Code § 5.63.150; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
      2.   Maintenance; Inspection: Every holder of a certificate of public
convenience and necessity, shall retain and preserve all drivers' manifests in
a safe place for at least one calendar year after the current calendar year in
which such manifests are made, and said manifests shall be available to the
Police Department.
(1979 Code § 5.63.160; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
   B.   Schedule Of Fares And Charges: Any holder of a certificate shall keep
on file with the City, a current schedule of all fares and charges for its
transportation service hereunder, and no transportation shall be performed or
service rendered except in conformity therewith. The City Council, upon its own
motion or upon the request of any person, may review those fares and charges
and may establish maximum fares in the event it determines the charges are
unreasonable. This subsection shall not apply to rates established by agreement
with any public or private school, charitable or nonprofit organization or the
Federal or State governments or any political subdivision thereof.
(1979 Code § 5.63.170; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
   C.   Vehicles; Equipment: All vehicles used under and certificates issued
under this Title shall be in a safe condition for transportation of handicapped
persons, clean, of good appearance, well painted and have such equipment as now
or hereafter required by the County Health Department, including, but not
limited to:
      1.   Doorways wide enough to accommodate a wheelchair.
      2.   Ramps or lifting devices for elevating handicapped persons from the
curb or sidewalk into the "special transportation vehicle", which ramps and
lifting devices must be stored inside the "special transportation vehicle"
while it is moving.
      3.   Adequate means of securing handicapped persons safely to the inside
of the "special transportation vehicle" and safety belts for all passengers.
      4.   A door, in addition to those provided in such vehicles for normal
ingress and egress, located at the rear thereof, to be used as a method of
escape in case of an emergency.
      5.   A fire extinguisher, and first aid equipment and supplies as
prescribed and amended from time to time by the County Health Department.
(1979 Code § 5.63.180; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
   D.   Inspections: Every "special transportation vehicle" operating under
this Article may be inspected at any time by the Police Department and the
County Health Department to ensure the continued maintenance of safe, clean and
proper operating conditions.
(1979 Code § 5.63.190; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
   E.   Clean And Sanitary Conditions Of Vehicles: Every "special
transportation vehicle" operating under this Title shall be kept in a clean and
sanitary condition according to rules and regulations promulgated by the County
Board of Health.
(1979 Code § 5.63.200; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
   F.   Identifying Design: Each "special transportation vehicle" shall bear on
the outside of each rear or front door in painted letters not less than five-
sixteenths inch (5/16") stroke and more than two and one-fourth inches (21/4")
in height, the words "Special Transportation", the name of the holder and the
company number shall also be painted on the rear of the "special transportation
vehicle".
(1979 Code § 5.63.210; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-16E-8: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this Article shall not be deemed to have any application to
the transportation by the City, any school board, county, State or any
nonprofit corporation, or to any driver of these exempt organizations
performing such transportation.
(1979 Code § 5.63.220; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
5-16E-9: VIOLATIONS; REPORTING:
Upon discovery of a violation of the provisions of this Article, in addition to
criminal proceedings, the Police Department shall report the same to the Mayor,
or the Mayor's designee, who may take such action as is appropriate respecting
the licenses or certificates of the persons involved.
(1979 Code § 5.63.240; amd. Ord. 98-54, 8-18-1998)
ARTICLE F.  PEDICABS
SECTION:
5-16F-1: Definitions
5-16F-2: Number Limitation
5-16F-3: License Required
5-16F-4: Certificate Required
5-16F-5: Business License Application And Qualification Requirements
5-16F-6: Pedicab Driver's License Required
5-16F-7: Approval Procedure
5-16F-8: Records Maintained
5-16F-9: Routes Designated
5-16F-10: Rules And Regulations
5-16F-11: Prohibited Acts
5-16F-12: Suspension, Revocation Or Denial
5-16F-1: DEFINITIONS:
CERTIFICATE: A certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by the
Mayor, or the Mayor's designee, authorizing the holder thereof to conduct in
Ogden City a business in the transportation of persons by pedicab pursuant to
the provisions of this article.
DRIVER: An individual who drives a licensed pedicab whether as the holder, an
employee of the holder, or as an independent contractor.
HOLDER: A person to whom a certificate of public convenience and necessity has
been issued to conduct a business in the transportation of persons by pedicab
in Ogden City.
PEDICAB: A bicycle type vehicle for the purpose of carrying passengers for hire
that is propelled by human power or electric assisted, is not intended to
exceed twenty five (25) miles per hour and cannot exceed a combined voltage and
amperage of 72V and 30C.
(Ord. 2017-16, 4-11-2017)
5-16F-2: NUMBER LIMITATION:
The Mayor may limit the number of pedicabs that may be licensed to operate upon
the streets of the City on the basis of public convenience, welfare and
necessity, under the provisions of article B of this chapter.
(Ord. 2008-51, 10-28-2008)
5-16F-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation owning or having under its
control any pedicab to operate the same or to suffer the same to be operated
for public transportation upon the streets of the City unless a pedicab
business license has been issued pursuant to the provisions of this article and
is in full force and effect at the time of the operation upon the streets of
the City as aforesaid. No license shall be issued for any such pedicab business
except to a holder of a certificate as provided under article B of this
chapter.
(Ord. 2008-51, 10-28-2008)
5-16F-4: CERTIFICATE REQUIRED:
No person shall operate, or permit to be operated for public transportation, a
pedicab owned or controlled by him or her upon the streets of the City without
having first obtained a certificate of public convenience and necessity, as
provided under article B of this chapter, authorizing the operation of a
pedicab for public transportation.
(Ord. 2008-51, 10-28-2008)
5-16F-5: BUSINESS LICENSE APPLICATION AND QUALIFICATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Contents Of Application: Applications for pedicab business licenses
shall be made on forms furnished by the City. The application must set forth
the full name and address of the applicant, the number of pedicabs to be
licensed under the business, and shall also contain such other information as
the City may from time to time specify. It shall be unlawful to make any false
statement on an application for any such license.
   B.   Fee For License: The fees for pedicab business licenses shall be as
established in chapter 1, article B of this title.
   C.   Card Issuance; Contents: Upon payment of the necessary fees and the
compliance with all other sections of this article, the Business License
Coordinator shall issue to the holder a license card for each pedicab to be
operated. The form and size of the card shall be prescribed by the Business
License Coordinator and shall contain the name of the holder, together with any
identification number or numbers, the date of issuance, and a statement to the
effect that in case of any complaint, the Chief of Police and the holder shall
be notified. The card shall be signed by the Business License Coordinator and
shall be good for the license year of its issuance unless sooner revoked or
suspended.
(Ord. 2008-51, 10-28-2008)
5-16F-6: PEDICAB DRIVER'S LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to drive a pedicab upon the streets of the City
without first having obtained a pedicab driver's license as provided herein.
(Ord. 2008-51, 10-28-2008)
5-16F-7: APPROVAL PROCEDURE:
   A.   Licensing Requirements: Every person driving a licensed pedicab must
have a pedicab driver's license. Each applicant for a pedicab driver's license
must:
      1.   Be licensed by the Utah Department of Motor Vehicles as an operator,
and operate a pedicab under the same restrictions, if any, placed on the
person's driver's license;
      2.   Be of the age of eighteen (18) years or over;
      3.   Be of sound physique, with good eyesight, and not subject to
epilepsy, vertigo, heart trouble or any other infirmity of body or mind which
might render him or her unfit for the safe operation of a public vehicle,
taking into consideration any restrictions placed on the person's motor vehicle
license;
      4.   Be able to read and follow traffic signs, safely handle a pedicab in
and among motorized vehicles in an urban setting, communicate with passengers,
and have knowledge of Ogden geography and the designated service zone;
      5.   Be a holder, or be employed by or under contract with a holder;
      6.   Obtain from the Ogden Police Department a criminal background check
and driver's license history. An individual is not eligible for a driver's
license who has had a felony conviction, or a conviction for driving under the
influence of alcohol or drugs, or any citations for reckless driving within
three (3) years from the date of application;
      7.   Fill out upon a blank form, to be provided by the Chief of Police, a
statement giving the applicant's full name; residence; places of residence for
five (5) years previous to date of application; age; height; color of eyes and
hair; place of birth; whether the applicant has ever been arrested or convicted
of a felony or misdemeanor; whether the applicant has ever been convicted for
driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs or for reckless driving;
whether the applicant has previously been a licensed driver or chauffeur and,
if so, whether any such license has ever been revoked and for what cause; which
statement shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant and filed with the
Chief of Police as a permanent record. It shall be unlawful for the applicant
to make any false statement on said form.
   B.   Photographs: Each applicant for a driver's license must provide four
(4) "passport style" photographs of the applicant, taken within the thirty (30)
days preceding the filing of the application. Such photographs shall be taken
at the Ogden police office, if available. One (1) photograph shall be attached
to the driver's license when issued, one (1) shall be attached to the plastic
badge, one (1) shall be filed with the Business License Coordinator, and the
fourth shall be retained by the Chief of Police. The photograph should be so
attached to the license that it cannot be removed and another photograph
substituted without detection. Each licensed driver shall, upon demand of any
police officer or passenger, exhibit the driver's license for inspection. Where
the application for a license is denied, three (3) copies of the photograph
shall be returned to the applicant and one (1) retained by the Chief of Police.
   C.   Fee; Issuance; Term: The fee for a driver's license shall be as
established in chapter 1, article B of this title. Upon payment of the fee and
compliance with the other requirements therefor, the Business License
Coordinator shall issue the applicant a driver's license and the badge required
by this article. The driver's license shall expire two (2) years after date of
issue. It shall be in such form as to contain the photograph and signature of
the licensee and a blank space upon which a record may be made of any arrest,
revocation, suspension or serious complaint against the licensee. It shall be
unlawful for any licensee to deface, remove or obliterate an official entry
made upon the license.
   D.   Driver's Badge: There shall be delivered to each licensed driver a
plastic badge of such form and style as the Chief of Police may prescribe, with
the driver's picture, signature and license number thereon, which must, under
penalty of the revocation of the license, be constantly and conspicuously
displayed on the driver's cap or person when engaged as a pedicab driver. Such
badge shall be nontransferable, and it shall be unlawful for any person to wear
any such badge or one so similar as to deceive any person, unless the same has
been regularly issued, as provided in this article, to the person wearing it.
   E.   License Denial, Suspension, Revocation:
      1.   Denials, suspensions or revocations shall be handled in accordance
with the provisions of chapter 1, article C of this title, or its successor.
      2.   In addition to the grounds stated in chapter 1, article C of this
title, the driver's license may be suspended or revoked for a violation of any
of the provisions of this article, or for violation of any ordinance of the
City or the State that involves a crime against the person or property of
another. Any such suspension shall be noted on the license, together with a
statement of the reasons thereof, and the driver shall thereupon be suspended
or deprived of the driver's badge, the badge to be returned at the expiration
of the period for which the license was suspended. A second suspension of any
license shall revoke such license. No driver whose license has been revoked
shall again be licensed as a driver for licensed public vehicles in the City
except upon presentation of persons satisfactory to the Mayor, or the Mayor's
designee.
(Ord. 2008-51, 10-28-2008)
5-16F-8: RECORDS MAINTAINED:
There shall be kept in the Office of the Business License Coordinator a
complete record of each license issued to a driver and of all renewals and
revocations or suspensions thereof, which record shall be kept on file with the
original application of the driver for a license.
(Ord. 2008-51, 10-28-2008)
5-16F-9: ROUTES DESIGNATED:
The City authorizes a holder to operate a pedicab business upon streets within
the City according to streets, routes and restrictions authorized by the City's
Traffic Engineer in coordination with the Chief of Police. The authorized
routes shall be subject to amendment from time to time by the City. Pedicabs
are not permitted to operate on streets with a speed limit of forty (40) miles
per hour or greater, except as necessary to access the intermodal
transportation hub, or as may be required in emergency situations.
(Ord. 2008-51, 10-28-2008)
5-16F-10: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   Schedule Of Rates: It shall be the duty of every holder to file with
the Business License Coordinator a current schedule of rates to be charged per
passenger, and no transportation shall be performed or service rendered except
in conformity therewith. This section does not apply to fares for special
tours, provided that the fare for the special tour is agreed upon between the
passenger and the driver prior to the beginning of the tour.
   B.   Use Of Taxicab Stands: Pedicabs may use existing taxicab stands as
established by the City in the Business District in section
10-3-2 of this Code.
   C.   Use Of Sidewalks, Paths, And Trails: Pedicabs shall remain on public
streets. Pedicabs may load and unload adjacent to sidewalks but may not travel
on sidewalks, paths, or trails.
   D.   Driver To Remain Near Pedicab: It is unlawful for any person, while
engaged as a driver of a licensed pedicab, to leave the immediate vicinity of
the pedicab except for the purpose of assisting passengers.
   E.   Occupant To Have Exclusive Use: When a pedicab is engaged, the occupant
shall have the exclusive right to the full and free use to the passenger
compartment, and it is unlawful for the driver of the pedicab to solicit or
carry additional passengers therein except with the consent of the passenger.
   F.   Most Direct Route Required: Unless otherwise agreed to, any driver
carrying passengers to a definite point at the request of the passengers shall
take the most direct route possible that will carry the passenger safely and
expeditiously to the desired destination.
   G.   Capacity: The pedicab manufacturer's recommended capacity shall not be
exceeded and passengers shall remain seated throughout the ride.
   H.   Maintenance:
      1.   Maintenance Required: The holder shall conduct weekly maintenance,
cleaning, and inspections of each licensed pedicab to ensure that they are
maintained in a clean, safe, and operable condition, and maintain an inspection
record for each pedicab.
      2.   Retention; Right Of Inspection: The holder shall retain and preserve
all inspection records in a safe and convenient place for a period of time
covering at least the current calendar year and the calendar year immediately
preceding the current calendar year. Inspection records shall be available for
review by the Chief of Police, the City Attorney and the Mayor, or any of them,
or any person designated by any of them.
   I.   Inspection: At a minimum, licensed pedicabs are required to display a
highly visible "Slow Moving Vehicle" sign on the rear of each pedicab, and be
equipped with turn signals, headlights, taillights, horns, reflectors, and
hydraulic brakes. The Chief of Police may, in the Chief's discretion, after the
issuance of the license, conduct an inspection of any licensed pedicab. The
Business License Coordinator shall refuse a license to, or if already issued,
the Mayor, or the Mayor's designee, may revoke or suspend the license of, any
pedicab found by the Chief of Police to be unfit or unsuited for public
patronage. It is unlawful to operate or allow to be operated on the streets of
the City any pedicab which fails to meet the minimum requirements specified in
this subsection.
   J.   Display Of License Card; Driver's License: There shall be displayed
within each licensed pedicab, within the plain view of any passenger, the
pedicab license card, the driver's license card, the telephone number of the
holder, and a statement that the Chief of Police and the holder are to be
notified in case of any complaints.
   K.   Electric Assist: Licensee may utilize a pedicab equipped with an
electric assist front hub motor provided that:
      1.   The electric assist motor is controlled by an onboard computer that
will facilitate the monitoring and inspection of such motor by enforcement
personnel; and
      2.   The maximum speed attainable through the use of such electric assist
motor may be limited by the onboard computer system to ensure the pedicab does
not exceed a velocity of twenty five (25) miles per hour;
      3.   The electric assist motor is equipped with automatic brake shutoff
circuitry;
      4.   The electric assist motor does not exceed a combined voltage and
amperage of 72V and 30C;
      5.   The electric assist motor is powered solely by electricity and does
not produce noise in excess of fifty (50) decibels.
(Ord. 2017-16, 4-11-2017)
5-16F-11: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   Permitting Unlicensed Or Illegal Operation: It is unlawful for any
holder or driver to permit such pedicab to be driven by any person who has not
been licensed in the manner prescribed by law, to knowingly permit such pedicab
to be used for unlawful purposes or knowingly to transport persons therein to
places for such purposes, or to permit such pedicab to be operated in violation
of any provisions of this article or any other ordinance or law of the City or
the State.
   B.   Soliciting Of Passengers; Obstruction Of Traffic: Pedicab drivers may
solicit passengers for hire by cruising the streets of the City, but it shall
be unlawful for the driver of any pedicab to solicit passengers for hire or to
invite or to call the attention of the public to the pedicab by word of mouth,
signals, nods, whistles, shouts or other signs from the pedicab while traveling
on the streets of the City. Nothing contained in this subsection shall be
construed as prohibiting pedicabs from receiving or discharging passengers at
public places of gatherings, such as theaters, hotels, public buildings,
stadiums, transportation terminals, etc. Pedicab drivers shall at all times
drive their pedicabs so as not to constrict, congest or interfere with the
normal flow of traffic in any manner whatsoever.
(Ord. 2008-51, 10-28-2008)
5-16F-12: SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OR DENIAL:
Denials, suspension or revocations of any license under this article shall be
handled in accordance with the provisions of chapter 1, article C of this
title. The denial, suspension or revocation of any certificate of public
convenience and necessity shall be handled in accordance with article B of this
chapter.
(Ord. 2008-51, 10-28-2008)
CHAPTER 17
TEMPORARY AND SEASONAL BUSINESSES
ARTICLE A.  EXHIBITIONS AND SPECIAL EVENTS 1
SECTION:
5-17A-1: Licensing; Procedure
 
Notes
  1. Prior ordinance history: 1979 Code §§ 5.09.010, 5.09.020, 5.09.030,
1 5.09.040, 5.09.050; Ord. 91-37, 9-19-1991; Ord. 97-94, 12-16-1997; Ord. 2002-
  6, 1-22-2002; Ord. 2003-74, 12-16-2003.
   
5-17A-1: LICENSING; PROCEDURE:
   A.   Definitions: As used in this article, the following terms shall have
the designated meanings:
   EXHIBITION: A show or exhibit lasting no more than seven (7) consecutive
days, or for no longer than fifteen (15) consecutive weeks when conducted only
one day per week or every weekend (Friday, Saturday and/or Sunday), where the
operator allots space on a daily or hourly basis to vendors or exhibitors, such
as arts and crafts show, gun show, antique shows, trade shows or exhibitions.
It shall not include swap meets.
   PARTICIPANT: A vendor participating in an exhibition or special event. A
participant shall not include persons offering goods on a consignment basis to
the operator, wherein any payment for such goods is included in the gross sales
receipts of the operator.
   SPECIAL EVENT: A civic event or community celebration open to the general
public, sponsored by the city or another governmental entity, a bona fide
nonprofit association, church or political organization, where the sponsor
allots space to vendors or exhibitors on a daily or hourly basis. A special
event shall last no longer than seven (7) consecutive days, or no longer than
fifteen (15) consecutive weeks when conducted only one day per week or every
weekend (Friday, Saturday and/or Sunday).
   B.   Required: It is unlawful for any person to engage in the operation of
an exhibition or special event within the corporate limits of the city without
first having obtained an exhibition or special event license as required
herein. It is unlawful for any person to be a participant in an exhibition or
special event by selling, or offering for sale, food, drinks, goods or other
merchandise, without first having obtained an exhibition or special event
participant license. Neither the operator, sponsor or any participant may sell
alcoholic beverages during the exhibition or special event without first
qualifying for, and obtaining, the necessary licenses or permits from the city
and/or the state. All business activities not qualifying as an exhibition or
special event are required to be licensed under the other applicable provisions
of this title.
   C.   Application; Approval: Application for license shall be on forms
provided by the city, which shall contain, at a minimum, the following
information:
      1.   The location and duration of the exhibition or special event.
      2.   The name and mailing address of the applicant.
      3.   A statement as to whether the applicant is a sponsor, operator, or
participant.
      4.   Whether sales will be on a consignment basis.
      5.   A description of items to be sold.
      6.   A list of food items and food vendors, if any, participating in the
exhibition or special event, along with evidence of compliance with appropriate
rules of the county health department.
      7.   Evidence of compliance with Utah state tax commission sales tax
collection requirements.
   D.   Shortened Application; Authority: The business license coordinator is
authorized to establish a shortened application, approval and issuance
procedure.
   E.   Fee: The fee for an exhibition or special event license and the
participants thereof shall be as specified in chapter 1, article B of this
title.
(Ord. 2004-55, 7-13-2004 1 )
 
Notes
  1. Upon application for an amended special event or exhibition business
1 license, the new fees and licensing criteria approved by ordinance 2004-55
  may be applied retroactively to any reoccurring special event or exhibition
  issued a license on or after June 15, 2004.
ARTICLE B.  CHRISTMAS TREE SALES
SECTION:
5-17B-1: Licensing; Procedure
5-17B-2: Regulations
5-17B-1: LICENSING; PROCEDURE:
   A.   Required: It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage
in the business of selling fir or evergreen trees, or trees commonly called
Christmas trees, in the city without first obtaining a license therefor.
(1979 Code § 5.20.010)
   B.   Application: Any person, firm or corporation desiring a license to sell
and dispose of fir, evergreen or Christmas trees within the city shall make
application therefor, under oath, to the business license coordinator and in
such application shall specifically state and set forth the source and title of
the trees to be sold, whether the same or any part thereof were cut or procured
within any public domain of the United States or of the state or any county
within the state, or from any private land, and shall be required in connection
with the application for sale to furnish the city evidence of ownership of such
trees or authority to cut and procure the same from the public domain or from
private lands.
(1979 Code § 5.20.020; amd. 1999 Code)
   C.   Issuance; Term; Fee; Exception: The business license coordinator shall,
if he is satisfied from the application and the showing made by the applicant
that the applicant has a bona fide title to the trees and that the same were
not obtained illegally and in violation of any laws of the United States or of
the state, or any law, rule or regulation of the state or county from which the
trees have been obtained relative to the cutting down of fir or evergreen
trees, and that applicant has authority to cut and procure the same from the
public domain or from private land, grant to the applicant a license upon the
payment of a license fee as established in chapter 1, article B of this title,
from November 1 of each year for a period of sixty (60) days.
(1979 Code § 5.20.030; amd. Ord. 81-27, 6-25-1981; Ord. 87-8, 1-22-1987; Ord.
97-94, 12-16-1997)
5-17B-2: REGULATIONS:
   A.   Written Consent To Cut: It is unlawful for any person or persons, firm
or corporation to sell at any time or offer for sale in the city any fir,
evergreen or Christmas tree cut or procured from or within the public domain of
the United States or the state or from any private land within the state,
without written authority having been first obtained from the United States or
the state or from the owner of such private lands to cut and remove such trees.
(1979 Code § 5.20.040)
   B.   Untagged Trees: It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
have in his or its possession for sale or to sell or offer for sale in the city
any such trees as described in this article until the same shall have been
officially tagged with a tag furnished or approved either by the United States
forestry service or the department of forestry of the state.
(1979 Code § 5.20.050)
ARTICLE C.  DISTRESSED GOODS SALES 1
SECTION:
5-17C-1: Definitions
5-17C-2: Licensing; Procedure
5-17C-3: Prohibited Acts
 
Notes
1 1. UCA § 76-6-507.
5-17C-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply whenever the terms listed are used in
this article:
DISTRESSED GOODS: Includes all goods, wares and merchandise that are sold at
sales represented or advertised as a bankrupt, insolvent's, assignee's,
adjustor's, trustee's, executor's, administrator's, receiver's, wholesaler's,
jobber's, manufacturer's, closing out, liquidation, quitting business, fire or
water damage sale, or any sale which, by representation or advertisement, tends
to lead the prospective purchaser to believe that the person conducting the
sale is closing out his business and disposing of all his goods, wares or
merchandise for less than the current or prevailing prices thereof in the city.
FALSE ADVERTISING: Any advertising, whether by placard, poster, sign, handbill,
newspaper, magazine, circular, radio, television or any other means of
communication, the effect of which is to suggest incorrectly the source,
quality, price or value of the goods being sold or the reason for the sale
thereof.
PERSONS: Includes any person, firm, association or corporation in the city.
(1979 Code § 5.48.010)
5-17C-2: LICENSING; PROCEDURE:
   A.   Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or advertise
distressed goods unless a license has been issued for such sale by the business
license coordinator.
(1979 Code § 5.48.020; amd. 1999 Code)
   B.   Application; Contents: All applications for licenses authorized by this
article shall contain the name and address of the applicant and, if the
applicant is an agent, the name and address of the person for whom he is
acting; shall specify the period of time during which the sale will be
conducted, which shall not exceed three (3) months, except as provided in this
article; shall have attached to it a complete and accurate list of all goods to
be sold, together with the wholesale price thereof; and shall contain a
statement that no other goods will be commingled with the distressed goods and
that all the information contained on the application and the attached
inventory are true and correct. The application shall be subscribed to under
oath by the applicant or by his resident agent thereunto authorized.
(1979 Code § 5.48.030)
   C.   Fee; Period: The license fee for a sale of distressed goods shall be as
determined in chapter 1, article B of this title, and the license shall be
valid for thirty (30) days after the date of its issue. If all such items on
such inventory are not sold within thirty (30) days from the issuance of the
license it may be renewed, upon application and payment of the renewal fee, if
a sworn statement is filed with the business license coordinator listing the
items on the original inventory that have not been sold and affirming that no
goods other than the inventoried goods have been or will be sold in connection
with such sale.
(1979 Code § 5.48.040; amd. Ord. 81-27, 6-25-1981; Ord. 97-94, 12-16-1997; 1999
Code)
5-17C-3: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   False Statements: It is unlawful to make a false statement in any
application for a license authorized by this article.
(1979 Code § 5.48.050)
   B.   False Advertising: It is unlawful to engage in or cause to be
published, displayed, announced or distributed any false advertising in
connection with the sale of any distressed goods.
(1979 Code § 5.48.060)
   C.   Commingling Distressed Goods: It is unlawful to commingle with any
distressed goods, as set forth in any inventory filed with the application for
a license as provided in this article, any other goods which are not listed on
said inventory; provided however, that nothing contained in this subsection
shall prohibit the sale of inventoried goods and other goods if the inventoried
goods are segregated from such other goods in such manner that they can be
clearly and readily distinguished by prospective purchasers.
(1979 Code § 5.48.070)
   D.   Securing Goods For Commingling: No person seeking a license shall
secure goods, wares or merchandise prior to the application for a license for
the purpose of commingling such goods with distressed goods at a distressed
goods sale, and any extraordinary purchase or addition to stocks that is not
normally made in the usual course of business within sixty (60) days prior to
the application for a license shall be presumptive evidence that any such
purchase or addition was made for the purpose of commingling at such sale.
(1979 Code § 5.48.080)
ARTICLE D.  FIREWORKS SALES 1
SECTION:
5-17D-1: Licensing; Procedures
5-17D-2: Temporary Stands; Regulations
5-17D-3: Discharge; Applicable Dates
 
Notes
1 1. UCA §§ 10-8-47, 11-8-56,
  11-3-1 et seq., 53-7-220 - 53-7-225, 76-10-301 et seq.
5-17D-1: LICENSING; PROCEDURES:
   A.   Required; When Permitted; Defined:
      1.   No person shall offer for sale or sell at retail any fireworks
without having first applied for and received a license from the city and a
permit from the fire department to do so for each location at which the said
fireworks are sold. A license may be issued for the sale of fireworks only for
the periods of time on or between June 23 and July 27 of each year; on or
between December 29 and December 31 of each year; and two (2) days before and
on the Chinese New Year's Eve.
      2.   Fireworks, as used in this article, shall have the same meaning as
provided in the Utah fireworks act, Utah Code Annotated sections 53-7-220
through 53-7-225, as it now exists or as hereafter amended.
   B.   Application: Applications for a license and permit to sell fireworks
shall be made in writing to the business license coordinator and shall include:
      1.   Payment Of License And Permit Fee: The payment of a business license
and a permit fee per location as determined in chapter 1, article B of this
title.
      2.   Proposed Location: Set forth the proposed location or locations of
the fireworks stand and whether in temporary stands or in permanent buildings.
      3.   Insurance Certificates: Deliver to the business license coordinator
insurance certificates evidencing public liability insurance coverage in the
amount of two hundred thousand dollars/four hundred thousand dollars
($200,000.00/$400,000.00) and property damage insurance coverage in the amount
of two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00). Such certificates shall
designate the city as an additional insured.
      4.   Statement Of Compliance: Include a statement that the applicant has
a copy of and agrees to comply strictly with the terms of this article, Utah
Code Annotated title 11, chapter 3, and the laws of the state.
      5.   Sales Tax Permit: Include evidence of a sales tax permit from the
state.
   C.   Inspection Of Premises: Upon receipt of such application, the business
license coordinator shall forward the same to the fire department, which shall
inspect the proposed premises and other compliance items and forthwith issue or
deny its permit for the locations involved and notify the business license
coordinator, which shall issue the license or deny the same as determined by
the fire department.
   D.   Display Of License; Sales Tax Permit: The license and permit to sell
fireworks and the sales tax permit used by the licensee shall be displayed in a
prominent place in the fireworks stand or store.
(Ord. 2012-38, 6-26-2012)
5-17D-2: TEMPORARY STANDS; REGULATIONS:
Temporary stands will be subject to the following regulations:
   A.   Distance To Structures: No fireworks stand shall be within twenty five
feet (25') of any building, structure or other fireworks stand nor within fifty
feet (50') of any gasoline pump, or gasoline dispensing service, or LPG tank or
dispensing device.
   B.   Code Compliance: Fireworks stands need not comply with the provisions
of the current fire or building code, as adopted by title 16, chapter 2 of this
code, or its successor provisions, but shall comply with all zoning ordinances.
However, all such stands shall be erected in a manner that will reasonably
assure the safety of tenants and patrons.
   C.   Exits: Each stand up to twenty four feet (24') in length must have at
least two (2) exits. Each stand in excess of twenty four feet (24') in length
must have at least three (3) exits. All exits shall be spaced at approximately
equal distances apart.
   D.   Fire Extinguishers: Each stand shall be equipped with an approved,
portable fire extinguisher in good working order having a minimum 2A rating at
every required exit.
   E.   Weeds And Combustible Material: All weeds and combustible material
shall be cleared from the location of the stand, including a distance of at
least twenty five feet (25') surrounding the stand.
   F.   Signs:
      1.   Two (2) signs, each sign bearing the message "No Smoking Within
Twenty Five Feet Of This Stand" in letters at least three inches (3") tall
shall be displayed on each and every side of a fireworks stand.
      2.   A sign bearing the message "Discharge Of Fireworks Prohibited Within
One Hundred Fifty Feet Of This Stand" in letters at least three inches (3")
tall shall be displayed on each and every side of the fireworks stand.
   G.   Supervisor: There shall be at least one supervisor, eighteen (18) years
of age or older, on duty at the stand at all times when the sale of fireworks
is in progress. All fireworks shall be effectively kept away from any kind of
self-service by the public and shall be placed in a location which is
unavailable and inaccessible to members of the public.
   H.   Removal: Fireworks stands shall be removed within five (5) days after
retail sales shall cease.
   I.   Deposit: Prior to the issuance of a license, each applicant shall file
with the business license coordinator a cash deposit in the amount of one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for each temporary fireworks stand to be
operated by the applicant. Such deposit shall assure compliance with provisions
of this article, including, but not limited to, the removal of the stand and
the cleaning of the site upon which it was located. In the event the licensee
does not comply with the provisions of this article or remove the stand or
clean the site, the city may do so or cause the same to be done and a
reasonable cost shall be charged against the licensee and the deposit, and the
balance, if any, shall be forthwith returned to the licensee.
   J.   Sleeping: No person shall sleep in a fireworks stand overnight.
   K.   Posting Notices: The supervisor of a fireworks stand shall ensure that
a copy of a notice pursuant to section
11-6-3 of this code, including any exhibits thereto, is posted in at least two
(2) prominent locations on the fireworks stand at all times when the stand is
open.
(Ord. 2013-28, 6-18-2013)
5-17D-3: DISCHARGE; APPLICABLE DATES:
Fireworks may only be discharged by permit or on the dates and times described
in section
11-6-2 of this code.
(Ord. 2011-38, 6-21-2011)
TITLE 6
PARKS, RECREATION AND PUBLIC PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
PARKS, RECREATION AND COMMUNITY FACILITIES
SECTION:
6-1-1: Rules And Regulations
6-1-2: Fees
6-1-3: Fastening Animals To Trees
6-1-4: Animals Near Trees
6-1-5: Injuring Trees Or Improvements
6-1-6: Nuisances In Parks
6-1-7: Reserved
6-1-8: Park Concessions; Limitations
6-1-9: Alcohol Permits
6-1-10: Penalty
6-1-1: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   Mayoral Authority To Establish: The mayor may establish such reasonable
rules and regulations as may be necessary for the use, control, management and
protection of the public parks, squares, playgrounds, stadiums, amphitheaters,
golf courses, trails and other facilities of the city available for, or
supporting, recreational or community activities or special events. Such rules
and regulations shall be established by administrative order and shall become
effective upon filing with the city recorder. Rules and regulations applicable
to special events shall be consistent with the provisions of chapter 5 of this
title.
   B.   Standards: The rules and regulations provided for in subsection A of
this section shall be such as the mayor shall find and determine are necessary
or desirable to provide for the maximum public use of and benefit from all
grounds and facilities for both individual and group recreational or community
activities commensurate with sound administrative practices and procedures and
with the protection of the public property and the public safety, health and
welfare, and the economical operation and maintenance of such grounds and
facilities. By such rules and regulations, the mayor may impose reasonable
limitations on the use of any or all such grounds and facilities and may
require a facility use agreement or the issuance of a written permit for the
use of the same by any public or private group, organization, body politic,
corporation or association for the purpose of such organization. Such
regulations may provide for the reservation for a reasonable time of a
reasonable portion of such grounds or facilities for exclusive use of such
group or organization when it appears that the same shall be in the public
interest.
(1979 Code §§ 12.32.030; 12.32.040; 12.32.060; amd. 1999 Code; Ord. 2007-21, 5-
22-2007)
6-1-2: FEES:
The fees established in title 4, chapter 6 of this code shall be imposed and
collected for:
   A.   The use of park facilities designated as available on a reservation
basis;
   B.   Recreational and community facilities available on a reservation basis;
and
   C.   Recreational programs operated by the city.
(1999 Code)
6-1-3: FASTENING ANIMALS TO TREES:
It is unlawful for any person to hitch or fasten any horse or other animal to
any tree, shrub, fountain, monument, lamppost or any other ornament to the
improvement growing or situated in any public street, public park or place
within the corporate limits of the city.
(1979 Code § 12.28.030)
6-1-4: ANIMALS NEAR TREES:
It is unlawful for any person to allow any animal under his control to stand
near enough to any such trees or shrubs to bite, rub against or otherwise
injure the same.
(1979 Code § 12.28.040)
6-1-5: INJURING TREES OR IMPROVEMENTS:
It is unlawful for any person to move any building or other object so as to
injure or interfere with any tree, shrub, statue, monument or other improvement
standing in any street, avenue or public highway; or place an advertisement,
announcement or notice upon the same; or scratch, cut, mark or deface any tree,
shrub, statue, monument or other improvement in any street, avenue, highway,
parking or public ground.
(1979 Code § 12.28.050)
6-1-6: NUISANCES IN PARKS:
It is unlawful for any person or persons to create any nuisance or commit any
offense that is in violation of state law or city ordinance; to scratch, cut,
injure or deface any of the buildings, fences, structures or other property or
foul any of the fountains or any other improvements; or to cut or injure
flowers or flowerbeds within the park; or for the owner of any dog to allow the
same to run at large within the parks, except as permitted within a city
approved dog park.
(Ord. 2009-50, 8-18-2009)
6-1-7: RESERVED:
(1979 Code § 12.28.080; amd. 1999 Code; Ord. 2007-21, 5-22-2007)
6-1-8: PARK CONCESSIONS; LIMITATIONS:
   A.   Alcoholic Beverage Sales: Concessionaires for city parks or
recreational facilities shall not be approved by the mayor for the sale of
alcoholic beverages except in the following parks or recreational facilities,
and under the applicable times and conditions:
      1.   Lindquist Field;
      2.   The stadium at Lorin Farr park;
      3.   The El Monte and Mount Ogden golf courses;
      4.   The recreational facility at Fourth Street park during such times
when the city is sponsoring adult softball tournaments and for adult league
play. Such tournaments shall not allow play by persons under the age of sixteen
(16) years;
      5.   The Ogden amphitheater.
   B.   Food Required: No concession for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall
be allowed unless food is also made available for consumption.
   C.   State License Required: Any concessionaire authorized to sell alcoholic
beverages within a city park or recreational facility shall be properly
licensed in accordance with title 5, chapter 3, article C of this code and, if
applicable, the alcoholic beverage control act of the state.
(1979 Code § 12.28.082; Ord. 94-19, 4-26-1994; amd. Ord. 2002-49, 8-6-2002)
6-1-9: ALCOHOL PERMITS:
   A.   MTC Learning Park, Ogden Eccles Dinosaur Park And Ogden Amphitheater:
      1.   Conditions: Persons who reserve the MTC Learning park, the Ogden
Eccles Dinosaur park, or the Ogden amphitheater may apply for an alcoholic
beverage permit which will allow the permittee to provide alcoholic beverages
to the permittee's guests for consumption during such function. Such alcohol
permit may be issued at the discretion of the community services director, or
the director's designee, in accordance with departmental rules and regulations
and only under the following conditions:
         a.   No persons under twenty one (21) years of age shall be allowed to
possess or consume any alcoholic beverage.
         b.   The permittee shall provide licensed private security to ensure
that rules and regulations regarding alcohol possession and consumption are
followed.
         c.   The permittee shall provide a reasonable deposit to cover
potential damage to property and to guarantee compliance with all rules and
regulations.
         d.   An alcohol permit fee shall be paid as provided in title 4,
chapter 6 of this code.
         e.   The permit shall designate the specific areas allowed for alcohol
possession and consumption, which shall be distinct from the areas of the park
or facility not reserved for such use and no possession or consumption shall be
allowed outside of that area or in any parking lot area, except as may be
reasonably necessary for set up or clean up by the permittee.
         f.   No sales of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted, except as
provided in subsection A2 of this section.
         g.   Food must be available as part of the function.
         h.   No participants shall be allowed to become inebriated.
         i.   Alcoholic beverage permits shall be allowed for private functions
only and shall not be allowed if open to the general public; provided that such
permit may be allowed at musical or theatrical performances in the Ogden
amphitheater where reserved seating is provided and alcoholic beverages are
being sold as provided in subsection A2 of this section.
         j.   No alcoholic beverage permit shall be issued if in conflict with
concession agreements applicable to the facility.
         k.   Any other conditions imposed by the community services director,
or the director's designee, to reasonably assure that any private function will
be conducted in a peaceful and orderly manner and to ensure that no
participants will become inebriated.
      2.   Approval: The community services director may approve an alcoholic
beverage permit allowing the sale of alcoholic beverages only if the following
minimum criteria are met:
         a.   When the sale of beer is involved, a special event beer license 1
has been granted;
         b.   A single event permit or a temporary special event beer permit
has been issued by the alcoholic beverage control commission pursuant to
section 32A-7-101, Utah Code Annotated; and
         c.   For a function in the MTC Learning park or the Ogden Eccles
Dinosaur park, the sale of alcoholic beverages is in conjunction with a
fundraiser being held for the benefit of the facility.
(1979 Code § 12.28.084; Ord. 94-22, 5-24-1994; amd. Ord. 2002-49, 8-6-2002;
Ord. 2003-19, 4-15-2003)
   B.   Union Station:
      1.   Persons who rent or reserve the facilities at Union Station for
private parties, weddings, business meetings or other similar functions may
apply for an alcohol permit which will allow the permittee to provide alcoholic
beverages to the permittee's guests for consumption during such function. Such
alcohol permit may be issued at the discretion of the community services
director, or the director's designee, in accordance with department rules and
regulations, but only under the following conditions:
         a.   No persons under twenty one (21) years of age shall be allowed to
possess or consume any alcoholic beverage.
         b.   The permittee shall provide licensed private security to ensure
that rules and regulations regarding alcohol possession and consumption are
followed.
         c.   The permittee shall provide a reasonable deposit to cover
potential damage to property and to guarantee compliance with all rules and
regulations.
         d.   An alcohol permit fee shall be paid as provided in title 4,
chapter 6 of this code.
         e.   The permit shall designate the specific areas allowed for alcohol
possession and consumption, which shall be distinct from areas in Union Station
remaining open to the general public, and no consumption of an alcoholic
beverage or possession of any open container containing an alcoholic beverage
shall be allowed outside of that designated area or in the parking lot or other
outdoor public areas surrounding Union Station.
         f.   No participant shall be allowed to become inebriated.
         g.   Food must be available as part of the function.
         h.   No sales of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted as part of the
function, except as provided in subsection B2 of this section.
         i.   Alcohol permits shall be allowed for private functions only, and
shall not be allowed if open to the general public.
         j.   No charge may be made to any participant for admission to the
function.
         k.   No consumption of an alcoholic beverage or possession of an open
container containing an alcoholic beverage shall be permitted after ten o'clock
(10:00) P.M.
         l.   Any other conditions imposed by the community services director,
in order to reasonably assure that any private function will be conducted in a
peaceful and orderly manner and to ensure that no participants will become
inebriated.
      2.   The community services director may approve an alcoholic beverage
permit allowing the sale of alcoholic beverages only if the following minimum
criteria are met:
         a.   When the sale of beer is involved, a special event beer license 2
has been granted; and
         b.   A single event permit or a temporary special event beer permit
has been issued by the alcoholic beverage control commission pursuant to
section 32A-7-101, Utah Code Annotated.
      3.   The provisions of this subsection B are not intended to apply to
those portions of Union Station leased for restaurant operations and whose
premises are licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages in accordance with
title 5, chapter 3, article C of this code and the alcoholic beverage control
act of the state.
   C.   Notification To Police Department: The community services department
shall notify the police department, at least seven (7) days in advance of the
function, of the issuance of any alcohol permit, the designated areas for the
permit, and the date and times for which the permit is valid. The alcohol
permit shall be posted as provided in departmental rules and regulations during
any time in which the possession and consumption of alcohol is permitted.
   D.   Revocation: An alcohol permit is a revocable privilege and if any
police officer or employee of the community services department observes
violations of the permit requirements, the officer or employee may immediately
rescind the permit and order the immediate cessation of alcohol consumption or
possession and the removal of all alcoholic beverages from the premises. No
permit shall be issued to any person or organization if violations of the
provisions of this subsection or applicable rules and regulations have occurred
during previous functions.
   E.   Exception: The provisions of this section are not intended to apply to
the sale of alcoholic beverages within a city park or recreational facility:
      1.   By a concessionaire authorized to sell alcoholic beverages as
provided in section
6-1-8 of this chapter and properly licensed in accordance with title 5, chapter
3, article C of this code and, if applicable, the alcoholic beverage control
act of the state; or
      2.   As part of a city sponsored special event licensed in accordance
with subsection 5-3C-5F of this code.
   F.   Additional Rules And Regulations: The mayor may adopt additional rules
and regulations regarding the issuance and use of alcoholic beverage permits
not inconsistent with the provisions of this section, pursuant to section
6-1-1 of this chapter.
(1979 Code § 12.28.085; Ord. 96-36, 7-16-1996; amd. Ord. 2002-49, 8-6-2002;
Ord. 2003-19, 4-15-2003)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection 5-3C-5F of this code.
2 1. See subsection 5-3C-5F of this code.
6-1-10: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter or any
regulation, administrative order, notice, directive or order promulgated under
the authority of said chapter, shall be deemed guilty of a class B misdemeanor
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as set forth in title 1,
chapter 4 of this code.
(1979 Code § 12.28.150; amd. 1999 Code)
CHAPTER 2
URBAN FORESTRY
SECTION:
6-2-1: Purpose And Applicability
6-2-2: Definitions
6-2-3: Urban Forester; Duties And Responsibilities
6-2-4: Urban Forestry Advisory Committee
6-2-5: Arboricultural Regulations
6-2-6: Planting, Pruning Or Removal Of Trees
6-2-7: Utility Companies; Cooperative Effort
6-2-8: Street Trees; Private Property Owners
6-2-9: Regulations
6-2-10: Public Nuisances
6-2-11: Prohibited Acts
6-2-12: Penalty
6-2-1: PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY:
   A.   The purpose of this chapter is to establish a comprehensive urban
forest management system that will optimize forest related public benefits,
increase public awareness of the benefit of our urban forest, integrate the
proper planting and maintenance of street and park trees with other urban
elements and amenities, increase public safety and the general welfare, and
maximize and maintain the aesthetic quality of the city urban forest resource.
Both public and private trees add value to Ogden City and the quality of life
of its residents. Conservation of this value in the form of resource
preservation is desirable for the community of Ogden. The value of trees is
manifest in their beauty, the ability to prevent erosion of topsoil, provide
protection against flood hazards and risk of landslides, counteract pollutants
in the air, sequester carbon, maintain climatic balance, decrease wind
velocities, produce oxygen, and increase property value. In order to maximize
these benefits, it is the intent of this chapter to regulate the selection,
planting, pruning, treatment and removal of trees within Ogden City in order to
retain as many healthy trees as possible consistent with the purpose of this
section and the reasonable use of private property.
   B.   This chapter shall apply to all "park trees" and "street trees", as
defined herein, as well as to those trees and shrubs located on private
property that have become a "public nuisance", as defined herein.
(Ord. 2016-13, 3-1-2016)
6-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
MAINTENANCE: Those practices and procedures for the normal care of trees and
shrubs as set forth in the arboricultural regulations of the city.
PARK TREES: Trees, shrubs, bushes and any other woody vegetation located on
city parks, on private property if the city trims or otherwise maintains the
vegetation based on a written easement or agreement or on other property
belonging to the city other than streets.
PARKING OR PARKING STRIP: That part of the public street right of way set aside
as a planting strip or open space and located between the sidewalk and curb or
edge of the roadway, or where no sidewalk exists, located between the property
line and curb or edge of the roadway.
PERSON: Individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships and every type of
association.
PUBLIC WAYS AND PARKS DIVISION: The division of the public services department
responsible for maintaining the parks of the city.
STREET: Includes any street, avenue, highway, alley or other public
thoroughfare, including the entire width from property line to property line.
STREET TREES: Trees, shrubs, bushes and any other woody vegetation located in
any parking or parking strip.
TREE PROTECTION ZONE (TPZ): An arborist/forester defined area surrounding the
trunk intended to provide protection of the canopy and to protect roots and
soil within the critical root zone and beyond, to ensure future tree health and
stability.
URBAN FORESTER: The official designated by the public services director to
enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2016-13, 3-1-2016)
6-2-3: URBAN FORESTER; DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
   A.   The urban forester, under the supervision of the public services
director or the director's designee, shall be responsible for:
      1.   Developing an urban forest management plan, which will include an
inventory of all street trees;
      2.   Recommending plans and procedures for the implementation of the
city's forestry program;
      3.   Supervising implementation of the city's forestry program;
      4.   Providing direction to all city employees in the care and
maintenance of street trees and park trees;
      5.   Enforcing the provisions of this chapter and the arboricultural
regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter;
      6.   Issuing permits required under section
6-2-6 of this chapter;
      7.   Coordinating with the department of community and economic
development in the site plan review process regarding installation of street
trees.
   B.   In order to accomplish the purposes of this chapter, the urban forester
is hereby authorized to go upon any property in the city for the purpose of
inspecting trees, shrubs and other plants, reasonably believed to be in
violation of this chapter; provided, that if such property be occupied, the
urban forester shall first present proper credentials and request entry; and if
such property be unoccupied, the urban forester shall first make a reasonable
effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the
property and request entry. If such entry is refused, the urban forester shall
have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry.
(Ord. 2016-13, 3-1-2016)
6-2-4: URBAN FORESTRY ADVISORY COMMITTEE:
   A.   Recommend And Review Regulations: The Ogden urban forestry advisory
committee, as established in title 3, chapter 23 of this code, shall recommend,
and then periodically review, and update, arboricultural regulations as
described under subsection 6-2-5A of this chapter.
   B.   Represent City: The Ogden urban forestry advisory committee shall
represent the city in making application to the heritage tree advisory
committee for designation by the state division of forestry, fire and state
lands of heritage trees within the city. Before making application, the urban
forestry advisory committee shall inform the owner of the property in question,
in writing, of the impending application and give the owner an opportunity to
be heard.
   C.   Appeals: Notice of appeal of a final determination by the committee may
be filed with the city recorder within twenty one (21) days of service of
notice. Appeals from the committee determination shall be heard by the mayor at
a time and place to be set by the mayor.
(Ord. 2016-13, 3-1-2016)
6-2-5: ARBORICULTURAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Implementation: The mayor, upon recommendation of the Ogden urban
forestry advisory committee, is authorized to adopt arboricultural regulations
for the city, which may be amended from time to time. The arboricultural
regulations shall designate the types and kinds of trees or shrubs permitted to
be planted hereafter as street trees or park trees; establish the standard
methods of tree care for street trees and park trees including guidelines for
trimming, spraying, removal, planting and pruning; and to establish the
requirements of tree protection plans and implement any existing or future
street tree plan as adopted by the city council as part of the Ogden city
general plan. The purpose of the regulation is to prohibit the planting and
growing of the type or kind of trees prone to disease and insects, or injurious
to sidewalks and curbs; to provide a plan of proper planting and growth of
trees for the beautification of the streets of Ogden; to protect trees from
improper care; and to prevent trees from becoming a public nuisance. Such
regulations, or any amendments thereto, shall be effective upon filing with the
city recorder's office and copies thereof shall be available to the public
through the office of the public ways and parks division.
   B.   Persons Engaged In Business:
      1.   Any person engaged in the business or occupation of trimming,
treating or removing trees or shrubs shall abide by the arboricultural
regulations of the city when performing any work on street trees or park trees
in the city.
      2.   Any public utility or person engaged in the business or occupation
of trimming, treating or removing trees or shrubs shall pay a fee of fifteen
dollars ($15.00) for each permit required under subsection 6-2-6A of this
chapter, or, as an alternative, pay an annual fee of seventy five dollars
($75.00). The above fees shall not be considered to be in lieu of any business
license fee or telecommunications license tax under title 5, chapter 2, article
B of this code or municipal energy sales and use tax under title 5, chapter 2,
article C of this code.
(Ord. 2016-13, 3-1-2016)
6-2-6: PLANTING, PRUNING OR REMOVAL OF TREES:
   A.   Permit Required: No person shall plant, prune, remove, spray, destroy,
deface or injure in any way, or cause to be planted, pruned, removed, sprayed,
destroyed, defaced or injured in any way, any street tree or park tree within
the city without having first obtained a written permit therefor from the
public ways and parks division.
      1.   An approved site plan by the mayor or other official or entity
authorized under the zoning title shall be considered a written permit required
by this section.
      2.   Any tree or shrub planted contrary to the provisions of this chapter
or any permit issued hereunder may be removed by the city.
      3.   A permit shall not be required for work performed by city employees
in the course of their duties.
   B.   Application: Any person desiring to plant, prune, remove or spray any
street tree or park tree within the city shall first make written application
to the public ways and parks division. Said application shall include the name
and address of the applicant, the name and address of the person doing the
work, the kind or species of tree or shrub and the location of same, together
with such other information as required. The applicant shall, at the time of
making the application, agree in writing to save the city harmless in all
respects and protect the city and the public at all times in connection with
any work performed under such permit.
   C.   Issuance; Expiration:
      1.   Permits issued for the planting, pruning, spraying or removal of
trees shall set forth the name of the person who shall perform the work, the
location of the work and any conditions or requirements in connection
therewith.
      2.   Failure to comply with the requirements of the permit shall
constitute a violation of this chapter.
      3.   All permit work shall comply with the arboricultural regulations of
the city.
      4.   As a condition of any removal permit and where a street tree or park
tree is in good health and is authorized to be removed at the applicant's
request, the public ways and parks division may require the permit applicant to
compensate the city for the value of the tree removal either by replacement
thereof with the size, species and location approved by the urban forester or
by monetary assessment.
      5.   Unless otherwise stated, a permit issued pursuant to this section
shall expire thirty (30) days after issuance.
      6.   A person who exceeds the authorization given in the permit is
subject to the penalties described in section
6-2-12 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2016-13, 3-1-2016)
6-2-7: UTILITY COMPANIES; COOPERATIVE EFFORT:
Utility companies shall have the right to maintain their utility lines to
assure public service. However, when an emergency situation is not involved, a
close cooperative effort will be maintained between the utility company's
supervisor over tree trimming/line clearance and the urban forester. Together,
the utility company supervisor and urban forester will determine a method of
trimming that will be in the best interest of the public, the utility and the
overall health of the trees.
(Ord. 2016-13, 3-1-2016)
6-2-8: STREET TREES; PRIVATE PROPERTY OWNERS:
   A.   Care And Maintenance: Any owner of private property, abutting city
parking strips shall assume the following responsibilities:
      1.   Periodic watering and fertilization of street trees when necessary
to maintain good health and vigor.
      2.   Protection of street trees against mechanical damage due to lawn
mowers, weed trimmers and lawn edgers. The private property owner abutting
parking strips shall have the right to plant and care for street trees in
accordance with section
6-2-6 of this chapter.
      3.   Pruning and maintaining street trees and other vegetation within the
right of way so as not to permit or allow the continuation of a public nuisance
as defined by section
6-2-10 of this chapter and after obtaining a permit as required by section
6-2-9 of this chapter.
      4.   Providing notice to the city engineer of the displacement of
sidewalk, or curb and gutter either horizontally or vertically to a point that
one section, or any part of a section, is separated by at least one-half inch
(1/2") from the other and that results from or is associated with the growth of
a street tree or a tree on the owner's property.
   B.   Financial Responsibility:
      1.   In cases where an owner of private real property abutting city
property requests a permit to take actions on street trees, said abutting
property owner shall assume financial responsibility for work to accomplish the
following:
         a.   Removal of trees, limbs or roots preventing house moving or other
construction or demolition activities, or interfering with sewer laterals.
         b.   Removal of trees, limbs or roots for the alteration of tree or
abutting property appearance where no public nuisance exists.
         c.   Spraying, fertilizing or treatment other than what may be
regularly conducted on citywide basis by the public ways and parks division.
      2.   Financial responsibility does not eliminate the legal requirement to
obtain necessary permits, including those required under this chapter or the
city's excavation ordinance, or avoid adherence to the arboricultural
regulations of the city.
(Ord. 2016-13, 3-1-2016)
6-2-9: REGULATIONS:
Any individual or contractor doing work that may affect a street or park tree
must have an approved permit and adhere to practices set forth in the
arboricultural regulations. Before work commences, the responsible person shall
first obtain and adhere to guidelines for the planting, removal and protection
of existing trees outlined in the urban forestry contractor packet. Individual/
contractor must, at all times, possess the contractor packet on site while work
is being performed.
   A.   Establishment Of A Tree Protection Zone (TPZ): Any street or park tree
in the immediate vicinity of any excavation, demolition or construction site of
any building, structure or street work, which could be potentially injured or
damaged shall be guarded by the establishment of a TPZ. The TPZ requirements
are outlined in the urban forestry contractor packet and shall be installed
prior to commencement of all construction activities. TPZ boundaries shall be
determined by the urban forester or by the project arborist approved by the
urban forester and shall be installed by those persons conducting the
construction activities. All building materials, dirt or other debris shall be
kept outside the TPZ boundary. No excavation shall take place inside the TPZ
boundary without the urban forester's consent.
   B.   Coordination; City Departments: There shall be close interdisciplinary
coordination and cooperation between all city departments and the director of
public services when trees on streets, parks and other public property are
affected. Plans for all lighting, sewer, irrigation, water, street and other
public works projects shall be considered in reference to their effect upon
trees on public property prior to the beginning of work on such projects. The
various department directors shall confer with the director of public services
to coordinate programs and to minimize damage to trees on all projects.
(Ord. 2016-13, 3-1-2016)
6-2-10: PUBLIC NUISANCES:
   A.   Declared: The following conditions concerning trees or shrubs are
hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. It shall be unlawful for
the owner, occupant or the person in control of any property in the city to
plant, maintain or permit the public nuisance described below to exist on said
property or within the parking strip abutting such property:
      1.   Any tree or shrub planted or maintained contrary to the provisions
of this chapter.
      2.   Any dead, dying, defaced, deteriorating, damaged or severely broken
tree or shrub, which is dangerous to life, limb or property.
      3.   Any tree or shrub, having a destructive or communicable disease or
other pestilence which endangers the growth, health, life or well being of
trees, shrubs or plants in the city, or which is capable of causing an epidemic
spread of a communicable disease, such as Dutch elm disease or insect
infestation, or gypsy moth.
      4.   Any cut wood or woodpile which provides a breeding site or habitat
for insects or disease that endangers the growth, health, life or well being of
trees, shrubs and plants in the city.
      5.   Trees, shrubs or hedges abutting upon or overhanging the sidewalk or
roadway that are not kept at a minimum height of:
         a.   Fourteen feet (14') above the lane of traffic for streets
maintained by Ogden City;
         b.   Sixteen feet (16') above the lane of traffic for streets
maintained by the Utah department of transportation; or
         c.   Seven feet (7') above the sidewalk.
      6.   Any tree, shrub or portion thereof which obstructs the free or safe
passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic or which obstructs a streetlight,
traffic signal or device.
      7.   Any tree, shrub or portion thereof, which obstructs the view of
vehicular traffic in or approaching an intersection in violation of title 7,
chapter 3 of this code.
      8.   The roots of any tree or shrub, which causes the surface of the
street, curb or sidewalk to be upheaved or otherwise disturbed.
      9.   Any tree, shrub or portion thereof, which by reason of location or
condition constitutes an imminent danger to the health or safety of the general
public.
      10.   The planting of a tree designated by the urban forester as either a
small or medium tree in a park strip that is less than five feet (5') wide, or
as a large tree in a park strip that is less than eight feet (8') wide.
      11.   The planting on private property of a tree designated by the urban
forester as a small tree within two and one-half feet (2.5') of a curb or
sidewalk, as a medium tree within three feet (3') of a curb or sidewalk, or as
a large tree within four feet (4') of a curb or sidewalk.
   B.   Owner Responsibilities: It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant or
the person in control of any property in the city to plant, maintain or permit
any of the public nuisances described in subsection A of this section to exist
on said property or within the parking strip abutting such property. Upon
receiving notice of the existence of a public nuisance, it shall be the duty of
the owner or occupant to correct said condition at their own expense within
such time and manner as the urban forester may designate which shall not be
less than ten (10) days from the date of service of such notice.
   C.   City Property; Abatement: Any public nuisance as defined in subsection
A of this section, which is located in the public street right of way or on
city property may be abated at any time under the direction of the urban
forester or his/her authorized representative and in accordance with the
arboricultural regulations of the city.
   D.   Alternative Remedies:
      1.   Abatement of public nuisances as defined in this chapter may be
abated as provided in title 12, chapter 8 of this code, or its successor, with
costs and expenses for such cleaning or removal and civil penalties to be
assessed against the property in accordance with the provisions of such
chapter.
      2.   This chapter may also be enforced by injunction, mandamus, judicial
abatement or any other appropriate action in law or equity.
      3.   The procedures and authority granted by this chapter shall be in
addition to and not in lieu of procedures provided in other ordinances of the
city which have heretofore been or may hereafter be enacted to accomplish the
same or related purposes, and no ordinances are repealed by this chapter,
except as otherwise specifically stated.
      4.   Any abatement of public nuisances, which involves trees, shrubs or
other woody vegetation, whether or not pursued under this chapter, shall be
coordinated with the urban forester and the urban forester shall provide
assistance in said abatements to any other department of the city.
(Ord. 2016-13, 3-1-2016)
6-2-11: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   Tree Topping: It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person
to top any street tree or park tree. "Topping" is defined as the severe cutting
back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches (3") in diameter within the
tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure
the tree. The urban forester may approve topping in specific instances where a
tree poses an immediate danger to persons or property, or where other pruning
practices are impractical due to the tree's proximity to utility wires or other
obstructions, or where a tree has been otherwise severely damaged. Unauthorized
topping of street trees or park trees, by any person, shall be a violation of
this chapter.
   B.   Removing, Defacing Or Injuring Trees: It is unlawful for any person to
wilfully cut, injure, disfigure, deface or destroy any street tree or park tree
or to cause a street tree or park tree to be cut, injured, disfigured, defaced
or destroyed except as provided in this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any
person to hitch or fasten any animal to any street tree or park tree, to allow
any animal under the person's control to bite or chew said trees, to cut, break
or girdle said trees or to destroy any grate, box or case around said trees.
   C.   Interference With Urban Forester: It shall be unlawful for any person
to hinder, prevent, delay or interfere with the urban forester or any personnel
under the urban forester's direction while engaged in carrying out the
execution, or enforcement of this chapter; provided, that nothing herein shall
be construed as an attempt to prohibit the pursuit of any remedy, legal or
equitable, for protection of property rights by the owner of any property
within the city.
(Ord. 2016-13, 3-1-2016)
6-2-12: PENALTY:
   A.   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter or any
regulation, administrative order, notice or order promulgated under the
authority of said chapter, shall be deemed guilty of a class B misdemeanor and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as set forth in title 1, chapter 4,
article A of this code.
   B.   Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter by removing a
street tree or park tree or defacing or injuring a street tree or park tree by
wilfully cutting and injuring or by poor arboricultural practice either without
a permit or in a manner that was not authorized by a permit:
      1.   Is subject to a civil penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for
each street tree or park tree removed, defaced or injured; and
      2.   May be required, in addition to any criminal or civil penalty, to
pay restitution to the city for the market value of the removed, defaced or
damaged tree in an amount established through a tree appraisal conducted by the
urban forester. The appraisal shall take into account the size, species,
condition and location of the tree immediately before the time it was removed,
defaced or damaged.
   C.   Failure to correct a violation of this chapter after notice of
violation and expiration of any applicable warning period may be enforced by
imposition of the following civil penalties pursuant to title 1, chapter 4,
article B of this code:
      1.   The first civil citation issued after expiration of the warning
period shall subject the responsible party to the initial penalty of two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
      2.   The second civil citation issued after expiration of the warning
period and the prior imposition of the initial penalty shall subject the
responsible party to the intermediate penalty of five hundred dollars
($500.00).
      3.   Any subsequent civil citation issued after expiration of the warning
period and the prior imposition of the intermediate penalty, or any reoccurring
violation under section
1-4B-6 of this code, shall subject the responsible party to the maximum penalty
of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
(Ord. 2016-13, 3-1-2016)
CHAPTER 3
CEMETERIES 1
SECTION:
6-3-1: Definitions
6-3-2: Superintendent; Duties
6-3-3: Burial Or Removal
6-3-4: Disinterment
6-3-5: Burial Arrangements
6-3-6: Planting Trees, Shrubs, Flowers Or Other Additions
6-3-7: Memorial Park Section
6-3-8: Tiffany Memorial Pet Cemetery
6-3-9: Rules And Regulations
6-3-10: Lot Sales
6-3-11: Prohibited Acts
6-3-12: Perpetual Care Fund
6-3-13: Lot Maintenance Charges
6-3-14: Penalty
6-3-15: Abandonment/Termination Of Rights
 
Notes
1 1. UCA §§ 10-8-62, 10-8-63.
6-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
PERPETUAL CARE: As used in this chapter, means the filling of the grave, the
placing of topsoil upon the grave, the filling and seeding of the gravesite
with suitable grass seed and watering and cutting of the grass, but does not
include any other service. Charges shall be made for all other services and
improvements in accordance with fee schedules established by the city council.
SEXTON: As used in this chapter, means public services director, or the
director's designee. Inasmuch as the law of the state designates a "sexton" as
the administrative head of a cemetery, the term "sexton" in the state laws
shall be construed to mean the public services director, or the director's
designee.
(Ord. 2016-10, 2-16-2016)
6-3-2: SUPERINTENDENT; DUTIES:
   A.   General: It shall be the duty of the sexton to take charge of the city
cemetery, to maintain and improve the grounds thereof; to direct the digging of
all graves required for the burial of the dead therein; to direct all removals,
changes and other authorized operations, and maintain all necessary records; to
take charge of all funeral corteges while in the environs of the cemetery; and
to regulate all traffic within the cemetery as deemed necessary.
   B.   Collect Fees; Issue Receipts: The sexton is authorized to collect from
those requiring the services provided by the cemetery, such fees as shall be
established in title 4, chapter 6 of this code. Receipts shall be issued for
all fees received, the original to be given to the person paying the fee, and
the duplicate to be filed with the city recorder, to be retained in the
cemetery records in the city recorder's office.
   C.   Promulgate Additional Regulations: The sexton shall have the authority
to promulgate additional reasonable regulations concerning the care, use and
maintenance of markers, headstones, monuments and vaults; the planting of
shrubs, flowers and landscaping; the conducting of burials or disinterments
therein; the placement of temporary decorations; visits to the cemetery by the
public; and other matters as necessary for the administration and management of
the cemetery. All such rules and regulations shall be subject to the approval
of the mayor.
(Ord. 2016-10, 2-16-2016)
6-3-3: BURIAL OR REMOVAL:
   A.   Within Cemetery: No person shall be allowed to bury their dead within
the limits of the city except in cemeteries, and no cemeteries shall be
established except as provided in the zoning title. No person, except the owner
of a lot upon which interment is to be made, shall use a space or lot in the
city cemetery, without first obtaining a written permit from the owner of the
lot, or legal heirs, which permit shall be filed with the city.
   B.   Permit Required: Before burying the body of any deceased person in the
city cemetery or before permitting the removal of the body of any person buried
therein, the city shall require the production of a permit from the county
health department. After burial or removal, the permit shall be endorsed with
the initial letter of the plat and the numbers of the block and lot, together
with the position where the body is buried, or from which the body is removed,
and the permit shall be filed in the permanent records of the cemetery.
   C.   Statement: Before burying any body in the city cemetery, the relatives
or persons having charge of the body shall be required to furnish in writing to
the city a statement giving the name of the person deceased, with the names of
his or her parents, wife or husband, date and place of birth, date and place of
death, date of funeral, together with a signed statement of permission from the
lot owner or heirs allowing the burial to be made on the lot. Such information
shall be entered in the cemetery records and the statement forwarded to the
city recorder.
   D.   Vaults; Exception: All burials in the city cemetery must be made in
concrete vaults of standard sizes and approved designs, except in the case of
infants and cremains, which will be cemented by the city.
   E.   Sundays And Holidays Prohibited: Except in so called health department
cases, there shall be no burials on Sundays or legal holidays. No interments,
removals or inurnments whatsoever will be permitted on Memorial Day.
(Ord. 2016-10, 2-16-2016)
6-3-4: DISINTERMENT:
No person shall disinter any body buried in the city cemetery, except under the
direction of the sexton, and before disinterment, the sexton shall require a
written order from the owner of the lot or his heirs authorizing such removal,
together with a permit from the county health department. It is unlawful to
remove the body of a person that has died of a contagious disease within two
(2) years of the date of burial, unless such body has been buried in a
hermetically sealed casket or vault and is found to be so encased at the time
of removal. The city assumes no responsibility for the condition of any casket
or vault involved in any removal. Fees for such removals will be charged
according to the work involved, with a base fee established by the city
council.
(Ord. 2016-10, 2-16-2016)
6-3-5: BURIAL ARRANGEMENTS:
   A.   Required; Time Limit: All persons in charge of bodies to be buried in
the city cemetery must make the necessary arrangements for the digging of
graves, time of arrival at the cemetery, supplier of vault and other pertinent
matters at least forty eight (48) hours prior to such burials. Families
desiring to purchase grave space for such a burial must contact the sexton at
least forty eight (48) hours prior to burial time.
   B.   Arrivals At Cemetery: It shall be required of all funeral directors
that they inform all those intending to attend funeral services in the city
cemetery, whether or not they are arriving individually or in the funeral
cortege, that they must enter the cemetery at the designated entrance and abide
by all traffic and parking regulations. No automobiles shall park in the
designated funeral zones unless they arrive in the cortege. All funeral
corteges must arrive at the city cemetery no later than four thirty o'clock (4:
30) P.M., and any cortege arriving after four thirty o'clock (4:30) P.M. shall
be charged additional fees as determined by the city council.
(Ord. 2016-10, 2-16-2016)
6-3-6: PLANTING TREES, SHRUBS, FLOWERS OR OTHER ADDITIONS:
   A.   Approval Required: In all sections of the city cemetery, except the
Memorial Park section, which section continues to be controlled by section
6-3-7 of this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to plant any trees,
shrubs, flowers or other additions except under the direction and with the
written approval of the sexton. Any planting made in violation of this section
may be removed by the city for maintenance, safety, or interment purposes,
after reasonable effort to notify the person that is in control of the lot
involved. In cases where removal is necessitated by safety, reasonable effort
will be made to notify the person or persons in control of affected lot/lots
after removal is performed.
   B.   Removal By Owner: It is unlawful for any owner to remove plant material
including trees, shrubs, flowers and other additions when that plant material
has been planted in the soil, whether in accordance with the provisions of this
section and with approval of the sexton, or whether planted in violation of
this section.
   C.   Removal By City: All trees, shrubs, flowers and other additions which
are planted and installed with the approval and under the direction of the
sexton, and all trees, shrubs, flowers, and other additions planted and
installed in violation of this section may be removed by the city after
reasonable effort to notify the person then in control of the lot involved.
When removal is necessitated by safety, reasonable effort will be made to
notify the person or persons in control of affected lot/lots after removal is
made and safety satisfied. All removals made for safety purposes will first be
inspected by the sexton or his or her designee. All trees shall be kept limb
free to a height of seven feet (7') to ensure the free and safe passage of
pedestrians.
   D.   Fresh Flowers Or Temporary Decorations: The provisions of this section
shall not restrict the placement of fresh flowers or other similar temporary
decorations placed in accordance with cemetery regulations.
(Ord. 2016-10, 2-16-2016)
6-3-7: MEMORIAL PARK SECTION:
In that section of the city cemetery designated as the Memorial Park, all
headstones, markers and urns shall be installed so as to be flat and level with
the ground. It shall be the responsibility of the sexton to arrange and
maintain the trees, shrubs, flowers and other landscaping so as to enhance the
symmetry and beauty of this section. It is unlawful for any person to place any
trees, shrubs, flowers or other additions other than fresh cut flowers or other
similar temporary decorations in said section except under the direction and
with the approval of the sexton.
(Ord. 2016-10, 2-16-2016)
6-3-8: TIFFANY MEMORIAL PET CEMETERY:
   A.   Established: There is hereby established a section of the city cemetery
to be known as the Tiffany Memorial Pet Cemetery. That section of the cemetery
shall be reserved for and restricted to the burial of dead animals. The burial
of human remains shall not be allowed in the Tiffany Memorial Pet Cemetery, nor
shall the burial of the remains of dead animals be allowed in the other
sections of the city cemetery.
   B.   Regulations: Except as otherwise provided herein, the Tiffany Memorial
Pet Cemetery shall be subject to and governed by all of the provisions of this
chapter and any regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
   C.   Markers; Maintenance: All headstones, markers and urns shall be
installed so as to be flat and level with the ground. It shall be the
responsibility of the sexton to arrange and maintain the trees, shrubs, flowers
and other landscaping so as to enhance the symmetry and beauty of the Tiffany
Memorial Pet Cemetery. It shall be unlawful for any person to plant any trees,
shrubs, flowers or other additions in said cemetery except under the direction
and with the approval of the sexton.
(Ord. 2016-10, 2-16-2016)
6-3-9: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   Hours: The city cemetery shall be open to the public from one hour
before sunrise to one hour after sunset. It is unlawful for any person to be in
the cemetery during any other hours without the permission of the city, and the
presence of any unauthorized person during such other hours shall constitute
trespassing.
   B.   Traffic: It is unlawful for any person to drive at a speed greater than
fifteen (15) miles per hour in the city cemetery. The sexton is authorized to
promulgate any other appropriate regulations concerning the driving or parking
of motor vehicles and the use of roads and streets in the city cemetery.
   C.   Work Within Cemetery; Approval Required: In order that the city
cemetery may carry out and execute its obligations of perpetual care to
purchasers and property owners of lots and gravesites within the cemetery, the
sexton shall restrict all work on lots to that done by cemetery crews under
his/her direction. Any person desiring to perform any work within the cemetery
must first secure the approval and permission of the sexton and pay any
applicable fees required. All settings of vases, markers and monuments and all
plantings of trees, shrubs and flowers must be approved by the sexton before
the work is commenced, and all work shall be performed under his/her direction.
(Ord. 2016-10, 2-16-2016)
6-3-10: LOT SALES:
   A.   Authority: The sexton is empowered to sell lots in the cemetery and
shall collect, before occupancy, all amounts arising from such sales. All
monies, dues and fees collected by him/her shall be turned in to the city
treasurer. Each purchaser shall receive a receipt describing each lot or part
thereof so purchased, together with the amount paid and the balance due, if
any. The sexton shall file the duplicate of the receipt for record with the
city recorder, to be retained in the cemetery records in the city recorder's
office. The prices for lots, parts of lots or single grave spaces shall be
established by the city council and shall include the perpetual care fee on the
lots or spaces.
   B.   Purchase Agreements: Lots or portions thereof shall be sold for cash or
under a written agreement whereby the title is retained by the city and the
purchaser agrees to pay the balance within a specified time limit. In no event
shall title to any lot or portion thereof pass to the purchaser, nor shall any
person be buried therein until the purchase price and perpetual care fee for
the lot or portion thereof has been paid in full; provided, however, that
burials may be made in any lot or portion thereof for which there has been
executed a title retaining purchase agreement providing for the payment of the
total purchase price, including the perpetual care fee, within six (6) months
from the date of burial.
   C.   Purchases By City: The sexton, when directed to do so by the mayor, or
the mayor's designee, may purchase for the city, with funds provided for that
purpose, any unused lots or portions of lots in the city cemetery; provided,
however, that it is unlawful for any officer or employee of the city to trade,
deal in or make a profit, directly or indirectly, out of any transaction
involving any such sale, purchase or transfer of any such property.
(Ord. 2016-10, 2-16-2016)
6-3-11: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   Lot Alterations: No person shall erect a fence, coping, corner post,
hedge or other boundary marker upon any lot or lots, nor grade the ground
thereof. The city shall, when requested, furnish the true lines of lots
according to the official survey. The sexton shall have the general care of all
lots and gravesites and shall make all general improvements thereon.
   B.   Damaging Property: Any person who injures, molests or defaces or
otherwise damages or removes any headstone, curbing, urn, monument, tree,
shrub, flowers, funeral flowers, floral pieces, vases and containers or any
other property in the cemetery, shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor.
   C.   Depositing Refuse: It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit in
any part of the city cemetery the carcass of any dead animal, "bulky waste",
"community waste", "construction and demolition waste", "garbage", "hazardous
waste", "junk or salvage material", "litter", "market waste", "trade waste", or
any other "solid waste", as such terms are defined in title 12 of this code, or
any object or substance that will detract from the beauty of the cemetery.
   D.   Animals: It is unlawful for any person to take any animal into the city
cemetery or to permit any animal to enter the cemetery without first having
obtained permission therefor from the sexton.
(Ord. 2016-10, 2-16-2016)
6-3-12: PERPETUAL CARE FUND:
There is established a perpetual care fund for the maintenance and improvement
of lots and portions thereof in the city cemetery, and there shall be deposited
in the fund forty percent (40%) of the purchase price of every lot or portion
thereof that is sold or transferred by the city after the effective date
hereof. Upon the payment in full of the perpetual care fee for any lot, the
owner thereof shall be relieved of liability for the costs of the services of
the city in caring for the lot. All sums paid for the perpetual care of lots in
the cemetery shall be deposited in the city treasury and shall constitute and
become a perpetual cemetery improvement fund, and the interest or income from
the fund shall be used for the perpetual care of the lots for which such sums
were paid. In no event shall title to any lots in the city cemetery pass to the
purchaser, nor shall any person be buried therein, until the perpetual care for
the property shall be paid in full; provided, however, that burials may be made
in any lot or portion thereof for which there has been executed a title
retaining purchase agreement providing for the payment of the total purchase
price, including the perpetual care fee, within six (6) months from the date of
burial.
(Ord. 2016-10, 2-16-2016)
6-3-13: LOT MAINTENANCE CHARGES:
   A.   Liability: The care and maintenance of all lots for which a perpetual
care fund has not been established shall be furnished by the city at rates
established by the city council. All such charges shall become a personal
liability of the owners of said lots and, in addition thereto, shall constitute
a lien against said lots as is set forth in subsection B of this section.
   B.   Lien; Notice: The cost of all services rendered by the city or its
employees in watering, beautifying, maintaining or caring for any unoccupied
lots of portions thereof in the city cemetery for which a perpetual care fund
has not been established in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
shall constitute a lien against said lot or lots. If the costs for such
services remain unpaid for a period of six (6) months, the lien created in this
section for said services may be foreclosed in a court of competent
jurisdiction in the manner provided by the laws of the state for the
foreclosure of mechanics' liens; provided, however, that in lieu of the notices
required for the foreclosure of mechanics' liens, the following notices shall
be given:
      1.   A notice of the action to foreclose said lien shall be published
once each week for three (3) consecutive weeks in a newspaper having general
circulation in the county. The notice shall contain a description of the
property, the amount of the lien and the name and last known address of the
owner of the property or, if said person is known to be deceased, the names and
last known addresses of any known heirs.
      2.   A copy of the notice shall be mailed to the owner of the property at
his last known address or, if known to be deceased, to any known heirs of the
deceased person at their last known addresses. Copies of the notice shall also
be posted in conspicuous places at the offices of the city cemetery and at one
other public place for a period of three (3) consecutive weeks.
   C.   Foreclosure:
      1.   City Bidding: The city shall be entitled to bid on all cemetery lots
sold in any foreclosure proceedings as set forth in subsection B of this
section. Any lot sold through foreclosure may be redeemed within six (6) months
from the date of sale by paying to the purchaser thereof the amount paid for
said lot.
      2.   Excess Proceeds: Any excess proceeds from the sale of lots remaining
after the payment of all liens and any costs involved in the foreclosure of the
liens, including reasonable attorney fees, shall be paid to the owner, or if
deceased, to any known heirs of said owner. If the owner or his heirs cannot be
located within a reasonable time after the sale of the lots, any such excess
proceeds shall be paid into the perpetual care fund established by section
6-3-12 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2016-10, 2-16-2016)
6-3-14: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or any rules or
regulations established under this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a class B
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall, unless a different penalty is
provided in specific cases, be punished as set forth in title 1, chapter 4 of
this code.
(Ord. 2016-10, 2-16-2016)
6-3-15: ABANDONMENT/TERMINATION OF RIGHTS:
Pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section
8-5-6, as amended, or any successor provision, the city council may pass a
resolution demanding that the owner of a lot, site or portion of the cemetery
which has been unused for burial purposes for more than sixty (60) years, file
with the city recorder notice of any claim to the lot, site, or portion of the
cemetery. Notice to the owner shall be provided as set forth in Utah Code
Annotated section
8-5-6, as amended, or any successor provision. If for thirty (30) days after
the last date of service or publication of the resolution, the owner or person
with a legal interest in the cemetery lot fails to state a valid interest in
the use of the cemetery lot, site or portion of the cemetery for burial
purposes, the owner's rights are terminated and that portion of the cemetery
shall be vested in the city.
(Ord. 2016-10, 2-16-2016)
CHAPTER 4
POLICIES AND STANDARDS FOR PLACEMENT OF SPECIAL STRUCTURES UPON CITY PROPERTY
SECTION:
6-4-1: Purpose
6-4-2: General Standards
6-4-3: Donations
6-4-4: Historical Monuments And Markers In City Rights-Of-Way
6-4-5: Municipal Block; Monument Plaza
6-4-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and procedures for
the City's placement of monuments, historical markers, statues, or other
similar structures upon City property, recognizing the necessity to place such
objects in a location and in a manner complementary to the design and function
of the facility and consistent with the Ogden City General Plan, to provide for
their long term maintenance, and to maintain the City's ability to effectively
manage and control its property.
   B.   It is not the purpose of this chapter:
      1.   To regulate the placement of monuments or markers used in the
surveying of property;
      2.   To regulate the placement of art within City buildings or offices;
      3.   To restrict the temporary placement of objects or structures upon
City property as part of a special event, celebration or other activity of
temporary duration, if approved in accordance with the ordinances, rules, and
regulations of the City; or
      4.   To establish a First Amendment forum for the placement of monuments,
historical markers, statues, or similar structures by members of the public.
(Ord. 2003-79, 12-30-2003)
6-4-2: GENERAL STANDARDS:
   A.   No monument, historical marker, statue, or other similar structure may
be placed on City property unless authorized and approved in accordance with
the requirements of this chapter.
   B.   Except for public art approved in accordance with title 4, chapter 1,
article C of this Code or a bench approved in accordance with subsection
6-4-3F of this chapter, any monument, historical marker, statue, or other
similar structure proposed to be placed on City property shall first be
authorized and approved by joint resolution of the City Council and the Mayor,
which joint resolution shall determine whether:
      1.   The purpose of the proposed structure has historical, cultural, or
educational significance to the City, is worthy of City recognition, and should
be endorsed and adopted by the City; and
      2.   The general location, design and content of the proposed structure
are appropriate to the authorized purpose.
   C.   The Mayor, or the Mayor's designee, shall approve the final location,
dimensions, materials, design and content of any monument, historical marker,
bench, statue, or other similar structure, in a manner consistent with the
joint resolution, approved pursuant to subsection B of this section.
   D.   Any monument, historical marker, statue, or other similar structure
placed on City property shall be the property of Ogden City, except as follows:
      1.   This policy is not intended to restrict reversionary interests of
donors as authorized in subsection 6-4-3E of this chapter.
      2.   Historical markers or monuments within public rights-of-way may be
owned by abutting property owners pursuant to section
6-4-4 of this chapter, only if:
         a.   The purpose of such markers or monuments is to recognize persons,
events, or buildings related to the abutting property; and
         b.   Such structure is authorized by encroachment permit issued
pursuant to section
7-4-2 of this Code or its successor provision.
   E.   Except for a bench approved in accordance with subsection
6-4-3F of this chapter, the location, dimensions, materials and design of any
donated structure shall be reviewed by the Ogden City Planning Commission for
compliance with the Ogden City General Plan and the provisions of this Code.
The Mayor may establish a committee, or utilize other City committees such as
the Landmarks Commission, Ogden City Arts, or the Parks and Recreation
Committee, to otherwise assist in the development, design, review and approval
process.
   F.   The placement of the structure shall not interfere with the normal,
regular and intended use of the affected City property, recorded easements, or
utilities installed in or over such property.
   G.   Responsibility for the care and maintenance of the structure shall be
identified and assigned as part of the approval process.
   H.   Donations of such structures may only be accepted by the Mayor, or the
Mayor's designee, if in compliance with section
6-4-3 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2017-19, 4-18-2017)
6-4-3: DONATIONS:
   A.   The Mayor, or the Mayor's designee, shall not accept the donation of
any historical marker, monument, statue, bench or other similar structure
proposed or intended to be located upon City property unless such structure
complies with the requirements of this chapter.
   B.   No donation may be accepted until the costs of installation and any
related site improvements have been identified, and it has been determined by
the Mayor, or the Mayor's designee, that such costs will either be included as
part of the donation or may be incurred by the City within existing
appropriations.
   C.   The City shall retain final approval authority over a structure's
location, dimensions, materials, design, and content, including all depictions
and descriptions used on any such structure.
   D.   Donors contributing to the cost of a structure may be recognized on
such structure only under the following conditions:
      1.   The recognition of donors shall not be a dominant feature of the
structure, considering the location, size and design of the donor recognition
as compared to those features directly related to the purpose of the structure;
      2.   Identification of donors shall be limited to the name of the donor,
expressed only in alphanumeric format, with no use of logos, trademarks, or
other pictorial or symbolic displays identifying or related to the donor.
   E.   The terms of any donation shall not limit the City's authority to
repair, remove or relocate the marker, monument, statue, bench, or other
similar structure, which authority should continue to be exercised at the sole
discretion of the City. It is not the intention of this policy to prohibit a
donor from retaining a reversionary interest in the structure, if acceptable to
the City, in the event that the City determines in the future to relinquish
ownership or to otherwise remove the structure from City property.
   F.   Subject to terms and conditions adopted by the Mayor in an
administrative order a donor may donate a bench, including installation, for
use on City property. A bench donated under this subsection:
      1.   May not be placed in the City cemetery or within the public right-
of-way; and
      2.   Shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission if the bench donation
is part of a larger change in use or change in the overall site plan for the
City property.
   G.   The Mayor, or the Mayor's designee, will explore with potential donors
the possibility of establishing a fund to assist the City in its
responsibilities for future maintenance. Under no circumstances shall
maintenance responsibilities be assigned to a donor.
   H.   Nothing contained herein shall be construed to require the placement of
any offered monument, historical marker, statue, bench, or other similar object
on City property or affect the authority of the Mayor to refuse the donation of
any historical marker, monument, statue, bench, or public art object.
(Ord. 2017-19, 4-18-2017)
6-4-4: HISTORICAL MONUMENTS AND MARKERS IN CITY RIGHTS-OF-WAY:
It is the preference of the City that historical monuments or markers,
recognizing persons, events, locations or buildings related to the abutting
property, be placed on such abutting property, with ownership and long term
maintenance responsibilities assumed by the property owners, or other private
persons under agreement with such property owner. If placement on property
adjacent to the public right-of-way is not feasible, it is the preference of
the City that such monument or marker be owned and maintained by the owner of
the abutting property and authorized to be located within the public right-of-
way only if approved under an encroachment permit issued pursuant to section
7-4-2 of this Code, or its successor provision. The preferences indicated above
should be explored prior to the City determining that it will assume
responsibility for ownership and maintenance of any historical monument or
marker.
(Ord. 2003-79, 12-30-2003)
6-4-5: MUNICIPAL BLOCK; MONUMENT PLAZA:
The grounds and gardens surrounding the Municipal Building (commonly referred
to as the "Municipal Block") have been designed with a monument plaza.
Placement in the monument plaza is intended to be limited to monuments or
statuary having historical or cultural significance to the City. Markers or
monuments on the Municipal Block commemorating persons, events, or historic
resources should generally be located within the monument plaza. Placement at
other locations within the Municipal Block should be allowed only if another
location has special significance to the proposed marker or monument and the
significance of the monument or marker would be lessened by placement in the
monument plaza, such as the commemoration of the former site of a historic
building.
(Ord. 2003-79, 12-30-2003)
CHAPTER 5
SPECIAL EVENTS
SECTION:
6-5-1: Definitions
6-5-2: Permit Required; Applicability
6-5-3: Application
6-5-4: Application Fees
6-5-5: City Services; Deposits And Reimbursements
6-5-6: Reserved
6-5-7: Indemnification, Reimbursement And Insurance
6-5-8: Grounds For Denial
6-5-9: Conditions Of Issuance
6-5-10: Nondiscrimination
6-5-11: Notice Of Denial Of Application
6-5-12: Alternative Permit
6-5-13: Appeal Procedure
6-5-14: Notice To City And Other Officials
6-5-15: Duties Of Permittee
6-5-16: Prohibitions
6-5-17: Public Conduct During Special Events
6-5-18: Special Event Signage
6-5-19: Revocation Of Permit
6-5-20: Waiver Of Requirements
6-5-21: Regulations For Public Property Adjacent To Event Routes
6-5-22: Penalties
6-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the designated
meanings:
BASIC CITY SERVICES: Those city services determined in the sole discretion of
the city to be provided, or otherwise made available to the general public,
for:
   A.   The normal use, maintenance and operation of the city's streets,
sidewalks, parks, and other facilities; and
   B.   The normal delivery of police, fire, emergency medical and other
municipal services.
CHIEF OF POLICE: The chief of the police department of the city, or the chief's
designee.
CITY EVENT: A special event that is organized and operated by the city, whether
directly or by contract with a third party operator.
CITY SERVICES: The provision of city employees, equipment or services related
to special events at a level that exceeds basic city services. City services
may include such things as:
   A.   Posting of "no parking" signs and barricading;
   B.   Providing additional refuse drums, recycling drums, liners, street
sweeping or refuse collection;
   C.   Providing electrical services and hookups, or other utilities;
   D.   Equipment usage, such as barricades, stages, lecterns, chairs,
canopies, sound systems or extension cords;
   E.   Police services, such as traffic control, towing, or security;
   F.   Emergency medical services; or
   G.   Fire and building inspection services.
CLASS I SPECIAL EVENTS: Applications for special events that take place on city
property and involve any of the following characteristics or activities:
   A.   The use of vehicles or other equipment other than sound producing
devices;
   B.   The use or display of animals, fireworks, or pyrotechnic devices;
   C.   The provision of food or beverages, including the provision of any
alcoholic beverage;
   D.   Games, sports and athletic events, dancing, live music or theatrical
events, or other entertainment;
   E.   Stationing or erecting any building, stand, bandstand, stage, tower,
tent, canopy, scaffold, sound stage, platform, rostrum, fencing or other
structure, exclusive of lecterns, tables or chairs;
   F.   Use of mechanical rides;
   G.   Bringing, landing or causing to ascend or descend or alight any
airplane, helicopter, flying machine, balloon, parachute or other apparatus for
aviation; and
   H.   Filming of a media broadcast (other than for news purposes), motion
picture, or still commercial photography.
CLASS II SPECIAL EVENTS: Special event applications not processed as a class I
special event.
DEPARTMENT: The community and economic development department.
DIRECTOR: The director of the community and economic development department, or
the director's duly authorized representative.
NEWS PURPOSES: Filming, videotaping, photographing or otherwise preserving for
newspapers or television news broadcasting by reporters, photographers, or
cameramen in the employ of a newspaper, news service, television station or
similar entity, of news events concerning those persons, scenes or occurrences
which are in the news and are of general public interest.
PARADE: Any march, demonstration, procession or motorcade consisting of
persons, animals, or vehicles or a combination thereof upon the streets,
sidewalks, parks or other public grounds within the city with an intent of
attracting public attention that interferes with or has a tendency to interfere
with the normal flow or regulation of traffic upon the streets, parks or other
public grounds.
PERMIT: A permit as required by this chapter.
PUBLIC ASSEMBLY: Any meeting, demonstration, picket line, rally or gathering of
twenty five (25) persons or more for a common purpose as a result of prior
planning that interferes with or has a tendency to interfere with the normal
flow or regulation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or occupies any public
area in a place open to the general public.
SIDEWALK: Any area or way set aside or open to the general public for purposes
of pedestrian traffic, whether or not it is paved.
SPECIAL EVENT: Any organized activity or assemblage described below:
   A.   The temporary use of public property, including, but not limited to,
streets, sidewalks, parks, and outdoor recreation and community facilities for
the purpose of conducting an event which significantly impacts or substantially
restricts the public's normal, typical, or customary use, level of use, or
ability to use such property, except for those events limited to city
facilities designated and designed to be available on a reservation basis, in
accordance with rules and regulations adopted pursuant to section
6-1-1 of this title, and subject to a facility use agreement. Special events
shall include, but are not limited to:
Circuses And Carnivals: Provision of games, food, beverages, live
entertainment, exhibitions, or similar activities in tents or other temporary
structures.
Commercial Filming: Filming of a media broadcast (other than for news
purposes), motion picture, or still commercial photography.
Concerts: Live music or theatrical events.
Open Air Fairs: Provision of exhibits, displays, entertainment, games as well
as sales of merchandise, food and beverages not requiring the use of roofed
structures.
Parades: Temporary use of a street or other public property for the purpose of
a parade.
Public Assemblies: The temporary use of the streets, parks or other public
grounds within the city for the conduct of a public assembly.
Sport And Athletic Events: Organized sports or athletic contests involving more
than twenty (20) participants that impact the normal use of public property.
   B.   The temporary use of private property not otherwise prohibited by the
city that imposes a significant burden on the normal use of adjoining public
property or that requires a special allocation of traffic control, police, or
other city services.
STREET: Any place or way set aside or open to the general public for purposes
of vehicular traffic, including any berm, shoulder, parkway, right of way, or
median strip.
(Ord. 2007-21, 5-22-2007)
6-5-2: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICABILITY:
   A.   No person shall organize, produce, direct, conduct, manage, institute
or carry on any special event without having obtained a permit from the city
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   No permit shall be required under this chapter for any city event
directly organized and operated by the city. Special events operated by a third
party under an agreement with the city require the issuance of a permit;
however, fees and costs for city services shall be governed by the terms of the
agreement.
(Ord. 2007-21, 5-22-2007)
6-5-3: APPLICATION:
   A.   Filing: A person seeking a special event permit shall file an
application with the department on forms provided by the department. The
application shall be filed:
      1.   Not less than thirty (30) and not more than two hundred seventy
(270) days before the activity is proposed to commence for a class I special
event.
      2.   Not less than ten (10) and not more than two hundred seventy (270)
days before the activity is proposed to commence for a class II special event.
   B.   Waiver; Minimum Filing Period: The director may waive the minimum
filing period and accept an application filed within a shorter period if, after
due consideration of the date, time, place, and nature of the special event,
the anticipated number of participants, and the minimal city services required
in connection with the event, the director determines that the waiver will not
present a hazard to public safety.
   C.   Contents: The application for a special event permit shall contain the
following:
      1.   The name, address, telephone number, facsimile number and e-mail
address of the person conducting the event, which person is authorized to
receive all notices from the city, unless another person is indicated by the
applicant.
      2.   If the event is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an
organization, the name, address, telephone number, facsimile number and e-mail
address of the organization and of the authorized and responsible heads of such
organization.
      3.   The name, address, telephone number, facsimile number and e-mail
address of the person who will be directly in charge of and responsible for the
event.
      4.   The type of special event, including a description of activities
planned during the event.
      5.   The proposed day and hour of the event, including the starting time
and termination time.
      6.   Proposed location of the event.
      7.   A reasonable and good faith approximation of the number of persons
expected to participate in the event.
      8.   A description of any vehicles, equipment or other apparatus to be
used in connection with the event.
      9.   A description of any sound amplification equipment, including the
number and the proposed amplifying range and decibel level.
      10.   A description of any banners, signs, or other attention getting
devices proposed to be used in connection with the event.
      11.   Type of goods, wares, merchandise, food, or beverages to be sold or
otherwise provided to persons at the event.
      12.   The name and address of any vendors who will be participating in
the event.
      13.   The amount of any spectator, participant, entry or other fee, if
any, to be charged in connection with the event.
      14.   A description of any city services or city facility proposed to be
utilized.
      15.   If the event is or includes a parade:
         a.   The proposed route to be traveled, including the starting point
and the termination point.
         b.   The approximate number of persons who and animals and vehicles
which will constitute the parade, the type of animals, and description of the
vehicles.
         c.   The proposed time when the parade will start and terminate.
         d.   A statement as to whether the parade is intended to occupy all or
only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed.
         e.   The proposed location by streets of any assembly areas for such
parade.
         f.   The proposed time at which units of the parade will begin to
assemble at the assembly area.
         g.   The interval of space to be maintained between units of the
parade.
      16.   If the event involves commercial filming, a report on discussions
with property owners or occupants in the affected neighborhoods. The applicant
shall provide a short written description of and schedule for the proposed
production to the owners and occupants in the affected neighborhoods (as
defined by boundaries set by the department). The applicant shall talk with
owners and occupants of all such property and submit as part of the application
a report noting any owner's or occupant's reaction along with the addresses and
phone numbers of all such property owners and occupants.
      17.   If the event is designed to be held by and on behalf of or for any
person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file with
the department a communication in writing from that person authorizing the
applicant to apply for the permit on his or her behalf.
      18.   Any additional information that the director finds reasonably
necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should issue.
   D.   Facilities Subject To Reservation: If the application proposes the use
of any city facility designated and designed to be available on a reservation
basis and subject to a facility use agreement, the applicant shall also be
responsible to comply with all rules and regulations applicable to the
reservation and use of such facility, and pay all applicable fees and deposits
prior to the issuance of the special event permit.
(Ord. 2007-21, 5-22-2007)
6-5-4: APPLICATION FEES:
Application and processing fees, as determined in title 4, chapter 6 of this
code, shall be paid to the city by the applicant when the application is filed
with the department in order to cover the administrative costs of processing
the permit application.
(Ord. 2007-21, 5-22-2007)
6-5-5: CITY SERVICES; DEPOSITS AND REIMBURSEMENTS:
   A.   Reimbursements: If the application requires or requests the use of any
city services, the applicant shall reimburse the city for all charges
applicable for any such services agreed to be provided by the city. Unless
rates for city services have been established by ordinance of the city council,
standardized rates for city services may be established by administrative order
of the mayor, which rates may not exceed the reasonable costs of providing such
service. Rates established by administrative order of the mayor shall be
reviewed annually and subject to revision or updating, as needed, as a result
of such review.
   B.   Cleanup Required: Immediately after the special event, the permit
holder shall be responsible for cleaning the special event area of litter and
debris, and disposing of all waste in accordance with city rules and
regulations unless the city has agreed to provide such services. The permit
holder shall also be responsible for immediately restoring property damaged,
disturbed or defaced in connection with the special event to the same condition
existing before the event.
   C.   Deposits:
      1.   Prior to the issuance of a special event permit, the applicant shall
provide a deposit, in an amount equal to an estimate of:
         a.   All city services agreed to be provided by the city; and
         b.   The city's cost of cleaning the special event area of litter and
debris and restoring any city property damaged in connection with the special
event, if not adequately performed by the applicant.
      2.   Such deposit shall be in the form of a cash deposit, or a bond
issued by surety acceptable to the city or an irrevocable letter of credit
issued by a federally insured bank or savings institution licensed by the state
of Utah, which bond or letter of credit shall be in a form approved by the city
attorney. Such deposit may be reduced for good performance for three (3)
consecutive years at previous special events as evidenced by prior events or
other documentation and no outstanding amount owed to the city.
   D.   Invoice: Within a reasonable time after the conclusion of the event,
the director shall mail or deliver to the permit holder an invoice for the cost
of city services provided by the city, and any costs incurred by the city in
restoring the site. If the amount exceeds any cash deposit, the permit holder
shall pay the unpaid portion of the invoice amount within thirty (30) days of
the date that the invoice was mailed or delivered. If the amount is less than
any cash deposit, the director shall return the excess to the permit holder
within thirty (30) days.
   E.   Availability: Provision of city services is based on availability. If
such services are not available from the city, it shall be the applicant's
responsibility to procure the services, either desired by the applicant or
determined to be necessary by the director, at the sole expense of the
applicant.
(Ord. 2007-21, 5-22-2007)
6-5-6: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2007-21, 5-22-2007)
6-5-7: INDEMNIFICATION, REIMBURSEMENT AND INSURANCE:
   A.   The applicant shall covenant and agree, in a form approved by the city
attorney, to bear all costs of policing, cleaning up and restoring the city
property upon conclusion of the event or activity; to reimburse the city for
any such costs incurred by the city or any costs related to the provision of
city services; and to indemnify and hold the city harmless against liability,
including court costs and attorney fees, and attorney fees on appeal, for any
and all claims for damage to property, or injury to, or death of persons
arising out of or resulting from the issuance of the permit or the conduct of
the event or any of its participants.
   B.   For any class I special event, the applicant shall procure and maintain
at all times during its use of city property, insurance in such amounts and
with such coverages as shall reasonably be required by the department and shall
name Ogden City Corporation, its elected and appointed officials, employees,
volunteers and agents as additional insureds with primary coverage and not
contributing. The amounts and type of insurance required shall be determined by
the department or division of the city responsible for risk management ("risk
management"), based upon the nature of the activity and the risk involved. Risk
management shall prepare a uniform schedule of insurance guidelines for
particular types of activities. At least five (5) days before the event, the
applicant shall provide the department with a certificate from an insurer
evidencing such coverage and requiring that the insurer provide at least thirty
(30) days' written notice of cancellation. If the applicant fails to provide
proof of insurance within the required time frame, the city may deny or revoke
the permit, or allow the event to proceed and acquire the insurance itself with
the premium costs to be paid by the applicant.
   C.   No insurance requirement shall be imposed for a class II special event.
(Ord. 2007-21, 5-22-2007)
6-5-8: GROUNDS FOR DENIAL:
   A.   An application for a special events permit may be denied on any of the
following grounds:
      1.   The application for permit is not fully completed or fails to comply
with the requirements of this chapter.
      2.   The application for permit contains a material falsehood or
misrepresentation.
      3.   The applicant is legally incompetent to contract or to sue and be
sued.
      4.   The applicant or any person on whose behalf the application for
permit was made has on prior occasions:
         a.   Damaged city property and has not paid in full for such damage,
or has other outstanding and unpaid debts to the city;
         b.   Made material misrepresentations regarding the nature or scope of
an event or activity previously permitted; or
         c.   Has violated the terms of prior permits issued to or on behalf of
the applicant.
      5.   The applicant has failed to comply with all conditions and
regulations attendant to issuance of the permit.
      6.   The use or activity intended by the applicant is prohibited by the
provisions of this code, regulations of the city, or otherwise prohibited by
law.
      7.   The conduct of the special event will substantially interrupt the
safe and orderly movement of other pedestrian or vehicular traffic contiguous
to its route or location, unreasonably limit or obstruct access to private
property, or unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or
ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such public assembly areas.
      8.   The proposed event will unreasonably interfere with or obstruct the
public's ability to use public property for activities unrelated to the event.
      9.   The conduct of the special event will require the diversion of so
great a number of city police officers to properly police the line of movement
and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection of the
city.
      10.   The conduct of the special event is reasonably likely to cause
injury to persons or property.
      11.   Adequate sanitation and other required health facilities are not,
or will not be, available in or adjacent to any special event areas.
      12.   There are insufficient parking places near the site of the special
event to accommodate the number of vehicles reasonably expected.
      13.   The special event, if conducted on city property, is for the
primary purpose of advertising any product, goods, or event that is primarily
for private profit. This prohibition against advertising products, goods, or
events shall not apply to signs identifying organizations or sponsors
furnishing or sponsoring exhibits or structures used in the special event.
      14.   A city event is scheduled for the same time and location.
      15.   A special event permit application for the same time and location
is already granted or has been received and will be granted.
      16.   An event is scheduled elsewhere in the city where the police
resources required for that event are so great that the deployment of police
services for the proposed special event would have an immediate and adverse
effect upon the welfare and safety of persons and property.
   B.   No permit shall be granted for the following activities or
encroachments unless advance approval is granted by the mayor or otherwise
authorized under rules and regulations adopted by the mayor:
      1.   The erection or placement of any structure on a city street,
sidewalk, right of way or other property owned by the city; or
      2.   The closure of any street or sidewalk for more than twenty four (24)
hours.
(Ord. 2007-21, 5-22-2007)
6-5-9: CONDITIONS OF ISSUANCE:
   A.   As a condition to issuing a permit, the director may impose reasonable
terms and regulations concerning the time and place of such event; the area and
manner of conducting such event; the maximum number of persons participating
therein; the regulation of traffic, if required, including the number and type
of vehicles, the number and type of signs and barricades to be provided by the
applicant, if any, together with a plan of their disposition following the
event; permissible noise levels; and such other requirements as the director
may find reasonable and necessary for the protection of persons and property
and the compliance with the requirements of this code.
   B.   The permit applicant may be required to compensate the city for any
incidental costs associated with the event, including, but not limited to,
special equipment costs, special cleaning or maintenance costs, utility
charges, and any necessary or appropriate fire, police, lifeguard, paramedic,
ambulance, or parking enforcement costs resulting from the event. The
permittee, as a condition to the issuance of the permit, may be required to
bear some or all of such costs of providing such services as well as a surety
bond or cash deposit sufficient to pay the cost of providing these services.
   C.   Issuance of a special event permit is conditioned on and subject to the
right of the city to suspend, revoke, restrict or modify such permit due to the
failure to pay event fees, costs or deposits, provide required insurance, or
for the planning, permitting or conduct of activities or programs which are a
violation of law or the conditions or parameters of the permit.
   D.   The issuance of a special event permit requiring the approval of other
governmental jurisdictions may be conditioned upon the receipt of such
approval.
   E.   A permit granted herein is not transferable.
   F.   Issuance of a special event permit involving in part the use of a
public facility designated and designed to be available on a reservation basis
shall require the applicant to reserve such facility pursuant to the necessary
facility use agreement, and pay any fees associated with such use.
(Ord. 2007-21, 5-22-2007)
6-5-10: NONDISCRIMINATION:
The director shall uniformly consider each application upon its merits and
shall not discriminate in granting or denying permits under this chapter based
upon political, religious, ethnic, race, disability, sexual orientation, or
gender related grounds.
(Ord. 2007-21, 5-22-2007)
6-5-11: NOTICE OF DENIAL OF APPLICATION:
The director shall act promptly upon a timely filed application for a special
event permit, but in no event shall grant or deny a permit less than forty
eight (48) hours prior to the event. If the department disapproves the
application, the department shall notify the applicant in writing at least
forty eight (48) hours prior to the event stating the reasons for such denial.
(Ord. 2007-21, 5-22-2007)
6-5-12: ALTERNATIVE PERMIT:
In denying an application for a special event, the director may propose
alternative locations, times, routes, or other conditions. The applicant can
either accept by written notice the department changes within five (5) days
after receiving notice of the proposed alternatives or submit a new application
that does comply with the issues raised by the department. An alternate special
event permit shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect
of, a special event permit issued under this chapter.
(Ord. 2007-21, 5-22-2007)
6-5-13: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
   A.   Any applicant shall have the right to appeal the denial of a special
event permit to the mayor. The denied applicant shall make the appeal within
five (5) days after receipt of the denial by filing a written notice with the
department and a copy of the notice with the city recorder. The mayor shall act
upon the appeal at the next regularly scheduled mayor's administrative review
meeting following receipt of the notice of appeal.
   B.   In the event that the mayor rejects an applicant's appeal, the
applicant may file an immediate request for review with a court of competent
jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2007-21, 5-22-2007)
6-5-14: NOTICE TO CITY AND OTHER OFFICIALS:
Immediately upon the issuance of a special event permit, the department shall
send a copy thereof to the following:
   A.   The mayor;
   B.   The chief administrative officer;
   C.   The fire chief;
   D.   The chief of police;
   E.   The public services director; and
   F.   Any other city official or employee affected by the issuance of the
permit.
(Ord. 2007-21, 5-22-2007)
6-5-15: DUTIES OF PERMITTEE:
   A.   A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and
conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances.
   B.   The person in charge of the special event shall carry the special event
permit upon his person during the conduct of the special event.
(Ord. 2007-21, 5-22-2007)
6-5-16: PROHIBITIONS:
The following prohibitions shall apply to all special events:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to stage, present, or conduct any
special event without first having obtained a permit as herein provided.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to participate in a special event
for which the person knows a permit has not been granted.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of, or responsible for
the conduct of, a duly permitted special event to knowingly fail to comply with
any condition of the permit, or to conduct any activity outside the parameters
of the application or permit.
   D.   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any special event
activity that would constitute a substantial hazard to the public safety or
that would materially interfere with or endanger the public peace or rights of
residents to the quiet and peaceful enjoyment of their property.
   E.   It shall be unlawful for any person participating in any special event
to carry or possess any length of metal, lumber, wood, or similar material for
purposes of displaying a sign, poster, plaque, or notice, unless such object is
one-fourth inch (1/4") or less in thickness and two inches (2") or less in
width, or if not generally rectangular in shape, such object shall not exceed
three-fourths inch (3/4") in its thickest dimension.
   F.   It shall be unlawful for any person to carry any sign, poster, plaque,
or notice, whether or not mounted on a length of material as specified in
subsection E of this section, unless such sign, poster, plaque, or notice is
constructed or made of a cloth, paper, or cardboard material.
   G.   It shall be unlawful for any person participating in a special event to
utilize sound amplification devices or other equipment in violation of title
12, chapter 14 (the noise ordinance), of this code.
   H.   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, drive, or cause to be
ridden or driven any animal or animal drawn vehicle upon any public street,
unless specifically authorized by the permit.
(Ord. 2007-21, 5-22-2007)
6-5-17: PUBLIC CONDUCT DURING SPECIAL EVENTS:
   A.   No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede, or interfere
with any special event permitted herein or with any person, vehicle, or animal
participating or used in any special event permitted herein.
   B.   The director, in consultation with the chief of police, shall have the
authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of
vehicles along a street constituting a part of the route of a special event.
When parking is so prohibited or restricted, signs shall be posted as necessary
to apprise the public of the prohibition or restriction. No person shall park a
vehicle in violation of such posted prohibition or restriction.
(Ord. 2007-21, 5-22-2007)
6-5-18: SPECIAL EVENT SIGNAGE:
   A.   Notwithstanding the provisions of title 18, chapter 4 of this code, the
holder of a special event permit may affix temporary signs or banner signs,
otherwise allowed under title 18 of this code, related to the special event
during the term of the permit:
      1.   Within a facility reserved for the use of the applicant under a
facility use agreement subject to rules and regulations established pursuant to
section
6-1-1 of this title; or
      2.   On any structure, equipment or vehicle temporarily allowed to be
placed on public property pursuant to a special event permit or facility use
agreement.
   B.   Other than the prohibitions and restrictions found in subsections 6-5-
16E and F of this chapter, there shall be no restriction on the carrying of
signage by any individual participating in a special event.
(Ord. 2007-21, 5-22-2007)
6-5-19: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
   A.   The director or the chief of police shall have the authority to revoke
a special event permit upon violation of the conditions or standards for
issuance set forth in this chapter if:
      1.   Notice is given to the applicant, or the applicant's representative
responsible for conducting the event, to cure the violation; and
      2.   The applicant, or the applicant's representative responsible for
conducting the event, refuses or fails to take reasonable steps to cure the
violation.
   B.   The chief of police shall also have the authority to revoke the special
event permit immediately when a public emergency arises where police resources
required for that emergency are so great that deployment of police services for
the special event would have an immediate and adverse effect upon the welfare
and safety of persons or property.
(Ord. 2007-21, 5-22-2007)
6-5-20: WAIVER OF REQUIREMENTS:
The city attorney shall waive any requirements for application fees, security
deposits or certificates of insurance, if the activity is protected by the
first amendment of the United States constitution and the requirement would be
so financially burdensome that it would preclude the applicant from using
public property for the proposed activity. Fees for city services shall not be
waived pursuant to this subsection. Application for a waiver of a fee, security
deposit, or certificate of insurance shall be made on a form prescribed by the
city attorney and must include an affidavit by the applicant and sufficient
financial information about the applicant to enable the city attorney to
determine whether the requirement(s) would be so financially burdensome that it
would preclude the applicant from using city property for the proposed
activity. If it appears that the applicant does not have sufficient funds to
satisfy the user fee requirement prior to the proposed event, but that the
applicant intends to raise sufficient funds at the event, the city attorney
shall require the applicant to pay such fees out of the proceeds of the
proposed event. If no written denial is issued within ten (10) days of the date
on which the application for waiver is fully completed, executed and filed with
the city attorney, the waiver request shall be deemed approved, contingent upon
the applicant complying with all other permit requirements. Denials of requests
for such waivers shall be subject to the appeal procedures contained in section
6-5-13 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2007-21, 5-22-2007)
6-5-21: REGULATIONS FOR PUBLIC PROPERTY ADJACENT TO EVENT ROUTES:
The following regulations shall apply to the permitted use of city services,
city streets or sidewalks, or other public property along the adjoining routes
and staging areas for the "Ogden's Pioneer Days Parade". It shall be unlawful
for any person to violate these provisions.
   A.   Time Restrictions: Prior to six o'clock (6:00) P.M. of the day before
the parade, no person shall claim or attempt to claim, reserve, occupy or
otherwise control public property either in person or by the placement of any
object along the adjoining parade route. Prohibited claiming activities include
the placement of ropes, tapes, banners, vehicles, barricades or barriers of any
kind; except if such placement is made by authorized and designated city
personnel pursuant to a special event permit.
   B.   Reserving Public Space: Notwithstanding section
7-2-15 of this code, from and after six o'clock (6:00) P.M. of the day before
the parade:
      1.   Any person may physically occupy a position on public property
overnight along the adjoining parade route and may use a blanket, cabana, chair
or sleeping bag to reserve the position.
      2.   If the person does not physically and continuously accompany the
permitted items used to reserve the position, the city makes no guarantee that
the position shall remain reserved.
      3.   No person may claim or attempt to reserve any public property for
himself or herself or others by placement of ropes, tapes, banners, vehicles,
barricades or other barriers of any kind at any time prior to and during the
parade, except if such placement is utilized by authorized and designated city
personnel pursuant to a special event permit.
   C.   Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following terms and
phrases shall have the meanings indicated:
   ADJOINING PARADE ROUTE: Any sidewalk, paved public area, or street adjacent
to Washington Boulevard from 20th Street to 31st Street.
   BLANKET: Any cloth or tarp which is laid down on the ground with the surface
not in excess of the size of a "queen" blanket.
   CABANA: A tentlike, self-standing structure for use as shade or weather
protection that shall remain open on all four (4) sides and does not exceed ten
feet by ten feet (10' x 10') in length and does not use a guyline.
   CHAIR: Any common chair, camp chair, stool, folding stool, bench, folding
bench or other structure, except boxes, the seating surface of which does not
exceed thirty inches (30") aboveground and six feet (6') in length and in such
condition and of sufficient strength to ensure safety from breakage or
collapse.
   PARADE: The authorized special event called "Ogden's Pioneer Days Parade".
   SERVICE ANIMAL: Any dog specially trained to accompany the blind, hearing
impaired, or persons with visual or other physical or emotional disabilities.
   SLEEPING BAG: Any common sleeping bag when opened completely with a seating
surface that does not exceed the size of a "queen" blanket or sixty inches by
eighty inches (60" x 80") in length.
   D.   Enclosed Shelter Prohibited: No person shall place, erect, use or
employ any enclosed tent or other enclosed shelter, including vehicles or
trailers, on public property along the adjoining parade route or staging areas
of the parade. The use of a cabana, which shall remain open on all four (4)
sides, is permitted to provide shade or weather protection.
   E.   Damage; Obstructions Prohibited: No person or the person's blanket,
cabana, chair, or sleeping bag shall obstruct or occupy paved portions of
streets, occupy any unsafe position, or occupy a position which may cause
damage or hazard to public or private property. Until such time as Washington
Boulevard is closed for the parade, no person shall occupy a position within
fifteen feet (15') of a stop sign, traffic semaphore, crosswalk or bus stop.
Sidewalks shall remain open for a space of no less than four feet (4') along
the interior border of the sidewalk which is farthest from the curb. Any fire
hydrant or private driveway shall remain open and accessible at all times.
   F.   Vehicle Parking Restrictions: From and after six o'clock (6:00) P.M. of
the day before the parade, and continuing until the conclusion of the parade,
no person shall park a vehicle, motor vehicle, trailer, or tent trailer on the
adjoining parade route. Only motor vehicles or trailers which are entries or
parts thereof in the parade may be allowed in the areas designated as staging
areas. Any vehicle, motor vehicle, trailer or tent trailer parked in violation
of this section may be towed from the prohibited area at the owner's expense.
   G.   Reserved Spectator Viewing Areas: As part of the special event
permitting process, the mayor or the mayor's designee may authorize:
      1.   The city to reserve places for the observation of the parade and to
erect and control seating on such reserved public property; and
      2.   The reservation of places for the observation of the parade and the
erection and control of seating on such reserved public property.
   H.   Animals Prohibited: From and after six o'clock (6:00) P.M. of the night
before the parade until conclusion of the parade, no animal shall be permitted
on public property along the adjoining parade route and staging areas, except
for a service animal or a parade animal that is a participant in the parade.
   I.   Specific Prohibitions:
      1.   The ignition or discharge of any firework, air soft gun, or
projectile is prohibited.
      2.   No walking or bicycling is permitted on the parade route during the
parade, except by licensed vendors or parade participants.
      3.   No barbecue, fire pit, fire, bonfire, or other flammable heat source
is permitted along the adjoining parade route.
      4.   Any person who spends the night along the adjoining parade route or
attends the parade shall be responsible for the control and removal of his or
her personal items and trash. The city shall provide, monitor, and empty
necessary trash receptacles.
   J.   Special Event License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to
stage, present, conduct, or sell goods or vendor food or beverage at the parade
without having first obtained the necessary license, including any license
required pursuant to this chapter and title 5, chapter 13, article B of this
code.
(Ord. 2012-35, 6-12-2012)
6-5-22: PENALTIES:
Any person violating the provisions of any section of this chapter shall be
guilty of a class B misdemeanor, punishable as provided in title 1, chapter 4,
article A of this code.
(Ord. 2007-21, 5-22-2007)
TITLE 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND FACILITIES
CHAPTER 1
STREET NAME AND BUILDING NUMBER DESIGNATIONS
SECTION:
7-1-1: Street Names And Numbers
7-1-2: Street Name Change
7-1-3: Building Addresses
7-1-1: STREET NAMES AND NUMBERS:
   A.   Assignment: All public streets of the City shall be designated by a
suitable name or number. The plat and dedication of every subdivision of land
in the City shall, subject to the approval of the City Engineer, assign an
appropriate name or number for each public street dedicated thereby. Such
assignment of name is subject to the approval of the plat and dedication.
   B.   Authority Of City Engineer: The City Engineer is authorized and
directed to assign to all new or established, but unnamed, public streets of
the City suitable names or numbers. An assignment of name may be made:
      1.   In conjunction with the recording of a subdivision plat or other
dedication plat by depicting such information on the plat; or
      2.   By administrative order signed by the City Engineer, filed with the
City Recorder.
(1979 Code § 12.04.010; amd. Ord. 97-83, 10-28-1997)
7-1-2: STREET NAME CHANGE:
   A.   Recommendation By City Engineer: The City Engineer may from time to
time recommend to the City Council that changes be made to the designated name
or number of any street to eliminate duplications, to avoid confusion which
would have a negative impact upon the providing of emergency services, or for
any other good cause.
   B.   Petition By Lot Owner: A person owning a lot in the City may petition
that the name of a street or alley adjacent to such lot be changed. The request
shall include a statement regarding the public purpose to be accomplished by
means of the change.
   C.   Public Hearing; Notice; Approval: The City Council may approve a change
to a street name by ordinance after public hearing and notice as provided
herein. Prior to any such approval, the proposed change shall be reviewed by
the Planning Commission, the City Engineer, the Police Department and the Fire
Department. Notice of the public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of
general circulation at least seven (7) days before the date of the hearing. In
addition to publication, a reasonable effort shall be made to identify and
notify the following persons and entities of the Planning Commission meeting
and the public hearing held by the City Council, which notice shall be mailed
at least five (5) days prior to the date of the meeting or hearing:
      1.   The owners of record of the property adjacent to the street segment
under consideration;
      2.   The occupants of the property adjacent to the street segment under
consideration;
      3.   The U.S. Postal Service; and
      4.   The owners and operators of utilities located within the affected
street.
   D.   Recording Of Ordinance: Upon enactment of an ordinance approving a
street name change, the City Recorder shall record such ordinance in the office
of the Weber County Recorder and provide a copy of such ordinance to the City
Engineer who shall notify the U.S. Postal Service, area emergency service
providers, and any other persons or entities required to be notified in the
applicable ordinance.
   E.   Honorary Names: The City Council may also designate an honorary name
for a public street in addition to the assigned street name. The procedure in
reviewing and approving any proposed honorary street name designation shall be
the same as for a change to the assigned street name, except that such
designation shall be approved by resolution.
(1979 Code § 12.04.020; amd. Ord. 97-83, 10-28-1997)
7-1-3: BUILDING ADDRESSES:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect a house or building within
the City without numbering such house or building with the number designated by
the City Engineer, or for the occupant of any house or building, or for the
owner or agent of any unoccupied habitable house or building, to fail for a
longer period than ten (10) days after notice from the City Engineer so to do,
to number such house or building with the number designated by the City
Engineer.
   B.   When such number has been designated by the City Engineer, the owner or
occupant of such house or building shall cause a painted, carved or cast
duplicate of such number at least three inches (3") in height and of a shade
opposite to the background upon which the number is mounted to be placed in a
conspicuous position upon the front of such house, or building, in a permanent,
stationary and durable manner unobstructed at all times by vines, screens, or
anything that would tend to hide or obscure the number, and so that the number
will be clearly perceptible from a distance of one hundred fifty feet (150');
upon application, the City Engineer shall issue a certificate giving the
correct street number for said house or building.
(1979 Code § 12.04.021; Ord. 97-83, 10-28-1997)
CHAPTER 2
STREET, PARKWAY AND SIDEWALK RESTRICTIONS
SECTION:
7-2-1: Unauthorized Sidewalk Obstruction Prohibited
7-2-2: City Sponsored Cleanup Campaigns
7-2-3: Unlawful Structures In Public Way
7-2-4: Concrete Mixing Or Piling
7-2-5: Cellar Doors; Safety
7-2-6: Injuring Structures
7-2-7: Water From Roofs
7-2-8: Snow Removal
7-2-9: Parking Strips
7-2-10: Unused, Dedicated Public Right Of Way
7-2-11: Landscaping Within Public Way
7-2-12: Abutter's Alleys
7-2-13: Outdoor Sales Activities, Seating Or Dining
7-2-14: Receiving Or Delivering Goods
7-2-15: Camping And Related Activities
7-2-16: Driving Animals Prohibited
7-2-17: Banner Signs Or Decorations In Public Way
7-2-18: Weight And Other Restrictions
7-2-1: UNAUTHORIZED SIDEWALK OBSTRUCTION PROHIBITED:
Except as provided under section
7-2-2 of this chapter, it is unlawful for any person owning, occupying or
having control of any premises to place, maintain or permit upon or in the
sidewalk, parking, gutter or half of the street next to such premises:
   A.   Any broken ware, glass, filth, rubbish, refuse, mud, garbage, ashes,
tin cans or other type of "solid waste", as defined under section
12-1-1 of this code;
   B.   Any lumber, wood, boxes, fencing, building material, construction or
demolition waste, tree limbs, dead trees, tree stumps, merchandise or other
things which obstruct such public street, gutter, parking or sidewalk or any
part thereof, or the passage over and upon the same or any part thereof, except
as expressly authorized by ordinance, after first obtaining any required
permit.
(1979 Code § 12.04.090; amd. Ord. 97-83, 10-28-1997)
7-2-2: CITY SPONSORED CLEANUP CAMPAIGNS:
For a period of fourteen (14) days prior to scheduled, city sponsored cleanup
campaigns, any person owning, occupying or having control of any residential
premises may place approved items upon the parkway to be collected by the city,
in accordance with rules and regulations adopted by the mayor. Items placed for
collection shall include only those items authorized for collection by the
mayor; provided, that in no event shall any person place any garbage or
uncontainerized solid waste capable of being blown or scattered upon the public
way or surrounding properties during such cleanup campaign.
(1979 Code § 12.04.091; amd. Ord. 97-83, 10-28-1997)
7-2-3: UNLAWFUL STRUCTURES IN PUBLIC WAY:
It is unlawful for any person to place, maintain or permit any permanent or
temporary structure, mechanism, device, or other thing of any kind or character
upon or in the sidewalk, parkway or other portion of the public way; except:
   A.   A mailbox (including any supporting structure) located in the parkway
by the owner of the abutting property, provided:
      1.   It shall not be located within five feet (5') of a driveway
approach, water meter, or fire hydrant;
      2.   It shall not exceed forty eight inches (48") in height or twenty
four inches (24") in width;
      3.   No signage shall be placed on the mailbox, except for the address or
name of the resident;
      4.   The owner of the abutting property shall be responsible for all care
and maintenance of the mailbox or any damage resulting to or from the mailbox;
   B.   An encroachment approved by the mayor in accordance with section
7-4-2 of this title;
   C.   Utility structures of the city or utility structures authorized under
franchise granted by the city and installed and maintained in accordance with
city ordinance;
   D.   As otherwise specifically authorized in this code.
(1979 Code § 12.04.092; Ord. 97-83, 10-28-1997; amd. Ord. 97-92, 12-16-1997;
Ord. 2005-44, 7-12-2005)
7-2-4: CONCRETE MIXING OR PILING:
It is unlawful to place or pile, or cause or permit to be placed or piled, any
sand, gravel, lime, cement, mortar, plaster, concrete or any like substance or
mixture, or allow the same to remain on any portion of any paved street or
sidewalk in the city; or to make or mix, or to cause or permit to be made or
mixed, any mortar, plaster, concrete or any like substance or mixture on any
portion of any paved street or sidewalk in the city.
(1979 Code § 12.04.130; amd. 1999 Code)
7-2-5: CELLAR DOORS; SAFETY:
It is unlawful for the owner or occupant of any building having a cellar
opening upon any street or sidewalk to fail to keep the door or other covering
thereof in good repair and safe for the passage of the customary traffic on
such street or sidewalk; and if the owner or occupant of any such building
shall neglect or refuse to properly repair any such door or covering for twenty
four (24) hours after notice to do so, the public works director or the chief
of police shall forthwith cause such repairs to be made at the expense of the
owner or occupant.
(1979 Code § 12.04.080; amd. 1999 Code)
7-2-6: INJURING STRUCTURES:
It is unlawful for any person to wilfully or negligently cut, injure, remove,
pull down, break or deface any construction, improvement, paving, pole,
conduit, waterway, sidewalk, curb, gutter or traffic control device built,
erected or standing in, on or along the streets of the city.
(1979 Code § 12.04.200; amd. 1999 Code)
7-2-7: WATER FROM ROOFS:
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, occupying or having control of any
premises to suffer or permit water from the roof or eaves of any house,
building or other structure, or from any other source under the control of such
person, to be discharged and spread upon the surface of any sidewalk.
(1979 Code § 12.04.151; Ord. 97-83, 10-28-1997)
7-2-8: SNOW REMOVAL:
   A.   Required: It is unlawful for any owner, occupant, lessor or agent of
any property abutting on any paved sidewalk of the city to fail to remove, or
cause to be removed from such paved sidewalk, all snow falling thereon within
twelve (12) hours after such snow shall have ceased to fall; provided, that if
the storm occurs at night, then within twelve (12) hours after sunrise the next
day. If such snow has turned to ice and it cannot be removed without injury to
the sidewalk, the owner, occupant, lessor or agent shall cover or cause such
ice to be covered, within twenty four (24) hours, with sand or some other
similar substance which will render it safe for travel. In case the owner,
occupant, lessor or agent fails to remove such snow in a timely manner, the
public works director may cause the removal of the snow or ice and charge the
cost thereof to the property owner or against the property as a lien.
   B.   Placement: It is unlawful to place snow or ice removed from private
property in the public way. It is unlawful to place snow or ice removed from
sidewalks, drive approaches or other public places in a manner so as to cause a
hazard to vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
(1979 Code § 12.04.150; amd. Ord. 97-83, 10-28-1997)
7-2-9: PARKING STRIPS:
   A.   Maintenance: In all areas of the city where there exists a parking
strip, the immediately adjoining private property owner shall maintain the
parking strip in a neat and orderly manner, equal to the manner in which the
owner customarily maintains his adjoining real property, which customary manner
shall not be less than the minimum standards otherwise permitted or required by
law. Such property shall be kept free of weeds, junk or salvage material,
debris, trash, litter or other solid waste material, and will specifically be
subject to enforcement of the provisions of title 12, chapters 4, 5 and 8 of
this code. Any trees planted in the parking strip shall be subject to the
provisions of title 6, chapter 2 of this code, referring to street trees.
   B.   Parking Strip Defined: "Parking strip" means that part of the public
right of way set aside as a planting strip or open space and located between
the sidewalk and the curb or edge of the roadway.
(1979 Code § 12.04.152; Ord. 97-92, 12-16-1997)
7-2-10: UNUSED, DEDICATED PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY:
   A.   Maintenance: In all areas of the city where there exists unused,
dedicated public right of way, the immediately adjacent private property owner
shall maintain the real property comprising such unused, dedicated public right
of way in a neat and orderly manner, equal to the manner in which the owner
customarily maintains his adjoining real property, which customary manner shall
not be less than the minimum standards otherwise permitted or required by law.
Such unused, dedicated public right of way shall be kept free of weeds, junk or
salvage material, debris, trash, litter, or other solid waste material, and
will specifically be subject to enforcement of the provisions of title 12,
chapters 4, 5 and 8 of this code.
   B.   Unused, Dedicated Public Right Of Way Defined: "Unused, dedicated
public right of way" means that portion of a dedicated public right of way
either between the property line of the adjacent property and the sidewalk, or
if no sidewalk exists, between the property line of the adjacent property and
the curb or edge of the roadway portion.
(1979 Code § 12.04.153; Ord. 97-92, 12-16-1997)
7-2-11: LANDSCAPING WITHIN PUBLIC WAY:
Any owner of private property adjacent to any public way who installs or
maintains landscaping within a park strip or between the property line and the
curb or edge or the roadway shall:
   A.   Maintain such landscaping in such a manner as will:
      1.   Not interfere with the public use of the right of way;
      2.   Not cause any damage to any improvements installed in the right of
way; and
      3.   Otherwise comply with the requirements of this code regarding
maintenance of such property; and
   B.   Be subject to and comply with the requirements of title 6, chapter 2 of
this code regarding street trees.
(1979 Code § 12.04.154; Ord. 97-92, 12-16-1997)
7-2-12: ABUTTER'S ALLEYS:
   A.   Maintenance: In all areas of the city where there exists abutter's
alleys, the immediately adjoining private property owner shall maintain that
portion of the abutter's alley which abuts the owner's property, extending to
the centerline thereof, in a neat and orderly manner, equal to the manner in
which the owner customarily maintains his adjoining real property, which
customary manner shall not be less than the minimum standards otherwise
permitted or required by law. Such abutter's alley shall be kept free of weeds,
debris, trash, or other solid waste material, and will specifically be subject
to enforcement of the provisions of title 12, chapters 4, 5 and 8 of this code.
   B.   Abutter's Alleys Defined: "Abutter's alleys" means any alley which has
been dedicated as part of a subdivision plat for the use or benefit of adjacent
properties but which has not been dedicated to the city as a public alley.
(1979 Code § 12.04.155; Ord. 97-92, 12-16-1997)
7-2-13: OUTDOOR SALES ACTIVITIES, SEATING OR DINING:
   A.   Permit Required: Except as may be allowed under subsection D of this
section:
      1.   No goods, wares, merchandise shall be placed, maintained or
permitted for sale or show on any parking, street or sidewalk without first
either obtaining a sidewalk sale permit, as provided in subsection B of this
section or a sidewalk use permit, as provided in subsection C of this section.
      2.   No seating, tables, or other dining furnishings shall be placed,
maintained or permitted for use in the public way without first obtaining a
sidewalk use permit, as provided in subsection C of this section.
   B.   Sidewalk Sale Permit: A one day or two (2) day sidewalk sale permit may
be issued by the business license coordinator to the retail owner or operator
located adjacent to the proposed sidewalk sale location for the sale of goods,
wares or merchandise sold by the owner or operator in the adjacent, ground
level, retail business. Through the duration of the sale, the sidewalk sale
permit must be prominently displayed by the retail owner or operator. Such
sidewalk sale permit may be obtained for no more than two (2) sales per
calendar year, per retail store location, with each sidewalk sale extending no
longer than forty eight (48) consecutive hours. The permit requirement may be
waived for sidewalk sales held in conjunction with a community sponsored
special event or activity wherein a majority of the retail establishments in
the business district participate, if approved in writing by the mayor. No
goods, wares or merchandise, permitted or allowed to be displayed within a
sidewalk area under the provisions of this subsection, shall be placed in such
a manner as to leave less than a five foot (5') passageway for pedestrians.
   C.   Sidewalk Use Permit: A sidewalk use permit may be issued by the
community and economic development director, or the director's designee, to the
owner or operator of a retail or dining establishment located on the ground
level adjacent to the proposed sidewalk use location for either the display of
goods, wares or merchandise sold by the owner or operator in such adjacent
business, or the provision of seating or dining facilities for its customers,
subject to the following conditions and standards:
      1.   Use Limitations: Sidewalk use for displays, seating, or dining in
the sidewalk area of the public right of way shall be limited to ground level,
retail or dining establishments located in the central business district –
intensive (CBD–I) zoning district. No sidewalk use permit shall be issued along
the frontage of a building that is the approved location of a licensed sidewalk
vendor.
      2.   Location: The sidewalk area utilized for outdoor display, seating,
or dining shall be located directly in front of the building, lot, or leased
space of the establishment and shall be located at least five feet (5') away
from any adjacent business entrance and two feet (2') from curb line. An
exception to the five foot (5') minimum distance to entrances may be allowed if
the adjacent owner or tenant gives written permission for the encroachment.
      3.   Unobstructed Passageway: An unobstructed passageway of five feet
(5') shall be maintained at all times within the sidewalk area. This passageway
must be free of obstructing the flow of pedestrian traffic. The five foot (5')
passageway is measured from any display, seating or dining facilities to the
nearest obstruction affecting the flow of pedestrian traffic. Obstructions
include fixtures such as traffic signals, traffic signs, light poles,
pedestrian curb cuts, parking meters, phone booths or stands, bus stops,
garbage cans, benches, trees and grates, fire hydrants and other similar
objects or other areas set aside for display, seating or dining uses. Recesses
in the building facade shall not be used to satisfy the clear path requirement.
      4.   Safety For Physically Disabled: Items used for the outdoor display,
seating, or dining shall be designed, placed, or operated in such a manner that
does not create unsafe conditions for pedestrians or persons who are physically
disabled. Shelves, decorations, planters and/or other objects shall not
cantilever over or be placed beyond the delineated perimeter of the sidewalk
area approved for such use.
      5.   Furnishings To Be Moveable: The furnishings for the outdoor display,
seating or dining area shall consist solely of moveable items such as tables,
chairs, umbrellas, plantings and other similar furnishings, that may be readily
removed from the sidewalk area during nonbusiness hours or adverse weather. No
such items shall be physically attached to any public improvement.
      6.   Furnishings To Be Removed When Business Is Closed: Unless the
sidewalk use is approved as a dining area with a semipermanent barrier under
subsection C12 of this section, or otherwise approved under an encroachment
permit issued pursuant to section
7-4-2 of this title, the permittee shall remove all goods, wares, merchandise,
seating or other dining furnishings during the hours when the permittee's
business is closed.
      7.   Furnishings To Be Removed During Adverse Weather: Goods, wares,
merchandise, seating, dining furnishings, barriers, or other related items
approved under a sidewalk use permit should be removed during periods of
adverse weather that would restrict the effective removal of snow or cause
items to move or become airborne, or during periods of construction or
maintenance work when the city determines that such sidewalk use will interfere
with such work.
      8.   Music Prohibited: Musical instruments, recorded music, or similar
music reproduction devices used by an establishment shall not be used within
the sidewalk use area.
      9.   Area To Be Kept Clean: The sidewalk area used for outdoor display,
seating, or dining shall be kept clean of litter that is appropriately disposed
of at the end of each day. Garbage containers provided by the city for public
use shall not be utilized for the disposal of food, trash, and other similar
items produced by an establishment.
      10.   Awnings: The use of awnings is subject to section
18-3-12 of this code. All signage is also subject to the provisions of the
city's sign ordinances adopted under title 18 of this code.
      11.   Historic District Certificate Required: In addition to obtaining a
sidewalk use permit, the use of awnings, signs, displays, seating, dining and
associated furnishings in the 25th Street historic district shall receive a
certificate of historic appropriateness from the Ogden City landmarks
commission.
      12.   Barrier Fence: Dining establishments desiring a sidewalk use permit
for an area where they can restrict use by nonpatrons, where they can leave
furnishings during nonbusiness hours, or which will be under their management
and control to the extent necessary for service of alcoholic beverages, shall
also be required to obtain an encroachment permit under section
7-4-2 of this title and shall provide a semipermanent barrier fence meeting the
following requirements:
         a.   Barrier Fence Requirement: A three foot six inch (3'6") high
barrier shall delineate the area of use. The use of solid walls is prohibited.
         b.   Materials And Design: The materials utilized for the barrier
fence shall consist of finished decorative metal. The design of the barrier
fence should contribute to the streetscape and add appeal to the pedestrian
experience. The installation and design of the barrier fence shall allow it to
be placed on the sidewalk in a safe and stable manner, secured to the building
when the building or leased space is occupied; and removed when the area is not
in use.
         c.   Removal: The barrier shall be removed during periods of time when
the building or leased space is vacant.
         d.   Access Restriction: Access to the dining area directly from the
sidewalk or other portions of the public right of way is prohibited when
alcohol beverages are to be served to patrons of the establishment within the
approved sidewalk use area. Under such circumstances, the permittee must
control egress and ingress to the sidewalk use area directly through the
interior of the building.
      13.   Indemnification; Insurance: The permittee shall agree to hold the
city and its employees and agents harmless and to indemnify and defend the
city, its employees and agents, against all claims, liability, loss, damage, or
expense, including attorney fees, resulting from the activities of the
permittee upon the public sidewalks. The permittee shall maintain a commercial
general liability insurance policy with minimum limits of liability of five
hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence for bodily injury,
personal injury and property damage. Any deductible or self-insured retention
must be declared to and approved by the city. A current certificate of
insurance must be kept on file with the city recorder verifying continuing
coverage and naming the city, its elected and appointed officials, employees,
agents and volunteers as additional insureds. The certificate shall provide
thirty (30) days' written notice to the city upon cancellation, nonrenewal or
material change in the policy.
      14.   Modifications; Revocation: The city retains the right to modify the
conditions imposed herein and to impose such conditions prospectively on any
permittee. A sidewalk use permit may be revoked or suspended for failure to
follow the conditions and standards imposed herein, or any other violation of
this code. A sidewalk use permit may also be suspended or revoked by the city,
at any time, for any reason, upon thirty (30) days' written notice.
   D.   Two Foot Encroachment Allowed Without Permit: Owners or operators of
adjacent retail or dining establishments, located on the ground level, may,
without a permit or other permission from the city, show or display its goods,
wares, or merchandise, or provide seating or tables for its customers, within
the two foot (2') wide strip of the sidewalk located immediately in front of
the property line of the lot, so long as a five foot (5') wide passageway for
pedestrians is maintained on the remaining width of the sidewalk.
(1979 Code § 12.04.100; amd. Ord. 86-34, 7-31-1986; 1999 Code; Ord. 2002-13, 3-
19-2002; Ord. 2003-54, 9-23-2003)
7-2-14: RECEIVING OR DELIVERING GOODS:
It is unlawful for any person to place or suffer to be placed or kept upon any
sidewalk any goods, wares or merchandise which he may be receiving or
delivering, without leaving a ten foot (10') passageway clear upon such
sidewalk; and it shall be unlawful for any person receiving or delivering such
goods, wares or merchandise to suffer the same to be or remain on such sidewalk
for a longer period than two (2) hours.
(1979 Code § 12.04.110)
7-2-15: CAMPING AND RELATED ACTIVITIES:
It is unlawful for any person to camp, lodge, sleep, cook, make a fire or pitch
a tent, fly, lean to, tarpaulin, umbrella, or any other type of ground cover or
shelter, or place sleeping bags, bedding or any other type of camping or
sleeping equipment upon any portion of a public way, as defined herein, and it
is unlawful for any person using or benefiting from the use of any of the
foregoing shelter or camping or sleeping equipment to fail to remove the same
from any such street for more than five (5) minutes after being requested to do
so by any police officer or citizen.
(1979 Code § 12.04.156; Ord. 97-92, 12-16-1997)
7-2-16: DRIVING ANIMALS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to drive or ride an animal upon any sidewalk,
except across a sidewalk at an established crossing.
(1979 Code § 12.04.120)
7-2-17: BANNER SIGNS OR DECORATIONS IN PUBLIC WAY:
   A.   Permitted: The mayor, or the mayor's designee, may permit the hanging
of decorations or banner signs, as defined in title 18 of this code, along
designated public streets. Decorations or banner signs may only be permitted
within the designated public ways for the following purposes: special
occasions, such as charitable, civic, or festive events; holiday or seasonal
decorations; celebration of some event of national, state, or civic
significance; in honor of a visit from a person of note; or promotion of a
community oriented event. Decorations or banner signs shall not incorporate in
any manner any political advertising or advertising of a commercial nature.
   B.   Designated Public Ways: Decorations or banner signs shall only be
allowed along the following designated portions of the public way:
      1.   25th Street, from Wall Avenue to Grant Avenue;
      2.   24th Street, from Washington Boulevard to Lincoln Avenue; and
      3.   Washington Boulevard, between 21st Street and 26th Street.
   C.   Noncity Displays; Permit Fee:
      1.   The 2400 block of Washington Boulevard may be available for display
by organizations other than the city. Nonprofit organizations or other
organizations promoting a community oriented event may apply for a permit to
display banner signs within the designated area, by making application to the
community services department, no later than thirty (30) days prior to the
proposed beginning date of display.
      2.   Any banner signs hung at the request of an organization other than
the city shall pay a fee to compensate the city for the reasonable costs of
administration, maintenance and hanging, which shall be approved by the mayor.
No permit shall be issued, and no banner sign or decoration displayed until
such fee is paid to the city.
   D.   Standards:
      1.   The same type of decoration or banner sign must be displayed within
an entire one block area.
      2.   Banner signs may be displayed no more than ten (10) days prior to a
promoted event and will be taken down upon the event's conclusion.
      3.   The mayor shall develop written standard design specifications for
all banner signs, in order to provide for uniform appearance, durability,
weather resistance, and secure installation. No banner signs shall be permitted
which violate such standards.
      4.   All permitted banner signs must be hung by the city.
(1979 Code § 12.28.110; amd. Ord. 98-27, 4-7-1998)
7-2-18: WEIGHT AND OTHER RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   The city engineer may prohibit the operation of any vehicle or impose
restrictions on the weight of a vehicle operating upon any street or roadway
under the jurisdiction of Ogden City if:
      1.   Following an engineering inspection or study, the city engineer
determines that the roadway:
         a.   Will be damaged or destroyed due to deterioration caused by
climatic conditions;
         b.   Is subject to damage or destruction due to the condition of the
roadway, including:
            (1)   The structural cross section of the roadway;
            (2)   The age of the roadway; and
            (3)   The effect of different types of vehicles on the integrity of
the roadway;
         c.   Is subject to congestion as a result of narrow travel lanes or
inadequate turning radii; or
         d.   Is unable to meet an established level of service standard due to
the presence of vehicles of a certain weight; and
      2.   Signs are erected and maintained citing the weight limit at each end
of that portion of any street affected by the determination.
   B.   A restriction imposed pursuant to subsection A of this section shall
not be construed to prohibit:
      1.   The operation of emergency vehicles upon any street in the city;
      2.   The operation of restricted vehicles owned or operated by the city,
public utilities, or any contractors or materialmen, while engaged in the
repair, maintenance, snowplowing, or construction of such streets, street
improvements, or public utilities within the city;
      3.   The operation of school buses and other forms of public transit upon
any street in the city;
      4.   The operation of a restricted vehicle where a permit has been issued
by the mayor or city engineer; or
      5.   The operation of restricted vehicles upon any officially established
detour in any case where such vehicle could lawfully be operated upon the
street for which such detour is established.
   C.   Any person who violates any restriction imposed under the authority of
this section is guilty of an infraction class C misdemeanor, subject to penalty
as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code.
(Ord. 2015-27, 6-16-2015)
CHAPTER 3
OBSTRUCTIONS AT INTERSECTIONS
SECTION:
7-3-1: Obstructions Prohibited; Lawn Trees Permitted When
7-3-2: Sight Triangle Area Defined
7-3-3: Enforcement
7-3-1: OBSTRUCTIONS PROHIBITED; LAWN TREES PERMITTED WHEN:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant or person in control of
any corner lot in the City to erect, maintain or permit to grow any
obstructions to the view of drivers of motor vehicles of other vehicles,
pedestrians or traffic-control devices within the "sight triangle area" of said
lot, as that term is defined in Section
7-3-2 of this Chapter. The following shall be presumed to constitute an
obstruction under this Section:
      1.   Fences, retaining walls, signs, shrubs, berms or other landscaping
exceeding the height of two feet (2') measured from the nearest and highest
elevation of the adjacent curb, or if no curb exists from the nearest and
highest elevation of the road surface;
      2.   Deciduous trees whose foliage is trimmed so as not to hang down
closer than seven feet (7') to the ground; provided, that the Public Works
Director, or designee, may restrict the number of such trees if such number
would effectively obstruct the view of drivers.
   B.   Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed as prohibiting the
construction of any house, garage, office, warehouse, or other structure that
complies with the provisions of the Zoning Title or that constitutes a lawful
prior nonconforming use.
(1979 Code § 12.16.010; amd. Ord. 97-92, 12-16-1997)
7-3-2: SIGHT TRIANGLE AREA DEFINED:
"Sight triangle area" means:
   A.   Where curbs are installed: that portion of a corner lot lying within a
triangular area formed by measuring back along each of the curb lines to a
point forty feet (40') from the intersection of said curb lines, and then
connecting the two (2) points thus established with a third line. An example of
a "sight triangle area" at an intersection where curbs are installed is marked
off by the shaded area in the following illustration:
   B.   Where no curbs are installed: that portion of a corner lot lying within
a triangle area formed by measuring back along the property lines adjacent to
the intersecting streets to a point on each property line twenty feet (20')
back from the intersection of said property lines and then connecting the two
(2) points thus established with a third line. An example of a "sight triangle
area" at an intersection where curbs have not been installed is marked off by
the shaded area in the following illustration:
(1979 Code § 12.16.020; amd. Ord. 97-92, 12-16-1997)
7-3-3: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Penalties: Any person who fails to comply with the requirements of this
chapter is subject to the penalties provided in chapter 16 of this title.
   B.   Removal By Abatement: Any obstructions prohibited under this chapter
may be removed by city abatement under title 12, chapter 8 of this code.
(1979 Code § 12.16.030; amd. Ord. 97-92, 12-16-1997; Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
CHAPTER 4
STREET AND SIDEWALK ENCROACHMENTS
SECTION:
7-4-1: Utility Structure Construction; Permit
7-4-2: Encroachment Permits
7-4-3: Building Materials In Street; Permit
7-4-1: UTILITY STRUCTURE CONSTRUCTION; PERMIT:
It is unlawful for any person to place, build, erect or maintain, any track,
pole, conduit, wires, etc., in, on or along any street in the city except under
proper permit, franchise or grant, all of which shall be subject to the laws,
rules, regulations and ordinances of the city.
(1979 Code § 12.04.190)
7-4-2: ENCROACHMENT PERMITS:
   A.   Permit Required: Except as may otherwise be specifically authorized in
the provisions of this code, it is unlawful for any person to erect or
construct any encroachment over, under, or upon any portion of the public way,
unless the party so constructing the same shall have obtained an encroachment
permit to do so from the mayor, or the mayor's designee.
   B.   Conditions For Issuance: No permit shall be issued for any encroachment
unless:
      1.   The permittee is the owner of the abutting property, provided that a
permit may be issued to the lessee of such property if the encroachment does
not involve any excavation, or affixing of structures to improvements, within
the public right of way and the owner concurs in writing with the issuance of
such permit;
      2.   The applicant demonstrates good cause for such encroachment;
      3.   The encroachment will not interfere with the use of the public way
by vehicular or pedestrian travel, or with utilities legally installed in or
over the public way;
      4.   The application is reviewed by and recommendations received from the
city engineer and the planning commission.
   C.   Indemnification; Insurance; Bonding:
      1.   The permittee shall agree to indemnify the city, in a form
acceptable to the city attorney, against any claim arising out of or connected
with the issuance of the permit and the construction or failure to maintain the
encroaching improvements, which indemnification shall be recorded as a covenant
running with the adjacent property for as long as such encroachment shall
exist.
      2.   The permittee shall maintain a commercial general liability
insurance policy with minimum limits of liability of five hundred thousand
dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence for bodily injury, personal injury and
property damage. Any deductible or self- insured retention must be declared to
and approved by the city. A current certificate of insurance must be kept on
file with the city recorder verifying continuing coverage and naming the city,
its elected and appointed officials, employees, agents and volunteers as
additional insureds. The certificate shall provide thirty (30) days' written
notice to the city upon cancellation, nonrenewal or material change in the
policy. The mayor may waive or reduce the insurance requirement, if it is
determined in consultation with the city attorney and the risk manager that
such waiver or reduction is appropriate considering the potential risks that
may be associated with the proposed encroachment. Nothing contained herein,
shall restrict the mayor from imposing a greater insurance requirement in
accordance with the risks.
      3.   If the encroaching improvements are such that their removal may
involve considerable cost to the permittee, the mayor may require a corporate
surety bond conditioned on the removal of the encroachment on city request.
   D.   Conditions: The mayor may impose, in the mayor's sole discretion, such
conditions as are determined to be necessary to protect the interests of the
city.
   E.   Revocation: The permit shall be revocable by the city, at any time, for
any reason, and the permittee, at its expense, will within ninety (90) days of
receipt of written notice that the permit is revoked, remove any structure
which has been constructed or placed on or within said right of way.
   F.   Title Acquisition Limited: The permittee shall not acquire any title to
or interest in land in any portion of a street, sidewalk, alley or highway by
virtue of any permit issued pursuant to this section.
(1979 Code § 12.04.093; Ord. 97-83, 10-28-1997; amd. Ord. 2002-13, 3-19-2002,
eff. 4-4-2002)
7-4-3: BUILDING MATERIALS IN STREET; PERMIT:
It is unlawful for any person to occupy or use any portion of the public
streets for the erection or repair of any building upon land abutting thereon,
without first making application to and receiving from the city engineer a
permit for the occupation or use, for building purposes, of such portions of
streets, and for such periods of time and under such limitations and
restrictions as may be required by the city engineer, to provide for safe
access by the public and adjoining property owners; provided, that any such
permit may be revoked by the city engineer at any time when the holder thereof
fails to comply with any rule or regulation under which it is granted, or when,
in the opinion of the city engineer, the public interest requires such
revocation. Occupation or use, as herein stated, for periods in excess of
fourteen (14) calendar days or for occupation or use of a street in excess of
fifteen feet (15'), measured from the curb line, requires approval of the
mayor. In no case shall an occupation or use be approved which eliminates or
unnecessarily restricts access by the public or adjoining property owners.
(1979 Code § 12.04.070; amd. Ord. 88-41, 10-13-1988; 1999 Code)
CHAPTER 5
EXCAVATION PERMITS
SECTION:
7-5-1: Definitions
7-5-2: Permit Required; Basis For Issuance
7-5-3: Application Requirements
7-5-4: Emergency Work
7-5-5: Fee For Permit
7-5-6: Contents Of Permit; Duration, Extensions
7-5-7: Transfer; Assignment
7-5-8: Compliance; Site Permittee Identification
7-5-9: Other Highway Permits
7-5-10: Relocation Of Structures In Public Way
7-5-11: Impact Of Excavation On Existing Improvements
7-5-12: Restoration Of Public Property
7-5-13: Insurance Requirements
7-5-14: Bond Requirements
7-5-15: Hold Harmless Agreement; Limitations On City Liability
7-5-16: Work Without Permit; Penalty
7-5-17: Failure To Comply; Default In Performance
7-5-18: Failure To Conform To Design Standards; Penalty
7-5-19: Appeal For Suspension, Revocation, Stop Order
7-5-20: Tampering With Traffic Barricades
7-5-21: Conflict With Governing Provisions
7-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
APPLICANT: Any person who makes application for a permit.
APPURTENANCES: Miscellaneous concrete surfaces within the public way, such as
parking bays and carriage walks.
BUSINESS: Any place in the city in which there is conducted or carried on
principally or exclusively any pursuit or occupation for the purpose of gaining
a livelihood.
CITY: The city of Ogden, a municipal corporation of the state of Utah.
CITY ENGINEER: The city engineer, or his/her authorized representative.
EMERGENCY: Any unforeseen circumstances or occurrence, the existence of which
constitutes an immediate danger to persons or property, or which causes
interruption of utility or public services.
ENGINEERING REGULATIONS, REGULATIONS, SPECIFICATIONS, AND/OR DESIGN STANDARDS:
The latest version of the engineering regulations, specifications, design
standards or criteria published or adopted by the city engineer.
FAILURE: A work site restoration which fails to meet city engineer
specifications, or which results in a deteriorated or substandard condition
within the duration of the warranty period. Failure may be settlement of
surfaces, deterioration of materials, or other surface irregularities.
Measurement of failure shall be further defined in the engineering regulations.
INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER: A person providing to another, for the purpose of
providing telecommunication services or other utility services to customers,
all or part of the necessary system which uses the public way.
OPERATOR: Any person who provides service over a telecommunications system or
other utility system, and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a
controlling interest in such system, or who otherwise controls or is
responsible for the operation of such a system.
PERMITTEE: Any person which has been issued a permit and thereby has agreed to
fulfill the requirements of this chapter.
PERSON: Means and includes any natural person, partnership, firm, association,
provider, corporation, company, organization, or entity of any kind.
PIPE DRIVEWAY: A driveway approach which uses a pipe or other means to bridge
the gutter.
PRIVATE DRAIN LINE: A pipe installed solely for the transmission of water
collected or generated on private property such as drainage, spring, or storm
water, or condensate into the public drainage system.
PROPERTY OWNER: Person or persons who have legal title to property and/or
equitable interest in the property, or the ranking official or agent of a
company having legal title to property and/or equitable interest in the
property.
PROVIDER: An operator, infrastructure provider, reseller, system lessee, or
public utility company.
PUBLIC UTILITY COMPANY: Any company subject to the jurisdiction of the Utah
State Public Service Commission, or any mutual corporation providing gas,
electricity, water, telephone, or other utility product or services for use by
the general public.
PUBLIC WAY: Means and includes all public rights of way and easements, public
footpaths, walkways and sidewalks, public streets, public roads, public
highways, public alleys, and public drainage ways. It does not, however,
include utility easements not within public ways of the City.
RESELLER: Refers to any person that provides service over a system for which a
separate charge is made, where that person does not own or lease the underlying
system used for the transmission and does not install any system in the rights
of way.
RESIDENT: The person or persons currently making their home at a particular
dwelling.
SECURITY: A corporate surety bond, cash bond or escrow, letter of credit, or
other security device, determined by the City.
STORM DRAIN: A dedicated pipe, conduit, water way, or ditch installed in a
right of way or easement for the transmission of storm and drainage water. This
term does not include private drain lines.
SYSTEM LESSEE: Refers to any person that leases a system or a specific portion
of a system to provide services.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM OR SYSTEM: All conduits, manholes, poles, antennas,
transceivers, amplifiers and all other electronic devices, equipment, wire and
appurtenances owned, leased, or used by a provider located in the construction,
ownership, operation, use or maintenance of a telecommunications system.
TRAFFIC BARRICADE MANUAL: The manual on proper barricading and traffic-control
practices, published by or on file with the City Engineer.
WORK SITE RESTORATION: Means and includes the restoring of the original ground
or paved hard surface area to comply with engineering regulations, and
includes, but is not limited to, repair, cleanup, backfilling, compaction, and
stabilization, paving and other work necessary to place the site in acceptable
condition following the conclusion of the work, or the expiration or revocation
of the permit.
(1979 Code § 12.10.010; Ord. 97-70, 9-23-1970; amd. Ord. 97-75, 10-21-1997)
7-5-2: PERMIT REQUIRED; BASIS FOR ISSUANCE:
Any person desiring to perform work of any kind in a public way within the
City, shall make application for a permit. The decision by the City to issue a
permit shall include, among other factors determined by the City, the
following:
   A.   The capacity of the public way to accommodate the facilities or
structures proposed to be installed in the public way;
   B.   The capacity of the public way to accommodate multiple wire in addition
to cables, conduits, pipes or other facilities or structures of other users of
the public way, such as electrical power, telephone, gas, sewer and water;
   C.   The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private facilities,
improvements, or landscaping previously existing in the public way;
   D.   The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of
construction from numerous excavations of the public way.
(1979 Code § 12.10.020; Ord. 97-70, 9-23-1970)
7-5-3: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Filing; Form: Application for a permit shall be filed with the City
Engineer on a form to be furnished by the City.
   B.   Eligible Persons: No person shall be eligible to apply for or receive
permits to do work within the public ways of the City, save and except the
following:
      1.   Contractors licensed by the State as general contractors; or
      2.   Providers; provided, that all work shall be performed by a
contractor licensed by the State as a general contractor, which contractor
shall be adequately identified on the permit.
      3.   The City acting through its Public Works Department.
   C.   Denial Based Upon Past Performance: The City Engineer may deny the
issuance of permits to applicants, including providers, who have shown by past
performance that in the opinion of the City Engineer they will not consistently
conform to the engineering regulations, specifications, design standards, or
the requirements of this Chapter.
   D.   Engineering Plans: When necessary, in the judgment of the City
Engineer, to fully determine the relationship of the work proposed to existing
or proposed facilities within the public ways, or to determine whether the work
proposed complies with the engineering regulations, construction specifications
and design standards, the City Engineer may require the filing of engineering
plans, specifications and sketches showing the proposed work in sufficient
detail to permit determination of such relationship or compliance, or both, and
the application shall be deemed suspended until such plans and sketches are
filed and approved.
   E.   Unlawful Commencement Without Permit: It shall be unlawful for any
person to commence work upon any public way until the City Engineer has
approved the application and until a permit has been issued for such work,
except as specifically approved to the contrary in this Chapter.
   F.   Appeal: The disapproval or denial of an application by the City
Engineer may be appealed by the applicant to the Mayor, or the Mayor's
designee, by filing of a written notice of appeal within ten (10) days of the
action of the City Engineer. The Mayor, or the Mayor's designee, shall hear
such appeal, if written request therefor be timely filed as soon as
practicable, and render his/her decision within two (2) weeks following notice
of such appeal.
   G.   Authority Of City Engineer: In approving or disapproving work within
any public way, or permits therefor, in the inspection of such work; in
reviewing plans, sketches or specifications; and generally in the exercise of
the authority conferred upon him/her by this Chapter, the City Engineer shall
act in such manner as to preserve and protect the public way and the use
thereof, but shall have no authority to govern the actions or inaction of
permittees and applicants or other persons which have no relationship to the
use, preservation or protection of the public way.
   H.   Routine Maintenance Work: It shall be lawful for a City, County, State,
Federal or other government employee to perform routine maintenance work, not
involving excavations, without first having obtained a permit therefor.
   I.   Exception To Permit Requirement: A permit is not required from the City
Engineer for hand digging excavations for installation or repair of sprinkler
systems and landscaping within the nonpaved areas of the public way. However,
conformance to all City specifications is required.
(1979 Code § 12.10.030; Ord. 97-70, 9-23-1970)
7-5-4: EMERGENCY WORK:
   A.   Authority: Any person maintaining pipes, lines, or facilities in the
public way may proceed with work upon existing facilities without a permit when
emergency circumstances demand the work to be done immediately; provided a
permit could not reasonably and practicably have been obtained beforehand.
   B.   Notification During Business Hours: In the event that emergency work is
commenced on or within any public way of the City during regular business
hours, the City Engineer shall be notified within one-half (1/2) hour from the
time the work is commenced. Any person commencing such work shall immediately
thereafter apply for a permit. The person commencing and conducting such work
shall take all necessary safety precautions for the protection of the public
and the direction and control of traffic, and shall ensure that work is
accomplished according to City Engineering regulations, the Manual on Uniform
Traffic- Control Devices and other applicable laws, regulations, or generally
recognized practices in the industry.
   C.   Other Than Business Hours: Any person commencing emergency work in the
public way during other than business hours without a permit shall either
immediately thereafter apply for a permit or give notice during the first hour
of the first regular business day on which City offices are open for business
after such work is commenced and apply for a permit as soon as practicable
thereafter. A permit for such emergency work may be issued which shall be
retroactive to the date when the work was begun, at the discretion of the City
Engineer.
(1979 Code § 12.10.040; Ord. 97-70, 9-23-1970)
7-5-5: FEE FOR PERMIT:
   A.   Required: The City shall charge and the permittee shall pay upon
issuance of the permit, fees for costs associated with the work performed under
the permit as outlined in Title 4, Chapter 6 of this Code. Such costs could
include costs for reviewing the project and issuing the permit, inspections of
the project, deterioration of the public way or diminution of the useful life
of the public way, and other costs to the City associated with the work to be
done under the permit. All costs shall be assessed in a nondiscriminatory
manner.
   B.   Additional Charges: Additional charges to cover the reasonable cost and
expenses of any required engineering review, inspection, and work site
restoration associated with each undertaking may be charged by the City to each
permittee, in addition to the permit fee.
   C.   Exception: Permit fees shall not be applicable to work performed by or
under contract to the City.
(1979 Code § 12.10.050; Ord. 97-70, 9-23-1970)
7-5-6: CONTENTS OF PERMIT; DURATION, EXTENSION:
   A.   Contents: Each permit application shall state the starting date and
estimated completion date. If the permittee is a provider, the permit shall
adequately identify the licensed contractor performing the work under the
permit. Work shall be completed within five (5) days from the starting date or
as determined by the City Engineer. Such determination shall be based upon
factors reasonably related to the work to be performed under the permit. Such
factors may include, in addition to other factors related to the work to be
performed, the following:
      1.   The scope of work to be performed under the permit;
      2.   Maintaining the safe and effective flow of pedestrian and vehicular
traffic on the public way affected by the work;
      3.   Protecting the existing improvements to the public way impacted by
the work;
      4.   The season of the year during which the work is to be performed as
well as the current weather and its impact on public safety and the use of the
public way by the public;
      5.   Use of the public way for extraordinary events anticipated by the
City.
The City Engineer shall be notified by the permittee of commencement of the
work within twenty four (24) hours prior to commencing work. The permit shall
be valid for the time period specified in the permit.
   B.   Extension: If the work is not completed during such period, prior to
the expiration of the permit, the permittee may apply to the City Engineer for
an additional permit or an extension, which may be granted by the City Engineer
for good cause shown.
   C.   Length Of Extension: The length of the extension requested by the
permittee shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
(1979 Code § 12.10.060; Ord. 97-70, 9-23-1970)
7-5-7: TRANSFER; ASSIGNMENT:
Permits shall not be transferable or assignable, and work shall not be
performed under a permit in any place other than that specified in the permit.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent a permittee from subcontracting the work
to be performed under a permit; provided, however, that the holder of the
permit shall be and remain responsible for the performance of the work under
the permit, and for all bonding, insurance and other requirements of this
Chapter and under said permit.
(1979 Code § 12.10.070; Ord. 97-70, 9-23-1970)
7-5-8: COMPLIANCE; SITE PERMITTEE IDENTIFICATION:
   A.   The work performed in the public way shall conform to the requirements
of Chapter 6 of this Title, and the engineering regulations, design standards,
construction specifications and traffic-control regulations of the City, copies
of which shall be available from the City Engineer, kept on file in the office
of the City Recorder and be open to public inspection during office hours.
   B.   Signage: Where a job site is left unattended, before completion of the
work, signage with minimum two inch (2") high letters shall be attached to a
barricade or otherwise posted at the site, indicating the permittee's name, or
company name, telephone number, and after hours telephone number.
   C.   Minimum Interference; Barricades: All excavations shall be conducted in
a manner resulting in a minimum amount of interference or interruption of
street or pedestrian traffic. Inconvenience to residents and businesses
fronting on the public way shall be minimized. Suitable, adequate and
sufficient barricades and/or other structures will be available and used where
necessary to prevent accidents involving property or persons. Barricades must
be in place until all of the permittee's equipment is removed from the site and
the excavation has been backfilled and proper temporary gravel surface is in
place, except where backfilling and resurfacing is to be done by the City; in
which case the barricades, together with any necessary lights, flares or
torches, must remain in place until the backfill work is actually commenced by
the City. From sunset to sunrise, all barricades and excavations must be
clearly outlined by adequate signal lights, torches, etc. The Police Department
and Fire Department shall be notified at least twenty four (24) hours in
advance of any planned excavation requiring street closure or traffic detour.
(1979 Code § 12.10.080; Ord. 97-70, 9-23-1970)
7-5-9: OTHER HIGHWAY PERMITS:
   A.   City Permit Not Required; Exceptions: Holders of permits for work on
highways owned or under the jurisdiction of other government entities, but
located within the City limits, shall not be required to obtain permits from
the City under the provisions of this Chapter, unless the work extends beyond
the back side of the curb, or beyond any other designated jurisdictional
boundary. Any City permit shall not be construed to permit or allow work on a
County road on a State highway within the City without an applicable County or
State permit.
   B.   Authority Of City Engineer: The City Engineer, in his or her
discretion, shall have the right and authority to regulate work under permits
issued by other governmental entities with respect to hours and days of work,
and measures required to be taken by the permittee of said governmental entity
for the protection of traffic and safety of persons and property.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to
impose any duty, implied or express, on the City or its employees, officers,
agents or assigns, relative to the protection of traffic and safety of persons
or property, arising out of the issuance of any permit issued by government
entities other than the City, or arising out of any work performed on any
public way owned or within the jurisdiction of the City.
(1979 Code § 12.10.090; Ord. 97-70, 9-23-1970)
7-5-10: RELOCATION OF STRUCTURES IN PUBLIC WAYS:
   A.   Authority To Require: The City Engineer may direct any person owning or
maintaining facilities or structures in the public way to alter, modify or
relocate such facilities or structures as the City Engineer may require as set
forth herein. Sewers, pipes, drains, tunnels, conduits, pipe driveways, vaults,
trash receptacles and overhead and underground gas, electric, telephone,
telecommunication and communication facilities shall specifically be subject to
such directives. The person owning or maintaining the facilities or structures
shall, at their own cost and expense and upon reasonable written notice by the
City, promptly protect, or promptly alter or relocate such facilities or
structures, or part thereof, as directed by the City. In the event that such
person refuses or neglects to conform to the directive of the City, the City
shall have the right to break through, remove, alter or relocate such part of
the facilities or structures without liability to such person. Such person
shall pay to the City all costs incurred by the City in connection with such
work performed by the City, including also design, engineering, construction,
materials, insurance, court costs and attorneys fees.
   B.   Conditions: Any directive by the City Engineer shall be based upon one
of the following:
      1.   The facility or structure was installed, erected or is being
maintained contrary to law, or determined by the City Engineer to be
structurally unsound or defective;
      2.   The facility or structure constitutes a nuisance as defined under
State statute;
      3.   The permit under which the facility or structure was installed has
expired or has been revoked;
      4.   The public way is about to be repaired or improved and such
facilities or structures may pose a hindrance to construction; or
      5.   The grades or lines of the public way are to be altered or changed.
   C.   Exception; Vested Right: This obligation does not apply to facilities
or structures originally located on private property pursuant to a private
easement, which property was later incorporated into the public way, if that
prior private easement grants a superior vested right.
   D.   Failure To Comply; Penalty: Any person owning or maintaining facilities
or structures in the public way who fails to alter, modify or relocate such
facilities or structures upon notice to do so by the City Engineer shall be
guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. All costs of alteration, modification or
relocation shall be borne by the person owning or maintaining the facilities or
structures involved.
   E.   Authority Of City In Emergency: The City may, at any time, in case of
fire, disaster or other emergency, as determined by the City in its reasonable
discretion, cut or move any parts of the system and appurtenances on, over or
under the public way, in which event the City shall not be liable therefor to
any person. The City shall notify a person in writing prior to, if practicable,
but in any event as soon as possible and in no case later than the next
business day following any action taken under this subsection.
(1979 Code § 12.10.100; Ord. 97-70, 9-23-1970; amd. Ord. 97-75, 10-21-1997)
7-5-11: IMPACT OF EXCAVATION ON EXISTING IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Temporary Sidewalk, Curb: If any sidewalk or curb ramp is blocked by
excavation work, a temporary sidewalk or curb ramp shall be constructed or
provided. Said temporary improvement shall be safe for travel and convenient
for users, and consistent with City standards for such.
   B.   Temporary Gravel Surface: Where excavations are made in paved areas,
the surface shall be replaced with a temporary gravel surface until such time
as the permanent repairs are completed.
   C.   Disturbing Real Or Personal Property: At any time a permittee disturbs
the yard, residence or the real or personal property of a private property
owner or the City, such permittee shall ensure that such property is returned,
replaced and/or restored to a condition that is comparable to the condition
that existed prior to the commencement of the work.
   D.   Costs; Reimbursement: The costs associated with the disturbance and the
return, replacement and/or restoration shall be borne by the permittee.
Further, a permittee shall reimburse a property owner or the City, for any
actual damage caused by the permittee, its subcontractor, or its independent
contractor, in connection with the disturbance of such property. However,
nothing in this subsection shall require the permittee to pay a subscriber or
private property owner when that subscriber or private property owner requests
that the permittee remove, replace or relocate improvements associated with the
service provided by the permittee to the property owner and when the permittee
exercises due care in the performance of that service, or when the subscriber
or private property owner provided false information to the permittee on which
the permittee relied to its detriment.
   E.   Included Acts: Examples of types of acts specifically included in this
section are the following:
      1.   Removal of sod, lawn, shrubbery, flowers, trees, driveways, or
fence, to install, trench, repair, replace, remove or locate, equipment, cable
or other appurtenances of the permittee;
      2.   Installation or removal of equipment or other appurtenances of the
permittee's system within a private property owner's property or residence
which requires drilling, excavating, plastering, or the like on the part of the
permittee;
      3.   Temporarily relocating or moving a piece of personal property or a
fixture of a private property owner (such as a motor vehicle, fence, air
conditioning, heating unit, or the like) in order to perform some sort of
construction, maintenance or repair by the permittee; or
      4.   Permanently removing a permittee's equipment or other appurtenances
due to the revocation, termination or nonrenewal of the franchise (if
applicable).
   F.   Drainage Channels: Existing drainage channels, such as gutters or
ditches, shall be kept free of dirt or other debris so that natural flow will
not be interrupted. When it is necessary to block or otherwise interrupt flow
of the drainage channel, a method of rerouting the flow must be submitted for
approval by the city engineer prior to the blockage of the channel.
   G.   Requirements Extended To Subcontractors: The requirements imposed upon
the permittee extend to any subcontractor or independent contractor that the
permittee might employ to perform the tasks pursuant to the permit.
   H.   Exception; Permanent Structure In Public Way: The requirements of this
section shall not apply to the removal by a permittee, of a permanent structure
placed by a property owner in a public way, unless such property owner has
received prior written permission from the city granting the property owner the
right to install a permanent structure on a public way, and such written
permission has been recorded in the office of the county recorder.
(1979 Code § 12.10.110; amd. Ord. 97-70, 9-23-1970)
7-5-12: RESTORATION OF PUBLIC PROPERTY:
The permittee shall, at its own expense, complete work site restoration of the
surface of any public way to its original condition and replace any removed or
damaged pavement with the same type and depth of pavement as that which is
adjoining, including the gravel base material.
   A.   All restoration shall conform to the engineering regulations, design
standards and specifications promulgated by the city and shall be accomplished
within the time limits set forth in the permit, unless additional time is
granted in writing by the city engineer.
   B.   Work site restoration includes, but is not limited to:
      1.   A road patch that extends two feet (2') beyond the limits of any
excavation, including undermining, where the excavation is up to four feet (4')
in depth;
      2.   A road patch that extends three feet (3') beyond the limits of any
excavation, including undermining, where the excavation is more than four feet
(4') in depth;
      3.   A road patch encompassing all excavation and extending across the
entire width of the roadway, and complying with the requirements of subsection
C1 or C2 of this section, if multiple road cuts are made as part of the
permitted work; and
      4.   Additional pavement removal and extension of the road patch to the
limit of the location indicated if the edge of the patch would terminate within
two feet (2') of:
         a.   A painted stripe;
         b.   Lip of gutter;
         c.   A curb;
         d.   An existing pavement patch;
         e.   Another saw cut; or
         f.   Deteriorated asphalt.
   C.   If the public way is under a construction moratorium due to road
construction or reconstruction within the past five (5) years or application of
a seal coat within the past three (3) years, work site restoration also
includes:
      1.   A fifty foot (50') wide road patch on either side of the excavation
with the road patch extending across the entire width of the roadway; and
      2.   If the roadway is under a chip seal coat moratorium, the permittee
shall also reapply the seal coat over the patch.
   D.   When a road patch is required, the patch shall:
      1.   Match the thickness of the existing aggregate base; and
      2.   Match the thickness of the existing asphalt plus one inch (1"),
provided that the asphalt patch may not have a thickness of less than four
inches (4") or more than seven inches (7").
(Ord. 2015-34, 7-7-2015)
7-5-13: INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Before a permit is issued, the applicant shall furnish to the city
evidence that such applicant has a comprehensive general liability and property
damage policy that includes contractual liability coverage endorsed with the
following limits and provisions:
      1.   A minimum of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single
limit per occurrence for bodily injury, personal injury, and property damage
and not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) in the aggregate. The
general aggregate limit shall apply separately to the permit, or the general
aggregate limit shall be two (2) times the required occurrence limit. The
coverage shall be in the nature of broad form commercial general liability
coverage. The city attorney may increase or decrease minimum insurance limits,
depending on the potential liability of any project.
      2.   All policies shall include the city, its employees, officers,
officials, agents, volunteers and assigns, as insureds. Any reference to the
city shall include the city, its employees, officers, officials, agents,
volunteers and assigns.
      3.   The coverage shall be primary insurance as respects the City, its
employees, officers, officials, agents, volunteers, and assigns. Any insurance
or self-insurance maintained by the City, its employees, officers, officials,
agents, volunteers, and assigns shall be in excess of the permittee's insurance
and shall not contribute to or with it.
   B.   Any failure to comply with reporting provisions of the policy shall not
effect coverage provided to the City, its employees, officers, officials,
agents, volunteers, and assigns.
   C.   Coverage shall state that the permittee's insurance shall apply
separately to each insured against whom claim is made or suit is brought,
except with respect to the limits of the insurer's liability.
   D.   Underwriters shall have no right of recovery or subrogation against the
City, it being the intent of the parties that the insurance policy so affected
shall protect both parties and be primary coverage for any and all losses
covered by the described insurance.
   E.   The insurance companies issuing the policy or policies shall have no
recourse against the City for payment of any premiums due or for any
assessments under any form of any policy.
   F.   Each insurance policy shall be endorsed to state that the coverage
shall not be suspended, voided, canceled, or reduced in coverage or in limits,
except after thirty (30) days', prior written notice by certified mail, return
receipt requested sent to the City.
   G.   Each policy shall be endorsed to indemnify, save harmless and defend
the City and its officers and employees against any claim or loss, damage or
expense sustained on account of damages to persons or property occurring by
reason of permit work done by the permittee, his/her subcontractor or agent,
whether or not the work has been completed and whether or not the right of way
has been opened to public travel.
   H.   Each policy shall be endorsed to indemnify, hold harmless and defend
the City, and its officers and employees against any claim or loss, damage or
expense sustained by any person occurring by reason of doing any work pursuant
to the permit including, but not limited to falling objects or failure to
maintain proper barricades and/or lights as required from the time work begins
until the work is completed and right of way is opened for public use.
   I.   Insurance is to be placed with insurers with an AM Best rating of no
less than an A carrier, with a rating of A7+ or higher.
   J.   The permittee shall furnish the City with certificates of insurance and
original endorsements affecting coverage required by the permit. The
certificates and endorsements for each insurance policy are to be signed by a
person authorized by that insurer to bind coverage on its behalf. The City
expressly reserves the right to require complete, certified copies of all
required insurance policies at any time. Consequently, the permittee shall be
prepared to provide such copies prior to the issuance of the permit.
   K.   If any of the required policies are, or at any time become,
unsatisfactory to the City as to form or substance, or if a company issuing any
such policy is, or at any time becomes, unsatisfactory to the City, the
permittee shall promptly obtain a new policy, submit the same to the City for
approval, and thereafter submit verification of coverage as required by the
City. Upon failure to furnish, deliver and maintain such insurance as provided
herein, the City may declare the permit to be in default and pursue any and all
remedies the City may have at law or in equity, including those actions
outlined in this Chapter.
   L.   The Permittee shall include all subcontractors as insured under its
policies or shall furnish separate certificates and endorsements for each
subcontractor. All coverages for subcontractors shall be subject to all of the
requirements stated herein.
   M.   Any deductibles or self-insured retentions shall be declared to and
approved by the City. At the option of the City, either the insurer shall
reduce or eliminate such deductibles or self-insured retentions as respects the
City, its employees, officers, officials, agents, volunteers or assigns, or the
permittee shall procure a bond, in a form acceptable to the City, guaranteeing
payment of losses and related investigations, claim administration, and defense
expenses.
   N.   A provider may be relieved of the obligation of submitting certificates
of insurance if such company shall submit satisfactory evidence in advance
that:
      1.   It is insured in the amounts set forth in this Chapter, or has
complied with State requirements to become self-insured. Public utilities may
submit annually evidence of insurance coverage in lieu of individual
submissions for each permit; and
      2.   Said coverage provides to the City the same scope of coverage that
would otherwise be provided by a separate policy as required by this Chapter;
   O.   The insurance requirements imposed herein shall not be applicable to
excavation work performed by employees of the City. If the applicant is
performing the excavation work under contract with the City, the applicant may
be relieved of the insurance obligations imposed herein, in which case
insurance or other risk transfer issues shall be negotiated between the City
and the applicant by separate agreement.
(1979 Code § 12.10.130; Ord. 97-70, 9-23-1970)
7-5-14: BOND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Amount: Except as noted in this Chapter, each Applicant, before being
issued a permit, shall provide the City with an acceptable security in the
amount of twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) to guarantee faithful
performance of the work authorized by a permit granted pursuant to this
Chapter. The amount of the security required may be increased or decreased at
the discretion of the City Engineer whenever it appears that the amount and
cost of the work to be performed, and not satisfactorily completed, may vary
from the amount of security otherwise required under this Chapter. The form of
the security and the entity issuing the security shall be subject to the
approval of the City Attorney.
   B.   Conditions: The security required by this Section shall be conditioned
as follows:
      1.   That the permittee shall fully comply with the requirements of the
City ordinances and regulations, specifications and standards promulgated by
the City relative to work in the public way, and respond to the City in damages
for failure to conform therewith;
      2.   That after work is commenced, the permittee shall proceed with
diligence and expedition and shall promptly complete such work and restore the
public way to construction specifications, so as not to obstruct the public
place or travel thereon more than is reasonably necessary;
      3.   That the permittee shall guarantee the materials and workmanship for
a period of two (2) years from completion of such work, with reasonable wear
and tear excepted; and
      4.   That unless authorized by the City Engineer on the permit, all
paving, resurfacing or replacement of street facilities on major or collector
streets shall be done in conformance with the regulations contained herein
within three (3) calendar days, and within seven (7) calendar days from the
time the excavation commences on all other streets, except as provided for
during excavation in winter or during weather conditions which do not allow
paving according to engineering regulations. In winter, a temporary patch must
be provided. In all excavations, restoration or pavement surfaces shall be made
immediately after backfilling is completed or concrete is cured. If work is
expected to exceed the above duration, the permittee shall submit a detailed
construction schedule for approval. The schedule will address means and methods
to minimize traffic disruption and complete the construction as soon as
reasonably possible.
   C.   City Excavations: The security requirement imposed herein shall not be
required for work performed by City employees. A person performing work under
contract with the City may be relieved of the security requirement imposed
herein, in which case the security requirement shall be negotiated between the
City and the applicant by separate agreement.
(1979 Code § 12.10.140; Ord. 97-70, 9-23-1970; amd. Ord. 97-75, 10-21-1997)
7-5-15: HOLD HARMLESS AGREEMENT; LIMITATIONS ON CITY LIABILITY:
   A.   The permittee agrees to save the City, its officers, employees and
agents harmless from any and all costs, damages and liabilities which may
accrue or be claimed to accrue by reason of any work performed under the
permit. The issuance and acceptance of any permit under this Chapter shall
constitute such an agreement by the permittee to this Section.
   B.   This Chapter shall neither be construed as imposing upon the City, its
officers, employees and agents, any liability or responsibility for damages to
any person injured by or by reason of the performance of any work within the
public way, or under a permit issued pursuant to this chapter; nor shall the
city, its officers, officials, employees, agents, volunteers or assigns thereof
be deemed to have assumed any such liability or responsibility by reason of
inspection authorized hereunder, the issuance of any permit, or the approval of
any work.
(1979 Code § 12.10.150; amd. Ord. 97-70, 9-23-1970)
7-5-16: WORK WITHOUT PERMIT; PENALTY:
   A.   Stop Order: A stop order may be issued by the city engineer, or the
city engineer's designee, directed to any person doing or causing any work to
be done in the public way without a permit, which shall take effect
immediately.
      1.   The abutting property owner or other person who authorized the work,
as well as the contractor or person performing the work, shall be responsible
for causing the unpermitted work to be done.
      2.   The stop work order, or subsequent written notice, may, in addition
to any other requirement, direct that equipment or materials associated with
the unpermitted work be removed from the site until any required permit is
obtained. Such removal shall be completed immediately or within such additional
time as the order or notice may allow.
      3.   The city engineer may cause the equipment or materials described in
subsection A2 of this section to be impounded if the property owner or
contractor fails to complete the removal within the time allowed. Before the
equipment or materials are released, all costs of impounding and storage shall
be paid by the person authorizing or performing the unpermitted work.
   B.   Fee: Any person authorizing or found to be doing work in the public way
without having obtained a permit, as provided in this chapter, shall be
required to pay a permit fee equal to two (2) times the normal permit fee. For
replacement work, where a fee is not normally charged, the normal permit fee
for new construction shall apply.
   C.   Permit: The person authorizing or performing work without a permit
shall, at the person's own expense, obtain a permit under this chapter and
restore the surface of any public way to its original condition, in the manner
provided in section
7-5-12 of this chapter, and shall repair any above or below ground utility or
other infrastructure that may have been damaged.
   D.   Standards: All work site restoration and other work shall conform to
the engineering standards, design regulations and specifications promulgated by
the city and shall be accomplished within the time limits set forth in the
permit or other written notice, unless additional time is granted in writing by
the city engineer.
   E.   Performance By City: If the person authorizing or performing work
without a permit fails to obtain a permit or to commence and cause the required
work to be performed with due diligence within a reasonable time following the
giving of notice, as determined by the city engineer (taking into consideration
the exigencies of the situation, the nature of the work, and the requirements
of public safety and for the protection of persons and property), the city may,
at the discretion of the city engineer, perform the work with city forces or
contract forces or both, and suit may be commenced by the city attorney against
the person authorizing or performing the unpermitted work and such other
persons as may be liable, to recover the entire amount due to the city,
including attorney fees, on account thereof. Joint and several liability shall
attach to a person authorizing unpermitted work, a person performing the work
and any other responsible party.
(Ord. 2015-33, 7-7-2015)
7-5-17: FAILURE TO COMPLY; DEFAULT IN PERFORMANCE:
   A.   Revocation, Suspension, Stop Order: Any permit may be revoked or
suspended and a stop order issued by the city engineer, after notice to the
permittee for:
      1.   Violation of any condition of the permit, the bond, or of any
provision of this chapter;
      2.   Violation of any provision of any other ordinance of the city or law
relating to the work; or
      3.   Existence of any condition or the doing of any act which does
constitute, may constitute, or cause a condition endangering life or property.
   B.   Immediate Effect: A suspension or revocation by the city engineer, and
a stop order, shall take effect immediately upon entry thereof by the city
engineer and notice to the person performing the work in the public way. Notice
to the person performing the work shall be accomplished when the city engineer
has posted a stop work order at the location of the work and written notice has
been mailed, return receipt requested, to the address indicated by the
permittee on the permit.
   C.   Notice Of Default: Whenever the city engineer finds that a default has
occurred in the performance of any term or condition of the permit, written
notice thereof may be given to the principal and to the surety or other party
providing the security, if applicable. Such notice shall state the work to be
done, the estimated cost thereof, and the period of time deemed by the city
engineer to be reasonably necessary for the completion of the work.
   D.   Performance By City: In the event that the surety (or principal),
within a reasonable time following the giving of such notice (taking into
consideration the exigencies of the situation, the nature of the work, the
requirements of public safety and for the protection of persons and property),
fails either to commence and cause the required work to be performed with due
diligence, or to indemnify the city for the cost of doing the work, as set
forth in the notice, the city may perform the work, at the discretion of the
city engineer, with city forces or contract forces or both, and suit may be
commenced by the city attorney against the contractor and the company providing
the security and such other persons as may be liable, to recover the entire
amount due to the city, including attorney fees, on account thereof. In the
event that cash has been deposited, the cost of performing the work may be
charged against the amount deposited, and suit brought for the balance due, if
any.
(1979 Code § 12.10.170; amd. Ord. 97-70, 9-23-1970; Ord. 97-75, 10-21-1975)
7-5-18: FAILURE TO CONFORM TO DESIGN STANDARDS; PENALTY:
For failure to conform to the design standards and regulations, the city
engineer may:
   A.   Suspend or revoke the permit;
   B.   Issue a stop order;
   C.   Order removal and replacement of faulty work;
   D.   Require an extended warranty period; and/or
   E.   Negotiate a cash settlement to be applied toward future maintenance
costs.
(1979 Code § 12.10.180; amd. Ord. 97-70, 9-23-1970)
7-5-19: APPEAL FOR SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, STOP ORDER:
Any suspension, revocation or stop order by the city engineer may be appealed
by the permittee to the mayor, or the mayor's designee, by filing a written
notice of appeal within ten (10) days of the action of the city engineer. The
mayor, or the mayor's designee, shall hear such appeal, if written request
therefor be timely filed, as soon as practicable, and render his/her decision
within a reasonable time following filing of notice of appeal.
(1979 Code § 12.10.190; amd. Ord. 97-70, 9-23-1970)
7-5-20: TAMPERING WITH TRAFFIC BARRICADES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously or wantonly or without
authorization and legal cause, extinguish, remove or diminish any light
illuminating any barricade or excavation, or to tear down, remove or in any
manner alter any rail, fence or barricade protecting any excavation or other
construction site.
(1979 Code § 12.10.200; amd. Ord. 97-70, 9-23-1970)
7-5-21: CONFLICT WITH GOVERNING PROVISIONS:
Should there be a conflict between the provisions of this chapter and the
provisions of any other ordinance, agreement, franchise, or other document
governing the excavation of a public way, the more restrictive provisions of
the aforesaid documents shall apply.
(1979 Code § 12.10.210; amd. Ord. 97-70, 9-23-1970)
CHAPTER 6
ENGINEERING STANDARDS FOR PUBLIC WAY IMPROVEMENTS AND EXCAVATIONS
SECTION:
7-6-1: Engineering Regulations, Design Standards, Construction Specifications
And Traffic Control Regulations, And Variances
7-6-1: ENGINEERING REGULATIONS, DESIGN STANDARDS, CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS
AND TRAFFIC CONTROL REGULATIONS, AND VARIANCES:
   A.   The city engineer is authorized to adopt regulations, design standards,
construction specifications, and traffic control regulations for all work
performed in the "public way", as defined under section
7-5-1 of this title. Such regulations, standards and specifications may also
include reasonable inspection and testing procedures to ensure compliance with
such specifications. Such regulations shall be effective upon filing in the
city recorder's office.
   B.   All work performed in the public way shall conform to the requirements
of the engineering regulations, design standards, construction specifications
and traffic control regulations, copies of which shall be available from the
city engineer and kept on file in the office of the city recorder and shall be
open to public inspection during office hours.
   C.   When there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the
provisions of this title or of adopted engineering regulations, the city
engineer may grant a variance to a standard adopted in this title or in the
adopted engineering regulations and the permit file shall be updated to include
the variance and the reason for the variance.
      1.   A variance may be granted only if the permittee demonstrates to the
satisfaction of the city engineer, or the city engineer's designee, all of the
following criteria:
         a.   The granting of such variance complies with the intent and
purpose of this title or the adopted engineering regulations and will not be
materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious or create adverse
impacts to adjoining property or other property and improvements in the
vicinity;
         b.   The proposed method or procedure produces a compensating or
comparable result which is in the public interest; and
         c.   The proposed method or procedure, based upon sound engineering
judgment, meets the objectives of safety, function and maintainability as would
be achieved under the regulations of this title or the adopted engineering
regulations.
      2.   Any proposed variance from road standards which does not comply with
the current fire code, as adopted by title 16, chapter 2 of this code, or its
successor provisions, may not be granted without the concurrence of the fire
marshal.
      3.   Maintenance considerations shall be included in the design for a
variance, and future costs shall not be excessive or shall be borne and
reliably performed by the permittee or requesting property owner.
      4.   A variance granted under this section shall not constitute a grant
of special privilege inconsistent with the limitation upon uses of, or
standards associated with, other properties in the vicinity and in the zone in
which the work is being done.
      5.   If a variance includes deferring any work associated with property
outside of the public way or imposing maintenance obligations on the adjoining
property, a deferral or other agreement shall be executed with the property
owner and recorded against the property.
      6.   A permittee may appeal a decision allowing or denying a variance to
the public services director within ten (10) days after the permittee is
notified of the decision.
(Ord. 2015-34, 7-7-2015)
CHAPTER 7
REPAIR OR REPLACEMENT OF PUBLIC WAY IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
7-7-1: Definitions
7-7-2: Defective Concrete; Repair Options
7-7-3: Concrete Work; Standards And Specifications
7-7-4: Approval And Permits Required
7-7-5: Suspension Of Work For Noncompliance
7-7-6: Compliance With Street Surface Specifications Required
7-7-7: Sidewalk Replacement Program
7-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
DEFECTIVE CONCRETE: Any sidewalk, curb, gutter, driveway approach or
appurtenances which requires extraordinary repairs.
EXTRAORDINARY REPAIRS: When the lineal footage of necessary repairs or
replacement to any sidewalk, curb, gutter, or paving exceeds six percent (6%)
of the total lineal footage in front of, or alongside, a piece of property, or
when a driveway approach to an establishment ordinarily used by the general
public requires repairs or replacement to eliminate a condition that is
hazardous to the public, as determined by the Director of Public Works, or when
a gutter overhaul requires repairs or replacement to prevent interference with
the normal flow of water in the gutter.
ORDINARY REPAIRS: When the lineal footage of necessary repairs or replacement
to any sidewalk, curb, gutter, or paving do not exceed six percent (6%) of the
total lineal footage in front of, or alongside, a piece of property.
REPAVING OR REBUILDING: Extraordinary repairs to sidewalks, curbs, gutters and
paving of a scope and magnitude involving major work, as determined by the
Director of Public Works.
UNITS: Every length of a lineal measure, as shown by assessment rolls, and of
the breadth of original construction of any sidewalk, curb, gutter, paving or
macadamizing, lying and being in front of any piece of property and within
lines drawn through the center and sides, of the street, and the side lines of
a piece of property extended to the center of the street and at a ninety
degrees (90°) thereto. Each unit shall be made up and consist of "subunits".
For sidewalks, the "subunit" of a "unit" shall be one hundred fifty (150)
square feet; for curbs and gutters, the "subunit" shall be twenty five (25)
lineal feet; and for street paving or macadamizing, the "subunit" contained in
any "unit" shall be considered as and called a "subunit".
(1979 Code § 12.20.010; amd. Ord. 97-83, 10-28-1997)
7-7-2: DEFECTIVE CONCRETE; REPAIR OPTIONS:
The replacement of any defective concrete may be made and the costs paid as
follows:
   A.   Owner Replacement: The owner of adjacent property may employ a
contractor to make the required replacement. Such replacement must be done
according to City specifications, to the satisfaction and approval of the City
Engineer, only after obtaining the required permit. Replacement made under this
subsection shall be at the sole cost and expense of the owner. Election by the
owner to proceed under this subsection shall be entirely voluntary on the part
of the owner.
   B.   Sidewalk/Curb And Gutter Replacement Program: If the adjacent property
qualifies and monies are available, the adjacent property owner may agree in
writing, upon forms approved by the City Attorney, to pay in advance fifty
percent (50%) of the cost for such sidewalk or curb and gutter replacement
under the sidewalk/curb and gutter replacement program, as provided in section
7-7-7 of this chapter.
   C.   New Development: If the determination is made as part of site plan
review for new development under the zoning ordinances of the city that the
sidewalk, curb, gutter, and drive approaches require extraordinary repairs, the
owner or developer shall replace such defective concrete, at the owner's or
developer's cost, as a condition of such development approval.
   D.   Municipal Improvement District: The city may create a municipal
improvement district for the purpose of making the required replacement after
such district is created, and levies assessed on the adjacent property in
accordance with chapter 8 of this title. The assessment of the owner's portion
of the total replacement cost shall be equal to the benefit resulting to the
adjacent property in accordance with chapter 8 of this title, unless modified
by the city council as provided therein. Such assessment may be paid by the
owner of the property over an extended period of time as determined in the
resolution creating the district and the subsequent assessment ordinance.
   E.   Repair Or Replacement By City:
      1.   Ordinary Repairs: The public works department may make ordinary
repairs, or extraordinary repairs not requiring repaving or rebuilding,
utilizing funds provided in the department's operating budgets.
      2.   Repaving Or Rebuilding: The public works department may make
extraordinary repairs requiring repaving or rebuilding by municipal improvement
districts established for that purpose, as provided in chapter 8 of this title
or as approved in the capital improvement plan as part of the city's annual
budget.
(1979 Code § 12.20.020; amd. Ord. 97-83, 10-28-1997)
7-7-3: CONCRETE WORK; STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
All concrete work performed in the public way shall comply with the standards
and specifications for concrete work provided in the engineering standards
adopted pursuant to chapter 6 of this title.
(1979 Code § 12.20.030; amd. Ord. 97-83, 10-28-1997)
7-7-4: APPROVAL AND PERMITS REQUIRED:
Cement work of any kind or character on the streets, sidewalks, curbs, or
gutters of the city shall be accomplished only by a licensed contractor, except
as otherwise allowed under section
7-7-7 of this chapter. The contractor, or other authorized person, shall not
begin such work until it has first been approved and a permit issued by the
city engineer in accordance with chapter 5 of this title.
(1979 Code § 12.20.040; amd. Ord. 97-83, 10-28-1997; Ord. 2002-19, 4-2-2002,
eff. 4-14-2002)
7-7-5: SUSPENSION OF WORK FOR NONCOMPLIANCE:
The public works director, through the office of the city engineer, may order
any work to be suspended at any time when, in his judgment, the contractor
doing such work is not complying with the ordinances of the city, and may hold
such work in abeyance until such contractor complies with the ordinances of the
city regarding such work; and any contractor who neglects, refuses or fails to
suspend any work, or fails to comply with the rules and requirements governing
such work, shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor and subject to penalty as
provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code.
(1979 Code § 12.20.050; amd. Ord. 97-83, 10-28-1997; 1999 Code)
7-7-6: COMPLIANCE WITH STREET SURFACE SPECIFICATIONS REQUIRED:
All materials used for surfacing streets in the city shall meet the standards
and specifications of the city engineer as set forth in chapter 6 of this
title.
(1979 Code § 12.20.060; amd. Ord. 97-83, 10-28-1997)
7-7-7: SIDEWALK REPLACEMENT PROGRAM:
To the extent that the city council may provide funding for the "sidewalk/curb
and gutter replacement program", as established in the city's annual budget,
the following guidelines shall apply to expenditures under such program:
   A.   Use Of Expenditures: Expenditures from this fund shall be used for
sidewalk and/or curb and gutter replacement only.
   B.   Property Types: Expenditures from this fund shall be used only for the
following types of properties:
      1.   Single-family residential properties, regardless of the zoning of
the property; and
      2.   Properties within a residential zone.
   C.   Development Approvals Exempted: Expenditures from this fund shall not
be used for any property which has been required to replace or repair sidewalks
and/or curbs and gutters as a condition of any development approval under the
zoning ordinances of the city.
   D.   Replacement Determined By Engineering Division: Expenditures from this
fund shall only be used for sidewalk and/or curb and gutter which needs to be
replaced as determined by the engineering division.
   E.   First Come, First Serve: The program will be administered on a first
come, first serve basis, based upon the date of receipt of applications.
   F.   Payment By Property Owners: Property owners, qualifying for this
program, shall be required to pay fifty percent (50%) of the cost of the
sidewalk and/or curb and gutter replacement work adjacent to their property,
and shall deposit fifty percent (50%) of the estimated cost to complete the
work as determined by the city engineer. The deposit shall be made by the
deadline established by the city engineer and before work may begin. The
property owner shall pay for the owner's share of any additional costs after
the work has been completed and actual costs are known. If the actual costs
were less than the city engineer's estimate, the property owner will receive a
refund of the amount by which the actual costs exceeded the estimate.
   G.   Contractor Hired By City: Except as provided in subsection H of this
section, all work funded under this program shall be completed by a contractor
hired by the city.
(1979 Code § 12.20.070; amd. Ord. 97-83, 10-28-1997; Ord. 2002-19, 4-2-2002,
eff. 4-14-2002)
   H.   Property Owner Performance Of Work: The owners of a qualifying
residential property may repair or replace sidewalks themselves, without the
necessity of hiring a licensed contractor, under the following conditions:
      1.   The owner shall obtain a no fee excavation permit for work in the
public right of way.
      2.   The owner shall ensure that the work meets all city standards and
specifications.
      3.   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection F of this section, the
city will reimburse the owner for the actual costs of material, which total
reimbursement amount shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of what would have
been the city's cost (per square foot) for performing the work under the
current contract for installation of sidewalk. The reimbursable amount shall
only be paid upon the city engineer's final inspection and approval of the work
and the owner's submission of receipts and proof of payment for the costs of
materials.
      4.   The owner shall be responsible for all labor and cleanup costs.
      5.   If the work does not comply with all city standards and
specifications, the owner shall be responsible for hiring a licensed contractor
to complete the work. If the work is not so completed to the satisfaction of
the city engineer, the city may complete the work and bill the property owner
for the costs that exceed the applicable amount subject to reimbursement. In no
event shall the city make reimbursements for material costs associated with
doing the work more than once.
      6.   An agreement between the owner and the city shall be in place before
work commences to ensure compliance with the above requirements and the
associated responsibilities.
(Ord. 2002-19, 4-2-2002, eff. 4-14-2002)
CHAPTER 8
SPECIAL IMPROVEMENT TAXES AND ASSESSMENTS
SECTION:
7-8-1: Establishment Of Improvement Districts
7-8-2: Levy Of Assessments
7-8-3: Interim Warrant Issuance
7-8-4: Engineer's Certificate
7-8-5: Tax Levy Ordinance; Transmittal To City Treasurer
7-8-6: Tax Levy
7-8-7: Validity Of Other Assessments Not Impaired
7-8-8: Sale Of Property For More Than One Delinquency
7-8-9: Delinquencies; Administrative Costs
7-8-10: Sale Of Property
7-8-11: Redemption
7-8-12: Sale; Conveyance To Purchaser
7-8-13: Tax Deed Record
7-8-14: Recorder's Fees
7-8-15: Sale Of Conveyed Property
7-8-16: Special Improvement Guaranty Fund
7-8-17: Settlement Of Tax Delinquencies; Alternatives
7-8-18: Necessity Of Objection
7-8-19: Utility Connections; Notice
7-8-20: Gas Connections; Requirements Of Facility Operator
7-8-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS:
   A.   Authority: The City may, from time to time, proceed to make
improvements within areas of the City, make assessments therefor, and issue
interim warrants and bonds, pursuant to the Utah Municipal Improvement District
Act, Utah Code Annotated section 17A-3-301 et seq., as amended, or its
successor, the Utah Underground Conversion of Utilities Law, Utah Code
Annotated section 54-8-1 et seq., as amended, or its successor, and other
appropriate provisions of State or local law.
   B.   Assessments According To Benefit: Unless modified or augmented by the
City Council, based on the provisions of subsection C of this Section or other
unique circumstances applicable to any proposed improvement or district, the
benefit to be derived by adjacent property for the replacement or installation
of improvements in the public way shall be as follows:
      1.   Fifty percent (50%) of the total replacement or installation cost of
sidewalks, or curbs or gutters exclusive of driveway approaches, in the case of
property used as a single-family residences or duplexes;
      2.   Seventy five percent (75%) of the total replacement cost of driveway
approaches in the case of property used as a single- family residence or
duplexes;
      3.   One hundred percent (100%) of the total replacement cost of
sidewalks, curbs, gutters, or driveway approaches, in the case of property used
as multiple-dwelling units, an apartment house, a business, or for any purpose
other than as a single-family residence or duplex;
      4.   Fifty percent (50%) of the total replacement cost for the repair or
replacement of existing local and minor collector streets;
      5.   One hundred percent (100%) of the total replacement cost of parkway
landscaping; and
      6.   One hundred percent (100%) of new improvements, except as provided
under subsection B1 of this Section.
   C.   Decrease In Percentage: Assessments shall be equal and uniform
according to the benefits received; however, the City Council may decrease the
percentage of the costs to be paid by adjacent property owners within any
district, thereby increasing the City contribution, if determined to be
necessary to achieve:
      1.   Significant and substantial economic development benefits for the
City as a whole;
      2.   Neighborhood revitalization or redevelopment objectives in target
neighborhoods designated under the housing programs of the Ogden City
Redevelopment Agency which will contribute to the overall redevelopment of the
City;
      3.   Other significant and substantial benefits provided to the public,
which would not otherwise be achieved.
(1979 Code § 12.24.010; amd. Ord. 97-83, 10-28-1997)
7-8-2: LEVY OF ASSESSMENTS:
   A.   Depth Limit: To defray the cost and expenses of such improvements, or
any of them, the City Council may proceed, after acquiring jurisdiction as
provided by law, to levy by ordinance special taxes and assessments upon the
blocks, lots or parts thereof and pieces of ground fronting or abutting upon or
adjacent to the street or alley thus in whole or in part opened, widened or
improved, or which may be affected or specially benefitted by any such
improvements, either to the full depth of such lots or to such depth as may be
determined by the City Council; provided, that where any lot or piece of ground
is of greater depth than three hundred thirty feet (330') back from the street
such assessment shall not be levied upon such lots, or pieces of ground to a
depth exceeding three hundred thirty feet (330'), unless the City Council
specifically determines otherwise in the resolution creating the district.
(1979 Code § 12.24.020; amd. Ord. 97-83, 10-28-1997)
   B.   Corner Lot Allowance: In determining the apportionment of the levy for
any such improvement, the City Council shall make allowances for the corner
lots, as hereinafter defined, from full taxation per front foot, upon the
following basis:
      1.   There shall be deducted from the total frontage in such district the
allowances provided for in this subsection all corner lots thereunto entitled
in such district, together with such other deductions or allowances as may be
provided by ordinance. The total frontage in such district for the purpose of
such tax shall be the remainder after making all such deductions and
allowances, and the levy or levies per front foot in the various units in such
district determined by dividing the cost of such improvements in the various
units in such improvement district by the total frontage subject to such tax as
so ascertained in such respective units.
      2.   Each such corner lot shall be assessed by deducting from its
frontage the amount of any such allowance made for such corner lot, and then
assessing the whole of such corner lot for a tax based on the remaining
frontage at the unit levy per front foot.
      3.   The term "corner lot", as used in this subsection, means a lot as
platted on the County records, or a corner tract embracing the whole or part of
one or more lots held under common ownership and used as one parcel for a
common purpose, which has two (2) sides fronting on intersecting streets, with
the interior angle made by such sides one hundred twenty degrees (120°) or less
at point of intersection of tangents. No such lot shall be deemed a corner lot
where its front is concave.
      4.   Allowance for such corner lots shall be made as follows: where both
frontages of any lot are embraced in one improvement, the whole of such
allowance shall be given. Where only one side is embraced, and an improvement
of like nature has not been constructed on or along the street on which the
street frontage not abutting on the proposed improvement abuts, then if the
frontages are equal, or the longer frontage abuts on the proposed improvement,
the whole of such allowance, but not in excess of the actual frontage abutting
frontage, shall be given, and no allowance shall be allowed thereafter to such
lot in connection with a like improvement abutting on the other street
frontage. But if the shorter of such frontages abuts on such improvement, then
no allowance shall be given such corner lot in such improvement, and the whole
of such allowance, but not exceeding actual abutting frontage, shall be given
when an improvement of like nature is constructed abutting on the other street
frontage of such lot. Where a street frontage of any such lot abuts on any
improvement made prior to June 2, 1931, and an improvement of like character is
thereafter made along the other street frontage of such lot, and no corner lot
allowance or exemption has theretofore been given for such corner lot in
construction of such prior improvement, the whole of such allowance, but not
exceeding the actual abutting frontage, shall be given in connection with such
subsequent improvement; but if any such allowance or any exemption was given in
connection with such former improvement or exemption as was given in connection
with such former improvement; but such allowance shall not exceed the total
frontage abutting on such later improvement.
      5.   If the street upon which the shorter abutting frontage of a corner
lot abuts has been or hereafter is first improved, and no corner lot allowance
has been granted the owner of such lot in connection therewith, and between the
levy of assessment therefor and the making of a subsequent like improvement
upon the street abutting upon the longer frontage of said lot becomes divided
in ownership, so that two or more persons own frontage in such corner lot which
abuts upon the street last to be improved, then and in such case such corner
lot allowance shall be prorated over the whole of the frontage of such corner
lot abutting on such street last to be improved to a depth which such lots was
assessed for the tax levied in connection with such first improvement.
      6.   Unless otherwise provided in the notice of intention to make any
such improvements shall be eighty feet (80'), and in connection with paving
improvements shall be sixty feet (60'). In improvement districts where
improvements of a different character are provided for, such corner lot
allowances may be made as are provided for specifically in the notice of
intention to make such improvements. Wherever assessments are made on a basis
other than frontage, the City Council in the notice of intention may make such
corner lot allowances and prescribe the conditions on which the same shall be
given as may be deemed proper by the City Council.
(1979 Code § 12.24.030; amd. Ord. 97-83, 10-28-1997)
   C.   Surplus Frontage Allowance: In computing total frontage in any
improvement district for the purpose of determining the unit levy per front
foot, all frontage abutting on such improvement and used for right of way
purposes public in character shall be deducted. Wherever it appears that there
is in any block or tract in any such district a surplus of land actually
present over the land shown to be therein by the official surveys and plats as
recorded in such office of the County recorder, the ownership of such surplus
frontage cannot be definitely ascertained, the amount as to which ownership is
not ascertained shall be deducted in determining total assessable frontage in
such district.
(1979 Code § 12.24.040; amd. Ord. 97-83, 10-28-1997)
7-8-3: INTERIM WARRANT ISSUANCE:
The City Treasurer, with the written approval of the Mayor, may from time to
time, as the work proceeds in any improvement pursuant to contract duly entered
into, issue to the contractor interim warrants against the improvement district
for not to exceed ninety percent (90%) in value of the work theretofore done,
as evidenced by the estimates of the City Engineer. Such warrants shall bear
interest at the rate or rates fixed by the City Council. Said interim warrants
and the interest thereon shall be taken up and paid by the special improvement
bonds issued upon the levy of assessment after completion of the work.
(1979 Code § 12.24.050; amd. Ord. 80-25, 5-15-1980; Ord. 97-83, 5-15-1980)
7-8-4: ENGINEER'S CERTIFICATE:
   A.   File With Finance Director, City Recorder: Whenever the City Engineer
issues a certificate covering a portion or all of the work completed in any
improvement district, he or she shall transmit a copy of said certificate,
together with a plat of the property affronted and an accurate list of the
property affected, to the City Treasurer and the City Recorder. The City
Recorder shall thereupon notify the Board of Equalization and review that the
assessment list has been completed and a copy thereof filed in his office.
(1979 Code § 12.24.060; amd. Ord. 80-25, 5-15-1980; Ord. 97-83, 10-28-1997)
   B.   File With City Council: Whenever the City Engineer issues a certificate
covering a portion or all of the work completed in any improvement district, he
or she shall file a copy of the same with the City Council, and the City
Council shall thereupon sit as a Board of Equalization and review, which Board
shall, upon the completion of the lists of the property within the district,
give public notice of the completion of such lists, as prescribed by subsection
7-8-6A of this Chapter.
(1979 Code § 12.24.070; amd. Ord. 80-25, 5-15-1980; Ord. 97-83, 10-28-1997)
7-8-5: TAX LEVY ORDINANCE; TRANSMITTAL TO CITY TREASURER:
The City Recorder, immediately after the ordinance levying a special tax shall
become effective, shall transmit a certified copy thereof to the City
Treasurer.
(1979 Code § 12.24.080; amd. Ord. 80-25, 5-15-1980; Ord. 97-83, 10-28-1997)
7-8-6: TAX LEVY:
   A.   Notice Of Delinquent Date; Publication: Immediately upon receipt by the
City Treasurer of the certified copy of the ordinance levying a special tax or
assessment, he shall give at least five (5) days' notice in a newspaper having
general circulation in the City of the time when such assessment will become
delinquent. Said notice shall further state the time within which one or more
of the installments of such tax in the order payable or the whole tax may be
paid without interest.
(1979 Code § 12.24.090; amd. Ord. 80-25, 5-15-1980; Ord. 97-83, 10-28-1997)
   B.   Notice Of Delinquent Date; Mailing: As soon as possible after the first
publication of the notice specified in subsection A of this Section, and not
more than five (5) days after the date of last publication of such notice, the
City Treasurer shall cause a copy of said notice to be deposited in the mail,
postage paid and addressed to the several owners of the property affected by
the levy as they appear upon the assessment lists and rolls of such special
improvement district, at their last known post office address, using for such
purpose the names and addresses appearing on the last compiled real property
assessment rolls of the County. The City Treasurer shall enclose, with the
notice so mailed, a statement of the amount of the tax levied against each
piece or parcel of land owned by such owner. Such statement shall specify the
total amount of the tax levied, the rate of interest to be charged thereon, and
the date from which interest will run and the due date and amount of each
annual installment thereon.
(1979 Code § 12.24.100; amd. Ord. 80-25, 5-15-1980; Ord. 97-83, 10-28-1997)
   C.   Delinquent List; Notice Of Sale; Form: Ten (10) days after the date of
delinquency of the last payment as fixed in the levy and notice of tax, or
thereafter, the City Treasurer shall proceed to make up a list of all property
upon which special taxes remain due and unpaid and, upon completion, cause the
same to be published once in some newspaper having general circulation in the
City. Said delinquent list shall contain a description of the property
delinquent, according to lots, blocks or parcels, together with the owner's
name or names, if known, and, if not known, in lieu thereof, the words "Unknown
Owner", with the amount of taxes due on each separate parcel, exclusive of
costs, and shall be accompanied by a notice of sale substantially in the
following form:
       NOTICE OF SALE FOR SPECIAL TAXES
Notice is hereby given that special taxes for (here insert briefly the purpose
of the tax) are due and unpaid in the amounts and upon the lands set forth and
described in the delinquent list hereto attached, and unless said taxes,
including interest, together with the cost of publication, are paid on or
before the              day of                      (here fix a day at least
ten days after the date of said publication), the real property upon which such
taxes are a lien will be on said day be sold to the highest bidder for said
taxes, interest, and administrative costs, at the east front door of the
Municipal building, 2550 Washington Boulevard, Ogden City, Utah, beginning at
the hour of twelve o'clock (12:00) noon of said day and continuing until all of
said property shall have been sold. A bid for less than the total amount of
taxes, interest, and administrative costs which are a charge upon the real
estate will not be accepted.
(1979 Code § 12.24.110; amd. Ord. 80-25, 5-15-1980; Ord. 97-83, 10-28-1997)
7-8-7: VALIDITY OF OTHER ASSESSMENTS NOT IMPAIRED:
When any such property ordered sold is subject to the lien of more than one
such special assessment tax, whether the same is sold under one notice of sale
or is sold for each of such delinquent assessments at different sales, the same
shall be sold subject to all such other liens whether so stated in the offer of
sale or otherwise, and a sale for any one or more assessments shall not
discharge the liens of any other special assessments, whether delinquent or
nondelinquent, and whether sale has been had upon the same or thereafter is had
upon the same, but each assessment shall continue a lien upon said lands until
paid and discharged. Upon issuance of a valid tax deed to the City on property
on which tax sale certificates have issued to the City only, all such liens
shall be merged, and the property thereafter may be sold by the City free of
all such liens.
(1979 Code § 12.24.120; amd. Ord. 80-25, 5-15-1980; Ord. 97-83, 10-28-1997)
7-8-8: SALE OF PROPERTY FOR MORE THAN ONE DELINQUENCY:
At any sale where property is published for sale for more than one delinquent
special assessment tax, the City Treasurer shall offer the property separately
for each delinquent special assessment tax, and redemption may be made
separately from each tax sale, but if the same person becomes the purchaser on
all such items for which such property is sold at one sale, only one
certificate need be issued, and in case of redemption therefrom, when
redemption covers less than the whole of the sale so covered by one
certificate, the certificate shall be one of partial redemption only and shall
recite that the rights under such sale or sales for the nonredeemed tax are not
affected by such partial redemption.
(1979 Code § 12.24.130; amd. Ord. 97-83, 10-28-1997)
7-8-9: DELINQUENCIES; ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS:
The City Treasurer shall add to the amount of the tax against each parcel of
land the following administrative costs:
   A.   For properties advertised as delinquent the sum of three dollars
($3.00) as the cost of advertising the delinquency;
   B.   In case of a sale of any land for special taxes, the sum of two dollars
($2.00) as the expense of sale;
   C.   In the case of a sale, a fee of two dollars ($2.00) covering the cost
of issuing each certificate of sale, which fee shall be conveyed into the
General Fund;
   D.   In the case of a sale to a party other than the City, the recording fee
currently in effect for the recording of deeds in the Weber County Recorder's
office.
(1979 Code § 12.24.140; amd. Ord. 80-25, 5-15-1980; Ord. 97-83, 10-28-1997)
7-8-10: SALE OF PROPERTY:
   A.   Minimum Price: In no case shall land advertised for sale for delinquent
special taxes be sold for less than the amount of such special taxes, interest,
and administrative costs.
(1979 Code § 12.24.150; amd. Ord. 80-25, 5-15-1980; Ord. 97-83, 10-28-1997)
   B.   Procedure: On the day fixed for the sale, the City Treasurer, in person
or by deputy, shall appear at the hour and place named in the notice of sale
and shall there offer sufficient of the delinquent real estate to pay taxes,
interests and costs, at public auction to the highest responsible bidder for
cash. If the sale is not concluded by four o'clock (4:00) P.M. in the afternoon
of the day advertised, it may be continued by the City Treasurer until twelve
o'clock (12:00) noon of the next succeeded with and continued until completed.
(1979 Code § 12.24.160; amd. Ord. 80-25, 5-15-1980; Ord. 97-83, 10-28-1997)
   C.   City Purchase: In case no bid at least equal to the amount of taxes,
principal and separate parcel is received as each separate parcel is offered
for sale, such parcel shall be struck off to the City for the amount of tax,
principal and interest, and applicable administrative costs, and such sale
shall have the same effect as if made to an individual. The City Treasurer
shall thereupon transfer from the Special Improvement Guaranty Fund to the
special fund for the improvement district in connection with such tax which was
levied, the amount due on said tax, plus the accrued interest, and applicable
administrative costs.
(1979 Code § 12.24.170; amd. Ord. 80-25, 5-15-1980; Ord. 97-83, 10-28-1997)
   D.   Assignment Of Certificate: The City may sell and assign any certificate
of sale upon payment to it of the amount mentioned in said certificate,
together with interest at ten percent (10%) per year from the date of sale to
date of assignment, and all monies received therefrom shall be paid into the
Special Improvement Guaranty Fund.
(1979 Code § 12.24.180; amd. Ord. 80-25, 5-15-1980; Ord. 97-83, 10-28-1997)
   E.   Record: The City Treasurer shall keep a record of all property sold for
special taxes or assessments. The record shall include a description of the
property, the date of sale and to whom sold, the amount of the sale and the
date of redemption thereof or the date of the issuance of a tax deed to said
property.
(1979 Code § 12.24.190; amd. Ord. 80-25, 5-15-1980; Ord. 97-83, 10-28-1997)
   F.   Certificate:
      1.   When real estate is sold for special taxes, the City Treasurer shall
make out, sign, acknowledge and deliver a separate certificate of sale for each
parcel sold, which shall recite the facts of sale as in the tax sale record and
what payment has been made therefor and shall be substantially in the following
form:
     OGDEN CITY OFFICE OF TREASURER
     CERTIFICATE OF SALE FOR SPECIAL TAXES
THIS CERTIFIES that on the          day of                   , 19    , in
pursuant of law and ordinance, I,                           , as City Treasurer
and Collector of Special Taxes of Ogden City, Utah, sold to                    
               there being no higher bidder therefor, subject to redemption, as
provided by law, and the ordinance of said City, the following described
property in Ogden City, for delinquent special taxes assessed against said
property in the name of                              to-wit:                  
           District No.                Page                   .
   DESCRIPTION:
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                               
                               having a frontage of                feet
abutting upon (or adjacent to) said improvement assessed to the full depth back
therefrom.
AMOUNT OF TAX INTEREST, AND COSTS
   Amount of Tax $         
   Interest to date of sale $         
   Administrative costs $         
   TOTAL special taxes, interest,
   and costs at date of sale $         
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereto set my name and official title this        
day of                     , A.D.          , Ogden City.
                                           
City Treasurer and collector of special taxes.
   (Acknowledgment in statutory form)
      2.   If the sale is for more than one tax, the amount of each tax and the
interest to date of the sale on each shall be separately stated in such
certificate and the form of such certificate changed in such respects as may be
required to show the same.
(1979 Code § 12.24.200; amd. Ord. 97-83, 10-28-1997)
   G.   Interest: Interest at the rate of ten percent (10%) per year shall be
charged on the special tax due from date of delinquency until date of sale, and
interest at the rate of ten percent (10%) per year shall be charged on the full
amount for which the property was sold from date of sale to date of redemption,
if any.
(1979 Code § 12.24.210; amd. Ord. 80-25, 5-15-1980; Ord. 97-83, 10-28-1997)
   H.   City Purchase Certificate: When property is sold to the City, the
certificate of sale shall be delivered to the City Treasurer, whose duty it
shall be to see that such certificate is properly recorded in the office of the
County Recorder, and shall thereafter be kept as a part of the records of the
City Treasurer.
(1979 Code § 12.24.220; amd. Ord. 97-83, 10-28-1997)
7-8-11: REDEMPTION:
   A.   Conditions: Real estate sold for special taxes may be redeemed by any
eligible person interested therein, by such person paying to the City
Treasurer, for the use of the purchaser or his legal representative, the amount
paid by the purchaser, and all applicable administrative costs, together with
the sum of two dollars ($2.00) for the redemption certificate, and all special
taxes that have accrued thereon and which have been paid by the purchaser after
his purchase to the time of redemption, together with interest at the rate of
ten percent (10%) per year on the whole from the date of payment to the day of
redemption; provided, that whenever two (2) or more parties are interested in a
piece of property which has been sold for taxes, and there is no other special
assessment which is a lien upon such land, or if any such other special
assessment which is a lien upon such land is a lien upon the whole of the tract
of which segregation is sought and attaches to the part so sought to be
segregated in the same proportion as does the assessment upon which sale was so
made, then and in that case, either party interested in such property may
redeem the property in which he is interested upon payment of that proportion
of the amount due under such sale which the area of the part of such tract in
which he is interested bears to the whole; provided, that in case such property
is improved, and the part sought to be segregated and redeemed from such tax
sale is the part of such property upon which the improvements are situated,
then no such segregation shall be made unless the persons so seeking such
segregation and right to redeem shall pay that proportion of the tax which the
City Treasurer shall fix as being that proportion of the whole tax which the
value of the property so sought to be segregated and redeemed shall bear to the
value of the whole of the tract; provided further, that in any case, the City
Treasurer, upon due application, may permit segregation to be made on an area
basis and redemption to be had where, in his judgement, the value of the
remaining part of the property is such as to adequately protect the City and
secure to it the payment of all remaining special assessments levied against
such tract or that part thereof with respect to which such redemption is not
sought. No redemption of such property shall be permitted except upon payment
of the full amount due, including interest, accrued administrative costs and
redemption fees, unless, in the judgment of the Mayor, the interest of the City
will be served by accepting a less sum in settlement therefor.
(1979 Code § 12.24.230; amd. Ord. 97-83, 10-28-1997)
   B.   Installment Payments: After sale, if a tax sale certificate thereon
issues to the City, payment in installments of unpaid principal, interest and
all applicable administrative costs and charges may be made and credit given
for the amounts so paid against the amounts so due; provided, that the
installments paid shall be in such amount as will discharge the indebtedness
within not more than three (3) years from the date of sale, and that written
agreements covering payments of such installments shall be filed with the City
Treasurer in form satisfactory to the City Treasurer and the City Attorney.
Credit shall be given for each installment as paid, and interest thereby
reduced proportionately and on all unpaid installments interest shall be paid
and charged at the rate of ten percent (10%) per year. In any case any owner
electing to take advantage of the provisions of such ordinance fails to make
payment of such installment when due, the right of the City to receive a tax
deed for such real estate shall not be impaired, nor shall the owner be
entitled to receive any refund of any amounts so paid. There shall be paid with
each installment the sum of one dollar ($1.00) per installment to cover the
additional bookkeeping expense incurred in connection therewith, which one
dollar ($1.00) payments shall not be credited against the delinquent tax.
(1979 Code § 12.24.240; amd. Ord. 97-83, 10-28-1997)
   C.   Certificate: The City Treasurer shall, when property is redeemed, make
the proper entry in the tax sale record filed in his office and issue a
certificate of redemption, which certificate shall be prime facie evidence of
such redemption.
(1979 Code § 12.24.250; amd. Ord. 97-83, 10-28-1997)
7-8-12: SALE; CONVEYANCE TO PURCHASER:
If any property sold as provided in this Chapter is not redeemed within the
time and in the manner provided in this Chapter, the City Recorder shall, on
presentation of a certificate of sale for special taxes duly executed by the
City Treasurer, make and acknowledge a deed conveying to the City all property
purchased in the name of the City at a special tax sales for which the
redemption period has so expired.
(1979 Code § 12.24.260; amd. Ord. 97-83, 10-28-1997)
7-8-13: TAX DEED RECORD:
The City Recorder shall keep on file in his office a record of all tax deeds
issued by him, which shall be facsimile copies of the deeds so issued, and
which shall be indexed in the name of the party whose property was sold for
taxes and also in the name of the individual whom the tax deed was issued.
(1979 Code § 12.24.270; amd. Ord. 97-83, 10-28-1997)
7-8-14: RECORDER'S FEES:
The City recorder shall collect two dollars ($2.00) for each deed issued for
the first description of property contained in each deed and for each
additional description of property in each deed one dollar ($1.00) and convey
such fees monthly into the City Treasury; provided, that in cases where the
City is the tax purchaser, no fee shall be collected.
(1979 Code § 12.24.280; amd. Ord. 97-83, 10-28-1997)
7-8-15: SALE OF CONVEYED PROPERTY:
Whenever any such tax deed shall issue for such property, or in any case where
property has been conveyed by the owner to the City in settlement of special
assessment taxes, and the deed therefor accepted by the City, the City
Treasurer may, at any time after due publication thereof in at least three (3)
issues of a daily newspaper having general circulation in the City, offer for
sale at the east door of the Municipal building at the time specified in the
notice all real property to which the City has received a tax deed on account
of sale for delinquent taxes, not theretofore redeemed, and may sell the same
to the highest satisfactory bidder. The Mayor and the City Recorder are
authorized to execute the deed of the City for any property thus sold. All such
property for which there is no satisfactory purchaser at the sale provided for
in this Section may thereafter be disposed of by the Mayor at either public or
private sale. Proceeds received from all such sales shall be paid into the
Special Improvement Guaranty Fund.
(1979 Code § 12.24.290; amd. Ord. 97-83, 10-28-1997)
7-8-16: SPECIAL IMPROVEMENT GUARANTY FUND:
   A.   Purpose: There is created a special fund to be known as the "Special
Improvement Guaranty Fund" which Fund shall be used for the purpose of
guaranteeing to the extent of said Fund the payment of special improvements
bonds, or special improvement warrants, and interest thereon heretofore or
hereafter issued against local improvement districts for the payment of local
improvements therein, and for the purchase of property sold to the City at tax
sale or under foreclosure for delinquent special improvement taxes.
   B.   Creation And Maintenance: The City Council shall create and maintain
the Special Improvement Guaranty Fund by appropriation from the General Fund,
or by the levy of a tax of not to exceed one mill in any one year, or by the
issuance of general obligation bonds, or by appropriation from such other
source as may be determined upon by the City Council to provide the monies
necessary for that purpose. Said Fund shall be held by the City Treasurer and
shall be kept by him separate and apart from all other funds held by him.
   C.   Transfer Of Excess Charges: All excess charges and penalties collected
by the City Treasurer for the benefit or credit of any special improvement fund
and remaining on hand after all the bonds or warrants, together with interest
thereon drawn against said special improvement fund shall have been fully paid
and canceled, shall be transferred to the Special Improvement Guaranty Fund.
   D.   Payment Of Bonds Or Warrants: When any bond, warrant or coupon drawn
against any special improvement bond is presented to the City Treasurer for
payment and there is not a sufficient amount in said special improvement fund
against which it is drawn to pay the same, unless otherwise requested by the
holder, payment therefor shall be made by warrants drawn by the City Treasurer
against the Special Improvement Guaranty Fund.
   E.   Property Purchase: In the event that any property is sold to the City
at tax sales or under foreclosure for delinquent special improvement taxes,
said purchase shall be made by warrant drawn against the Special Improvement
Guaranty Fund. All proceeds from the redemption or sale of property sold under
foreclosure or of certificate of tax sale held by the City shall be paid into
the Special Improvement Guaranty Fund.
   F.   Fund Replenishment: Whenever there is not a sufficient amount of cash
in the Special Improvement Guaranty Fund at any time to make any and all
purchases of property bid in by the City at sales of property for delinquent
special improvement taxes, the City Council may replenish the Special
Improvement Guaranty Fund by transfer or appropriation from the General Fund or
other available sources as may be determined by the City Council. Warrants
drawing interest at a rate of not to exceed eight percent (8%) per year may be
issued by the City Treasurer against said Fund to meet any financial
liabilities accruing against it; but at the time of making its next annual tax
levy, the City Council shall provide for the levy of a sum sufficient with the
other resources of the fund to pay warrants so issued and outstanding, the tax
for this purpose not to exceed one mill in any one year.
   G.   Subrogation Of City: Whenever the City shall have paid under its
guaranty any sum on account of principal or interest on the bonds or warrants
of any district, it shall be subrogated to the rights of the holders of such
bonds or warrants or interest coupons so paid, and such bonds or warrants or
coupons, and proceeds thereof, shall become a part of the Guaranty Fund.
(1979 Code § 12.24.300; amd. Ord. 97-83, 10-28-1997)
7-8-17: SETTLEMENT OF TAX DELINQUENCIES; ALTERNATIVES:
At any time after the levy of any such tax, the Mayor, at the Mayor's sole
discretion, may:
   A.   Accept from the fee owner or owners of any property so burdened with
such special improvement tax and assessment or taxes and assessments a good and
sufficient deed therefor conveying the title of said owner or owners therein,
subject to any such special tax and assessment or taxes and assessments, and
subject to any outstanding general tax or taxes, to the City, and may pay
additional consideration therefor;
   B.   Acquire by purchase or otherwise the general tax title from the County
to any property so burdened with such special improvement tax and assessment or
taxes and assessments, where title to said property has passed by auditor's
deed to the County for the nonpayment of general taxes, or has otherwise passed
to the County when the Mayor deems it necessary or advisable to do so in order
to protect the lien or liens of the City for any special improvement tax and
assessment or taxes and assessments;
   C.   File and prosecute actions to quiet title to said property or
properties, and/or do any and all things necessary or advisable to perfect
title in the City to said property or properties in order to protect the lien
or liens of the City for any special improvement tax and assessment or taxes
and assessments, and/or do any and all things necessary or advisable to protect
the lien or liens of the City for any special improvement tax and assessment or
taxes and assessments;
   D.   Expend the necessary funds to accomplish any or all of the objects
provided for in this Section from the Special Improvement Guaranty Fund or from
any other proper source;
   E.   Dispose of any or all of said properties to which the City has so
received title, free and clear of the whole or any part of any such special tax
lien and/or general taxes, without notice.
(1979 Code § 12.24.310; amd. Ord. 97-83, 10-28-1997)
7-8-18: NECESSITY OF OBJECTION:
No error made in the carrying out of any of the provisions of this Chapter
shall affect the validity of any sale made hereunder unless such error is
jurisdictional, or due objection thereunto is made at the time and in the
manner provided by law.
(1979 Code § 12.24.320; amd. Ord. 97-83, 10-28-1997)
7-8-19: UTILITY CONNECTIONS; NOTICE:
   A.   Whenever the City shall acquire jurisdiction to pave or repave in any
district now or hereafter created, it shall be the duty of the City Engineer to
notify in writing the owners of property abutting on said district, and require
such owners to make all necessary water, gas and sewer connections with the
water and gas pipes and sewer thereon, and to extend such water, gas or sewer
pipes to the curb of the streets on either side thereof.
   B.   Such notice may be given by personal service upon the owner of said
property or upon some one having charge of the same, or by depositing such
notice in the post office at Ogden, Utah, postage prepaid, addressed to the
owner of said property, or the one in charge of said property, at least twenty
(20) days before the time of paving or repaving said street.
   C.   If any of the owners of said property fails in the time required in
said notice to make the necessary water and sewer connections as provided in
this Chapter, then the City shall have the right to have said connections so
made and the cost thereof assessed against such property where said connections
have been made, and the same shall constitute a lien on said premises, and the
cost thereof shall be assessed against such property at the same time as the
district assessment is levied and shall be due, payable, delinquent and
collected in the same manner as in the case of district assessment.
(1979 Code § 12.24.330; amd. Ord. 97-83, 10-28-1997)
7-8-20: GAS CONNECTIONS; REQUIREMENTS OF FACILITY OPERATOR:
Whenever any gas mains are located upon any street where a district is created,
the City shall have the right, upon twenty (20) days' notice to the person or
corporation owning or operating said gas distribution facilities, to require
the same to make all necessary connections with said mains, and to extend the
pipes connected with the same to the curb line on either side of such street,
and upon failure of said gas company to make such connections after the time
required in said notice, the City may cause said connections to be made and
shall collect the cost of the same from said gas company in the manner provided
by law.
(1979 Code § 12.24.340; amd. Ord. 97-83, 10-28-1997)
CHAPTER 9
PUBLIC FACILITIES AND IMPACT FEES
SECTION:
7-9-1: Intent
7-9-2: Definitions
7-9-3: Applicability Of Impact Fee
7-9-4: Imposition Of Impact Fee
7-9-5: Establishment Of Development Service Areas
7-9-6: Development Potential (By Development Service Area)
7-9-7: Capital Improvements Program
7-9-8: Impact Fee Coefficients (By Development Service Area)
7-9-9: Calculation Of Impact Fee
7-9-10: Impact Fee Challenges Or Appeals
7-9-11: Administration Of Impact Fee
7-9-12: Bonding For Capital Improvement Projects
7-9-13: Refunds
7-9-14: Effect On Zoning And Subdivision Regulations
7-9-15: Impact Fee As Additional And Supplemental Requirement
7-9-16: Credits
7-9-17: Impact Fee Adoption Process
7-9-18: Liberal Construction
7-9-1: INTENT:
This Chapter is intended to authorize the imposition, collection and
administration of impact fees in order to finance public facilities, the demand
for which is generated by new development activity in designated service areas.
Only needs created by new development in the designated service areas may be
financed by impact fees. It is the intention of the City that any impact fees
authorized herein shall be imposed and administered in a manner consistent with
the provisions of Utah Code Annotated title 11, chapter 36, Impact Fees Act.
(1979 Code § 12.40.010; Ord. 91-32, 8-15-1991; amd. Ord. 97-24, 4-1-1997)
7-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
In addition to the definitions provided under the Act, the following words and
terms shall have the following meanings as used in this Chapter, unless another
meaning is plainly intended:
BUILDING PERMIT: The permit required for new construction and additions
pursuant to Section
16-2-2 of this Code.
CAPITAL BUDGET: That part of the City's annual budget dedicated to financing
capital improvements.
CAPITAL FACILITIES PLAN: The Plan required by Utah Code Annotated section 11-
36-201, as amended. It also may refer to the "capital improvements plan",
adopted and approved by the Ogden City Council, to the extent such plan
addresses the needs of development activity in designated development service
areas and meets the requirements of a plan under section 11-36-201 of the Act.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS OR CAPITAL FACILITIES: Facilities or infrastructure which
are treated as capitalized expenses according to generally accepting accounting
principles and are identified in the Capital Improvements Plan as improvements
intended to be made in the future to assure the provision of those levels of
service to be provided throughout the City in order to accommodate future and
existing development and does not include cost associated with the operation,
administration or minor maintenance of capital improvements. "Capital
facilities" may include "public facilities", as defined in this Section.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PROGRAM: The adopted schedule of capital improvements to
be undertaken, the projected year or month in which they will be undertaken,
the estimated time and cost of construction, and other necessary features.
DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY: Any construction or expansion of a building, structure,
or use, any change in use of a building or structure, or any changes in the use
of land that creates additional demand and need for public facilities and that
requires issuance of a building permit.
DEVELOPMENT SUBAREA MAP OR DEVELOPMENT SERVICE AREA MAP: A map of development
subareas or service areas in which impact fees are to be imposed.
DEVELOPMENT SUBAREAS OR DEVELOPMENT SERVICE AREAS: A geographic area designated
by the City Council on the basis of sound planning or engineering principles in
which a defined set of public facilities provide service within the area.
IMPACT FEE: A payment of money imposed upon development activity as a condition
of development approval. "Impact fee" does not mean a tax, a special
assessment, a building permit fee, a hookup fee, a fee for project
improvements, or other reasonable permit or application fee.
IMPACT FEE COEFFICIENT: The charge per applicable unit of measure as calculated
for each designated development service area by dividing total public facility
costs by the total number of applicable units of measure projected for that
service area.
PUBLIC FACILITIES: A. The following capital facilities, that may be financed in
whole or in part by the imposition of impact fees, and that have a life
expectancy of ten (10) or more years and are owned or operated by or on behalf
of the City:
      1.   Water rights and water supply, treatment, and distribution
facilities;
      2.   Wastewater collection and treatment facilities;
      3.   Storm water, drainage, and flood control facilities;
      4.   Municipal power facilities;
      5.   Roadway facilities;
      6.   Parks, recreation facilities, open space, and trails; and
      7.   Public safety facilities.
   B.   "Public facilities" shall not mean or include the operation,
administration or maintenance of any public facility or capital facility.
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCES: The subdivision ordinances as adopted as Title 14 of
this Code.
THE ACT: The Impact Fee Act of the State of Utah, Utah Code Annotated title 11,
chapter 36, as amended.
UNIT OF MEASURE: That basic gauging unit which can be quantified for measuring
the impact of development on the infrastructure in question, and which can
provide a fair and equitable method of assessing the demands for expanded
infrastructure. Units of measure can relate to the amounts of property,
improvements to property, or the inflow/outflow of people, products, or waste,
depending on the particular type of infrastructure; and may include, but shall
not be limited to, the following measuring devices:
   A.   Acres of property;
   B.   Square feet of hard surface;
   C.   Gallons per day;
   D.   Trips generated;
   E.   Square feet of floor area; or
   F.   Number of living units.
ZONING DISTRICTS: Those areas designated on the Zoning Map, adopted under the
Zoning Title as being reserved for specific land uses, subject to development
and use regulations specified in the Zoning Title.
ZONING ORDINANCES: The zoning ordinances, as adopted as Title 15 of this Code.
(1979 Code § 12.40.020; Ord. 91-32, 8-15-1991; amd. Ord. 97-24, 4-1-1997)
7-9-3: APPLICABILITY OF IMPACT FEE:
This Chapter shall be uniformly applicable to development activity that occurs
within a designated development service area in accordance with any impact fee
enacted pursuant to Section
7-9-17 of this Chapter.
(1979 Code § 12.40.030; Ord. 91-32, 8-15-1991; amd. Ord. 97-24, 4-1-1997)
7-9-4: IMPOSITION OF IMPACT FEE:
   A.   Required; Calculation, Verification: No building permit shall be issued
for development activity in a designated development service area unless an
enacted and in force impact fee is calculated and imposed pursuant to the
provisions of this Chapter and the ordinance enacted pursuant to Section
7-9-12 of this Chapter. The Building Official shall forward any building permit
application for development activity within a designated development service
area to the City Engineer, who shall calculate and verify in writing the
applicability of the impact fee ordinance, the method of calculation, and the
total fee amount to be imposed by designated service area.
   B.   Proportionate Share: Impact fees shall not exceed the proportionate
share of the costs of providing public facilities which are reasonably related
to those development activities subject to the fees.
   C.   Previously Constructed Improvements: Impact fees also may include a
proportionate assessment for public facility costs previously incurred by the
City to the extent that new growth and development will be served by the
previously constructed improvement.
   D.   Standards And Guidelines Of Act: For any impact fee enacted after July
1, 1995, or for any impact fee, effective July 1, 1997, in analyzing whether or
not the proportionate share of the costs of public facilities are reasonably
related to the new development activity, the City shall comply with the
standards and guidelines established under the Act.
   E.   Existing, Temporary Fees; Factors: Until July 1, 1997, for existing
impact fees or temporary impact fees for public facilities approved prior to
July 1, 1995, in determining the portion of capital improvement costs that will
be funded through the imposition of any impact fee, the following factors shall
be considered:
      1.   The need for new facilities to serve new development based on a
capital improvements plan that shows: a) any deficiencies in existing
facilities that serve existing development and the means by which existing
development will be assessed and assessments used to make up such deficiencies;
and b) any capital improvements that are attributable to the demands placed on
specified facilities by new development;
      2.   The need for impact fees considering the availability of other means
to fund capital improvements, including, but not limited to, user charges,
taxes, intergovernmental transfers and other revenue, and special taxation or
assessment districts;
      3.   The cost of existing capital improvements;
      4.   The method by which the existing capital improvements were financed;
      5.   The extent to which developments paying the impact fee already have
contributed to the cost of the existing facility and the credit against impact
fees that may be due therefrom;
      6.   The extent to which developments paying the impact fee will
contribute to the cost of the existing facility in the future (i.e., user fees,
debt payments, or proportion of future taxes reasonably expected to be used for
any debt retirement of the existing facility) and the credit against impact
fees that may be due therefrom;
      7.   The extent to which new development is required as a condition of
approval to construct facilities that substantially benefit other development
and the credit against impact fees that may be due therefrom; and
      8.   The time-price differential inherent in comparisons of amounts paid
and benefits received at different times and the credit against or reduction in
impact fees that may be due therefrom.
   E.   Use Of Revenues: Impact fee revenues may be used for new or enlarged
capital improvement projects that will reasonably benefit anticipated future
development as well as those developments that have paid the fee, as long as
the fee represents the benefit received by the development being assessed.
   F.   New Developments: Impact fees that are assessed against new development
shall be assessed in such a manner that any new development having the same
impacts on capital facilities shall be assessed the same impact fee. This
provision notwithstanding, the local governing body may contribute any part or
all of the impact fee assessed against certain new development that achieves
other policies, including, but not limited to, the provision of affordable
housing and the retention of existing employment or the generation of new
employment.
(1979 Code § 12.40.040; Ord. 91-32, 8-15-1991; amd. Ord. 97-24, 4-1-1997)
7-9-5: ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT SERVICE AREAS:
   A.   Requirements: Development service areas are established as shown on the
development service areas map within the ordinance enacting the impact fee.
Such development service areas will be established consistent with any facility
service areas established in the Capital Facilities Plan for each public
facility. Such areas will provide a nexus between those paying the fees and
benefits received to ensure that those developments paying impact fees receive
substantial benefits.
   B.   Additional Areas; Considerations: Additional development service areas
or combinations of all or parts of existing development service areas may be
designated by the City Council as development service areas consistent with the
procedure set forth in this Chapter. The City Council must consider the
following factors in determining when and whether to add development service
areas:
      1.   The general plan.
      2.   Any standards for adequate public facilities incorporated in the
Capital Improvements Plan.
      3.   The projected full development as permitted by the Subdivision Title
and the Zoning Title.
      4.   The need for and cost of unprogrammed capital improvements necessary
to support projected development.
      5.   Such other factors as the City Council may deem relevant.
The principal reason for identifying a development service area or combination
of development service areas is to ensure that development service areas
projected to experience significant development in the future will be served
adequately by necessary capital improvements.
(1979 Code § 12.40.050; Ord. 91-32, 8-15-1991; amd. Ord. 97-24, 4-1-1997)
7-9-6: DEVELOPMENT POTENTIAL (BY DEVELOPMENT SERVICE AREA):
As a part of the Capital Facilities Plan, each development service area shall
have calculated for it upon an engineering or planning basis, the appropriate
type of and total applicable units of measure in order to determine the
development potential of the development service area. These calculations shall
take into consideration:
   A.   Acreage available for development.
   B.   Current zoning of the respective service area.
   C.   Zoning Title.
   D.   Subdivision Title.
   E.   Topographic and geologic features affecting developability of the
service area.
(1979 Code § 12.40.060; Ord. 91-32, 8-15-1991; amd. Ord. 97-24, 4-1-1997)
7-9-7: CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PROGRAM:
As a part of the Capital Improvements Plan, there shall be developed and
maintained a capital improvements program which specifies the schedule by which
capital improvements financed by impact fees under this Chapter will be
installed.
(1979 Code § 12.40.070; Ord. 91-32, 8-15-1991; amd. Ord. 97-24, 4-1-1997)
7-9-8: IMPACT FEE COEFFICIENTS (BY DEVELOPMENT SERVICE AREA):
The impact fee coefficients applicable to each of the various service areas
shall be based upon the Capital Facilities Plan and the equitable distribution
of the costs delineated within the Plan by dividing the cost of the specific
public facility by the number of units of measure applicable to the respective
service area.
(1979 Code § 12.40.080; Ord. 91-32, 8-15-1991; amd. Ord. 97-24, 4-1-1997)
7-9-9: CALCULATION OF IMPACT FEE:
   A.   Determinations For Calculation: The City shall calculate the amount of
the applicable impact fee due for each building permit, under the enacted
impact fee ordinance, by:
      1.   Determining the applicable designated development service area;
      2.   Determining the types of uses within the development, if applicable;
      3.   Verifying the applicable type of units of measure for that service
area for which each building permit is sought;
      4.   Verifying the applicable impact fee coefficient;
      5.   Determining the number of units of measure applicable to the
particular development;
      6.   Multiplying the applicable impact fee coefficient by the number of
the units of measure;
      7.   Applying any adjustments provided under subsection D of this
Section.
   B.   Mixed Uses: If the development for which a building permit is sought
contains a mix of uses which are subject to different units of measure or
coefficients under the impact fee ordinance, the City must separately calculate
the impact fee due for each type of development.
   C.   Nonbinding Impact Fee Estimate: Prior to making an application for
building permit, an applicant may request a nonbinding impact fee estimate from
the City, which estimate shall be based on the development potential of the
particular site and through the same manner as provided above.
   D.   Adjustment Of Fee: The Director of the Public Works Department, upon
recommendation of the City Engineer, may adjust the standard impact fee or the
calculation of the amount of the impact fee at the time the fee is charged or
imposed:
      1.   To respond to unusual circumstances in specific cases and ensure
that the impact fees are imposed fairly; or
      2.   Based upon studies and data submitted by the developer indicating
such adjustment is required to meet the intent of the provisions of this
Chapter and the Act.
The basis for such adjustments shall be documented in writing. If the reasons
presented for such adjustment indicate a need to adjust the impact fee
coefficient or the applicable unit of measure under the standard impact fee,
the City Engineer shall make recommendations to the City Council for such
amendment to the impact fee ordinance.
(1979 Code § 12.40.090; Ord. 91-32, 8-15-1991; amd. Ord. 97-24, 4-1-1997)
7-9-10: IMPACT FEE CHALLENGES OR APPEALS:
   A.   Requirement To Pay: Any person or entity required to pay an impact fee
who believes the fee does not meet the requirements of law may file a written
request for information with the City. Within two (2) weeks of the receipt of
the request for information, the City shall provide the person or entity with
the written analysis required by section 11-36-201 of the Act and with any
other relevant information relating to the impact fee.
   B.   Payment: Within thirty (30) days after paying an impact fee, any person
or entity who has paid the fee and wishes to challenge the fee may appeal the
imposition or amount of the impact fee to the Mayor by filing a written notice
of appeal with the City Recorder.
   C.   Hearing Procedure: Hearings to consider an appeal of the imposition or
amount of an impact fee shall be heard by the Mayor or the Mayor's appointed
designee, as the hearing officer. Such hearing shall conform to the following
procedures:
      1.   Reasonable notice of the date, time and place of the hearing shall
be provided to the appellant by mailing a notice of hearing to the appellant
not later than five (5) days prior to the hearing.
      2.   All witnesses called at such hearing shall be sworn by a person duly
authorized to administer oaths, and a record of such proceedings shall be made
by a recording or written minutes, at the direction of the hearing officer.
      3.   An appellant shall have the right to appear at the hearing in person
or by counsel, or both, present evidence, present argument on the appellant's
behalf, cross-examine witnesses, and in all proper ways present the appellant's
position.
      4.   The hearing officer shall make a decision based upon the evidence
presented at such hearing and shall issue a written decision or order with
findings no later than thirty (30) days after the date the appeal is filed.
   D.   District Court Petition: Within ninety (90) days of the decision or
order upholding an impact fee or within one hundred twenty (120) days after the
date the appeal was filed, whichever is earlier, any party adversely affected
by the decision may petition the District Court for a review of the decision in
accordance with Utah Code Annotated section 11-36-401, as amended.
(1979 Code § 12.40.100; Ord. 91-32, 8-15-1991; amd. Ord. 97-24, 4-1-1997)
7-9-11: ADMINISTRATION OF IMPACT FEE:
   A.   Transfer Of Funds To City Treasurer: Upon receipt of impact fees, the
City Treasurer shall be responsible for placement of such funds into separate
accounts or subaccounts as hereinafter specified. All such funds shall be
deposited in interest-bearing accounts in a bank authorized to receive deposits
of City funds. Interest earned by each account or subaccount shall be credited
to that account or subaccount and shall be used solely for the purpose
specified for funds of such account or subaccount.
   B.   Establishment And Maintenance Of Accounts: The City shall establish
separate interest-bearing ledger accounts or subaccounts and maintain records
for each such account whereby impact fees collected can be segregated by
development service area (specific areas must be named).
   C.   Maintenance Of Records: The City shall maintain and keep accurate
financial records for each such account or subaccount that shall show the
source and amount of all monies collected, earned, and received by the fund or
account; that shall show each expenditure from the fund or account; and that
shall ensure that the disbursement of funds from each account or subaccount
shall be used solely and exclusively for the provision of projects specified in
the Capital Facilities Plan for the particular development service area; and
that shall provide an annual accounting for each impact fee account or
subaccount showing the source and amount of all funds collected and the
projects that were funded.
   D.   Review And Modification: The City shall, in conjunction with the annual
capital budget and Capital Improvements Plan adoption processes, review the
development potential of each development service area and the Capital
Facilities Plan and make such modifications as are deemed necessary as a result
of
      1.   Development occurring in the prior year;
      2.   Public facilities actually constructed;
      3.   Changing facility needs;
      4.   Inflation;
      5.   Revised cost estimates for public facilities;
      6.   Changes in the availability of other funding sources applicable to
public facility projects; and
      7.   Such other factors as may be relevant.
Modifications to the development potential, the capital improvements program,
and the impact fee coefficients shall be recommended to the City Council as
necessary. Responsibility for these actions shall rest with the City Engineer.
(1979 Code § 12.40.110; Ord. 91-32, 8-15-1991; amd. Ord. 97-24, 4-1-1997)
7-9-12: BONDING FOR CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROJECTS:
The City may issue bonds, revenue certificates, and other obligations of
indebtedness in such manner and subject to such limitations as may be provided
by law in furtherance of the provision of capital improvement projects. Funds
pledged toward retirement of bonds, revenue certificates, or other obligations
of indebtedness for such projects may include impact fees and other City
revenues as may be allocated by the City Council. Impact fees paid pursuant to
this Chapter, however, shall be restricted to use solely and exclusively for
financing directly, or as a pledge against bonds, revenue certificates, and
other obligations of indebtedness for the cost of public facilities as
specified herein.
(1979 Code § 12.40.120; Ord. 91-32, 8-15-1991; amd. Ord. 97-24, 4-1-1997)
7-9-13: REFUNDS:
   A.   Application: The current owner of the property for which an impact fee
has been paid may apply for a refund of the fee amount paid, plus interest
earned, if:
      1.   The City has failed to expend or encumber for the public facilities
to be funded wholly or in part by the respective impact fee within six (6)
years of the receipt of the impact fee; provided, that the City may hold the
fees for longer than six (6) years if the City Council identifies, in writing:
         a.   An extraordinary and compelling reason why the fees should be
held longer than six (6) years; and
         b.   An absolute date by which the fees will be expended; or
      2.   The applicant has expressed, in writing, the intention not to
proceed with the development activity; and
         a.   The building permit for which the impact fee has been paid has
expired; and
         b.   The fees have not been spent or encumbered and no impact has
resulted; or
      3.   The development activity for which the impact fee was paid has been
altered resulting in a decrease in the amount of the impact fee due; or
      4.   The applicable temporary or interim impact fee, adopted prior to
July 1, 1995, has expired and has not been replaced by an impact fee enactment
meeting the requirements of the Act; or
      5.   The amount paid pursuant to a temporary or interim impact fee
resulted in an overpayment under the adopted impact fee enactment as provided
in subsection
7-9-17B2 of this Chapter.
   B.   Refund To Recorded Owner: The refund shall be made to the then-current
owner or owners of the property, according to the records of the Weber County
Recorder. If any question exists as to ownership, the refund will be
interpleaded into District Court.
   C.   Submission Of Petition: The petition for refund must be submitted to
the City Engineer or his or her duly designated agent on a form provided by the
City for such purpose.
   D.   Decision: Within one month of the date of receipt of a petition for
refund, the City Engineer or his or her duly designated agent must provide the
petitioner, in writing, with a decision on the refund request including the
reasons for the decision. If a full or partial refund is due petitioner, the
City Engineer or his or her duly designated agent shall notify the City
Treasurer and request that a full or partial refund payment be made to
petitioner.
   E.   Appeal Of Determination: Petitioner may appeal the determination of the
City Engineer to the Mayor in the same manner as provided in Section
7-9-10 of this Chapter.
   F.   Reduction Of Refund: The amount of any refund due may be reduced by
amounts applied as credits pursuant to Section
7-9-16 of this Chapter.
(1979 Code § 12.40.130; Ord. 91-32, 8-15-1991; amd. Ord. 97-24, 4-1-1997)
7-9-14: EFFECT ON ZONING AND SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS:
This Chapter shall not affect, in any manner, the permissible use of property,
density of development, design, and improvement standards and requirements, or
any other aspect of the development of land or provision of capital
improvements subject to the zoning and subdivision regulations or other
regulations of the City, which shall be operative and remain in full force and
effect without limitation with respect to all such development.
(1979 Code § 12.40.140; Ord. 91-32, 8-15-1991; amd. Ord. 97-24, 4-1-1997)
7-9-15: IMPACT FEE AS ADDITIONAL AND SUPPLEMENTAL REQUIREMENT:
The impact fee is additional and supplemental to, and not in substitution of,
any other requirements imposed by the City on the development of land or the
issuance of building permits. It is intended to be consistent with and to
further the objectives and policies of the General Plan, the Capital
Improvements Plan, and other City policies, ordinances, and resolutions by
which the City seeks to ensure the provisions of public facilities in
conjunction with the development of land. In no event shall a property owner be
obligated to pay for capital improvements in an amount in excess of the amount
calculated pursuant to this Chapter; but, provided that a property owner may be
required to pay, pursuant to City ordinances, regulations, or policies, for
other taxes, assessments, hookup or connection fees, or project fees or
improvements in addition to the impact fee for public facilities as specified
herein.
(1979 Code § 12.40.150; Ord. 91-32, 8-15-1991; amd. Ord. 97-24, 4-1-1997)
7-9-16: CREDITS:
   A.   Construction By Property Owner: A property owner may elect to construct
a capital improvement listed in the Capital Improvements Plan. If the property
owner elects to make such improvement, the property owner must enter into an
agreement with the City prior to issuance of any building permit. The agreement
must establish the estimated cost of the improvement, the schedule for
initiation and completion of the improvement, a requirement that the
improvement be completed to City standards, and such other terms and conditions
as deemed necessary by the City. The City must review the improvement plan,
verify costs and time schedules, determine if the improvement is an eligible
improvement, and determine the amount of the applicable credit for such
improvement to be applied to the otherwise applicable impact fee prior to
issuance of any building permit. In no event may the City provide a refund for
a credit that is greater than the applicable impact fee.
   B.   Exception: No credits shall be given for the construction of local on-
site facilities, or project improvements, required by zoning, subdivision, or
other City regulations.
(1979 Code § 12.40.160; Ord. 91-32, 8-15-1991; amd. Ord. 97-24, 4-1-1997)
7-9-17: IMPACT FEE ADOPTION PROCESS:
   A.   Plan Required; Ordinance: An impact fee may be enacted by ordinance of
the City Council under this Chapter only upon preparation and adoption of a
Capital Facilities Plan meeting the substantive and procedural requirements of
Utah Code Annotated section 11-36-201, as amended. The Capital Facilities Plan
shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission, in order to determine compliance
with the Ogden City General Plan, and its recommendations forwarded to the City
Council. After adoption of the Capital Facilities Plan, the City Council may
enact an impact fee by adoption of an ordinance, which shall contain the
following:
      1.   Development service area designation. The City Council designates
the development service area. The development subareas shall be infrastructure
type specific and shall be indicated on a development service area map.
      2.   If not provided in the adopted Capital Facilities Plan, a
description of the total costs for the public facility as used in calculating
the impact fee using those costs allowable under subsection 11-36-202(c) of the
Act.
      3.   The unit of measure.
      4.   The impact fee coefficient.
      5.   Any exemption for low income housing or other development activities
with broad public purposes, and the designation of other sources of funds to
pay for such exemption.
   B.   Interim Impact Fee; Establishment:
      1.   The Mayor is authorized and directed, whenever upon investigation he
finds it necessary to impose interim impact fees until the various planning
processes can be completed in order to assure the health, safety and welfare of
the community, to establish and promulgate, by administrative order or
executive order in writing filed with the City Recorder, temporary or interim
impact fees which shall be imposed in the same manner described for impact fees
under Section
7-9-4 of this Chapter. Interim impact fees shall be based upon an engineering
estimate relating the interim impact fee to the impact of the development, in
question, upon the particular infrastructure. The order shall state the basis
of the engineering estimate by including the appropriate unit of measure, the
impact fee coefficient, and a description of the development subarea, all of
which shall be determined by using the principles and standards outlined in
this Chapter.
      2.   Interim impact fees shall remain in force and effect until the
development and enactment of the impact fee ordinance, at which time the
interim impact fee shall be rescinded and replaced by the impact fees enacted
in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and the Act. Interim impact
fees shall expire eighteen (18) months after its effective date unless extended
or readopted by the Mayor upon a determination that the capital improvement is
still needed and substantial progress toward development of the impact fee is
being made. The payment of temporary or interim impact fees shall be applied to
the impact fee finally adopted under subsection A of this Section, and any
overpayment shall be refunded in the same manner as provided in Section
7-9-13 of this Chapter. Temporary impact fees are subject to the rights of
appeal and refund as outlined in this Chapter.
      3.   Notwithstanding the above, no new impact fee shall be adopted as an
interim impact fee, after July 1, 1995. Any impact fee originally established
as a interim or temporary impact fee, prior to July 1, 1995, may be extended or
readopted by the Mayor upon a determination that the public facility is still
needed, substantial progress toward final enactment of the impact fee is being
made, and more time is needed to complete the process, procedures and analysis
necessary to enact the impact fee in accordance with the provisions of the Act;
provided, that any such interim fee shall expire, if not enacted pursuant to
the provisions of the Act by July 1, 1997.
(1979 Code § 12.40.170; Ord. 91-32, 8-15-1991; amd. Ord. 93-26, 6-22-1993; Ord.
97-24, 4-1-1997; 1999 Code)
7-9-18: LIBERAL CONSTRUCTION:
The provisions of this Chapter are hereby found and declared to be in
furtherance of the public health, safety, welfare, and convenience, and it
shall be liberally construed to effectively carry out its purpose.
(1979 Code § 12.40.180; Ord. 91-32, 8-15-1991; amd. Ord. 97-24, 4-1-1997)
CHAPTER 10
ACCEPTANCE OF PRIVATE INFRASTRUCTURE
SECTION:
7-10-1: Purpose
7-10-2: Infrastructure Defined
7-10-3: Review Procedures
7-10-4: Policies And Standards For Acceptance
7-10-5: City Attorney; Responsibilities
7-10-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   The purpose of this Chapter is to provide procedures and policies for
the review of petitions, by the owners of private infrastructure, requesting
that the City accept ownership and future maintenance costs and
responsibilities of the private infrastructure.
   B.   It is not the purpose of this Chapter to provide a mechanism by which
the City will accept any private infrastructure offered by its owners or to
accept public responsibility for infrastructure that should remain in private
ownership. The purpose is to provide a mechanism whereby private infrastructure
may be accepted by the City, if the transfer is in compliance with the policies
and standards provided herein. The City Council recognizes that benefits have
been derived by property owners or developers in the original development of
the private infrastructure, such as the reduction of costs, and in many
instances it may not be equitable to the community at large for the public to
assume such responsibilities.
(1979 Code § 12.44.010; Ord. 95-62, 9-19-1995)
7-10-2: INFRASTRUCTURE DEFINED:
For purposes of this Chapter, infrastructure shall mean capital improvements
which are commonly dedicated to and owned by the City in the provision of
municipal services, such as roads, sewers, parks, etc.
(1979 Code § 12.44.020; Ord. 95-62, 9-19-1995)
7-10-3: REVIEW PROCEDURES:
   A.   Petition: Any owner or owners of private infrastructure, who desire
that the City consider whether to accept ownership and future maintenance
responsibilities for such private infrastructure, shall submit a petition to
the City Engineer. The petition shall include:
      1.   A description of the private infrastructure requested to be
transferred to City ownership;
      2.   The signatures of all persons having any ownership interest in the
private infrastructure requested to be transferred;
      3.   A nonrefundable fee, in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00),
covering the costs of processing and reviewing the petition (the above fee is
not intended to cover the costs of preparing or conducting technical reports or
investigations as otherwise required herein); and
      4.   The report of a qualified and disinterested expert investigating and
providing such technical information as determined by the City Engineer to be
necessary to adequately describe the condition of the private infrastructure
requested to be transferred. The expert, the expert's qualifications and the
scope of the report shall be approved by the City Engineer. In lieu of the
report, the owners may provide a cash deposit for the costs of such
investigation and report. The amount of such deposit shall be based upon an
estimate of costs as determined by the City Engineer. Any portion of the
deposit that is unused during the technical investigation will be returned to
the owners.
   B.   Investigation: Upon receipt of a petition meeting the requirements of
subsection A of this Section, the City Engineer shall review the submitted
report and determine if more investigation is required before proceeding with
further City review. If more information is determined to be needed, the City
Engineer will inform the petitioners of the additional requirements, who shall
provide such information before the City shall proceed with the review. If a
deposit is submitted in lieu of the report, or in lieu of additional reporting
requirements, the City Engineer will cause such investigation to commence,
either by City personnel or by an independent contractor.
   C.   Review: The petition will be jointly reviewed by the engineering
division and the current planning division. After such review the petition will
be forwarded to the planning commission. Notice of consideration of the
petition by the planning commission shall be provided to all owners listed on
the petition and other affected parties as determined by the planning
commission.
   D.   Planning Commission; Recommendations: The planning commission shall
review and make recommendations to the mayor whether to approve, approve with
conditions or to deny the petition. Specifically the planning commission shall
review:
      1.   Whether the petition meets the policies and standards for acceptance
outlined in section
7-10-4 of this chapter;
      2.   What, if any, mitigating measures should be imposed upon such
acceptance;
      3.   If there are costs that must be assumed by the owners, available
options for the payment of such costs, such as the creation of special
improvement districts;
      4.   Whether effective mechanisms exist, or can be created, to provide
for continued private ownership and the assumption of future maintenance
responsibilities;
      5.   The effect of continued private ownership on the neighborhood or the
community at large; and
      6.   If acceptance of the particular infrastructure will cause undue
burdens to the city, whether other alternatives exist for city delivery of the
services.
   E.   Final Decision; Mayor: The petition, along with the recommendations of
the planning commission, shall be forwarded to the mayor for final decision.
(1979 Code § 12.44.030; Ord. 95-62, 9-19-1995)
7-10-4: POLICIES AND STANDARDS FOR ACCEPTANCE:
   A.   Compliance: Any infrastructure offered to the city shall be brought
into compliance with current standards before it will be accepted by the city.
   B.   Costs; Owners: The owners of the respective private improvement shall
pay the cost of bringing those improvements up to current standards.
   C.   Rights Of Way; Easements: The owners of the respective private
infrastructure shall provide such additional street rights of way or easements
as may be deemed necessary by the city. These rights of way or easements may be
needed to facilitate current or future improvements.
   D.   Private And Public Infrastructure; Mix: There shall be no remaining mix
of private and public infrastructure elements unless there exists evidence that
maintenance for any remaining private portion is adequately provided for, and
there are no foreseeable problems with the proposed mix.
   E.   Fees And Dues; Collected Prior: Any fees or dues that have been
collected from the current or previous property owners for the provision of
municipal type services or for the maintenance of the infrastructure, shall be
turned over to the city should the improvements be accepted.
   F.   Action By City Council: If the approval by the mayor of any transfer of
ownership of any private infrastructure requires certain actions by the city
council, such as additional budgetary appropriations, the creation of a special
improvement district, or the approval of an amendment to a subdivision plat,
such transfer shall not be accepted until such action has been taken by the
city council.
   G.   Consideration: No transfer shall occur unless it is determined that
good cause exists for the transfer and that the transfer will not be
detrimental to the best interests of the city or its citizens at large, by
causing undue burdens in the delivery of municipal services and in the
assumption of future maintenance costs and responsibilities.
(Ord. 2009-52, 8-4-2009)
7-10-5: CITY ATTORNEY; RESPONSIBILITIES:
The transfer and acceptance of ownership of any private infrastructure under
the provisions of this chapter, whether by plat, plat amendment, deed or other
legal means of transfer, shall be completed in such form and contain such
signatures and approvals, and include such proof of ownership and ability to
transfer as determined to be sufficient by the city attorney.
(1979 Code § 12.44.050; Ord. 95-62, 9-19-1995)
CHAPTER 11
PROJECT IMPROVEMENT FEES; DEVELOPER REIMBURSEMENT AGREEMENTS
SECTION:
7-11-1: Project Improvement Fees; Developer Reimbursement Agreements
7-11-1: PROJECT IMPROVEMENT FEES; DEVELOPER REIMBURSEMENT AGREEMENTS:
   A.   Authority: The Mayor is authorized to approve and adopt, by
administrative order filed with the City Recorder, project improvement fees for
the reimbursement of a developer who has installed and extended project
improvements on or along undeveloped or underdeveloped property lying between
the developer's property and the point of connection to existing City
infrastructure, hereinafter referred to as "intervening property". Such project
improvement fees shall:
      1.   Provide reimbursement for a developer in accordance with the
provisions of a written agreement, between the City and such developer
("payback agreement");
      2.   Be assessed at such time as an owner or developer of the intervening
property applies for development approval to the City and is requesting
connection to or use of such project improvements, or, if required by the City
Council, at the time such property is annexed;
      3.   Represent the intervening property's proportionate share of the cost
of such project improvements;
      4.   Not be used, in any manner, to reimburse the City for the City's
costs in making any capital improvement, including the City's cost attributable
to the "up-sizing" of a water or sewer line or requiring the extension of a
collector or arterial road; and
      5.   Be assessed only for the costs of water line extensions, sanitary or
storm sewer line extensions, or street extensions required as part of a
development approval.
   B.   Project Improvements Defined: For purposes of this Section, "project
improvements" means project improvements, as defined under Utah Code Annotated
section 11-36-102, as amended, or its successor provision.
   C.   Notice To Owners: Prior to adoption of an administrative order imposing
such fees, the Mayor shall provide notice to the owners of record, according to
the last assessment roles, of any intervening properties subject to such fees.
   D.   Appeal: Imposition of such fees may be appealed under the provisions of
Title 4, Chapter 4, Article A of this Code.
(1979 Code § 12.44.060; Ord. 97-5, 1-21-1997)
CHAPTER 12
WATERCOURSES; MAINTENANCE AND SPECIFICATIONS
SECTION:
7-12-1: Regulations
7-12-2: Failure To Comply; City Action
7-12-3: Irrigation; Specifications Compliance
7-12-1: REGULATIONS:
The following regulations shall apply to all canals, ditches, conduits and
other waterways in the City:
   A.   Obstructions: It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any canal,
ditch, conduit or other watercourse of any kind or nature, natural or
artificial, used by such person for the coursing of water within the City
limits, to become so obstructed as to cause the water to back up and overflow
therefrom, or to become in an unsanitary condition.
   B.   Nuisance; Abatement: Maintenance of any such watercourse in such
condition shall constitute a nuisance and the same shall be subject to
abatement in accordance with the provisions of Title 12, Chapter 8 of this
Code.
   C.   Construction Of Conduit Or Other Structures: Wherever any such
watercourse crosses any public street or sidewalk or other public right of way,
or whenever any such street, sidewalk or other public right of way is extended,
altered or improved, it shall be the duty of the persons owning the right to
run water through such waterway to construct and maintain across such street,
sidewalk or right of way a conduit, bridge or other suitable structure that is
approved by the City Council and meets the minimum standards and specifications
established by the Public Works Director. Such person shall thereafter maintain
such conduit, bridge or structure in good repair, free of obstructions and in a
sanitary condition.
(1979 Code § 12.04.160; amd. 1999 Code)
7-12-2: FAILURE TO COMPLY; CITY ACTION:
If any person fails to construct, maintain or keep free from obstructions any
conduit, bridge, or other structure as required by Section
7-12-1 of this Chapter after five (5) days' written notice to do so from the
Director of Public Works, the Mayor or the Mayor's designee may order such work
done, either under private contract or in such other manner as the Mayor or
Mayor's designee may direct. The person responsible for such work under the
provisions of Section
7-12-1 of this Chapter shall be liable for the costs of such work plus a
reasonable amount, not to exceed ten percent (10%) of the total cost of such
work, for supervision and engineering costs.
(1979 Code § 12.04.170; amd. 1999 Code)
7-12-3: IRRIGATION; SPECIFICATIONS COMPLIANCE:
All owners or occupants of lots in the City requiring water from a main ditch
for irrigation or other purposes shall dig suitable ditches, erect flumes, lay
pipes and install culverts, as needed, and maintain the same to convey water
under sidewalks to or from their respective lots. All culverts, ditches, pipes
and flumes conveying water under sidewalks shall meet such reasonable standards
and specifications as may be established by the Director of Public Works.
(1979 Code § 12.04.180)
CHAPTER 13
RAILROADS 1
SECTION:
7-13-1: Applicability
7-13-2: Reservation Of Right To Regulate
7-13-3: Regulations And Requirements
7-13-4: Obstructions
7-13-5: Railroads Permitted To Cross Each Other
7-13-6: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. U.C.A. §§ 10-8-30, 10-8-33 and 10-8-34 through 10-8-36.
7-13-1: APPLICABILITY:
All persons, associations or corporations that construct, operate or maintain
any railroad or railroad tracks within the City limits shall be subject to the
provisions of this Chapter.
(1979 Code § 12.36.010)
7-13-2: RESERVATION OF RIGHT TO REGULATE:
The City Council expressly reserves to itself all rights and powers to regulate
the location, construction, maintenance, operation and removal of all
railroads, railroad tracks, depots and facilities related thereto and the
operation and movement of all trains, engines and cars on and in said tracks
and facilities; and no grant, contract or franchise shall be construed as
conveying, surrendering or transferring such rights and powers to any grantee.
(1979 Code § 12.36.020)
7-13-3: REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Facilities; Maintenance: All persons, associations or corporations, as
set forth in Section
7-13-1 of this Chapter, shall, at their own expense, construct and maintain in
good repair all water sects, drains, sewers, street crossings or receiving
basins, water distribution facilities, and all fixtures connected therewith and
the distribution of water in the City that may be affected by such railroads or
railroad tracks. The construction, alterations and repairs shall be done under
the direction of the City Engineer, subject to the approval of the Mayor.
(1979 Code § 12.36.030; amd. 1999 Code)
   B.   Cross Street Facilities: All railroad companies shall construct at
their own expense such arches, viaducts and bridges for all the cross streets
intersected by the embankments or excavations for railroad tracks as in the
opinion of the Mayor may be required to make the passage over the railroad and
embankment easy and convenient for all purposes for which streets are usually
used. They shall also construct and properly maintain such drains and sewers as
their embankments and excavations may make necessary. Said companies shall make
their railroad paths conform to what is or what may hereafter be the regulation
or grade of the street or place through which their railroads pass. It shall be
unlawful to take up, remove, carry away or cause to permit to be taken up,
removed, or carried away, any rock, gravel, earth or other material from any
street or public place for making embankments, grades or for any other purpose
except by permission of the Mayor and under the direction of the City Engineer.
(1979 Code § 12.36.040; amd. 1999 Code)
   C.   Speed And Traffic: It is unlawful for any person to run any passenger
locomotive, passenger train or passenger cars operated by steam or diesel at a
greater speed than thirty (30) miles per hour or to run any freight or diesel
at a greater speed than fifteen (15) miles per hour within the corporate limits
of the City, and the bells on locomotives, while in motion, shall in all cases,
be rung continually in the inhabited portions of the City; and all trains are
required to come to a full stop before crossing any line of railroad and at a
distance of not less than fifty feet (50') therefrom.
(1979 Code § 12.36.060)
   D.   Crossing Gates: It shall be the duty of all railroad or depot companies
operating within the limits of the City to construct, operate and maintain
suitable and convenient gates at such street crossings in use by them as the
Mayor may direct.
(1979 Code § 12.36.080; amd. 1999 Code)
7-13-4: OBSTRUCTIONS:
   A.   Streets:
      1.   Remedy: If at any time after the construction of any railroad or
tracks it appears to the Mayor that any part thereof constitutes an obstruction
or impediment to the ordinary use of any street or place, or is run contrary to
the regulations of the City, the railroad company or the officers thereof
shall, at the request of the Mayor, forthwith provide a remedy for the same
satisfactory to the Mayor. If they fail to find such remedy, they shall, within
one month after such request, proceed to remove such railroad obstruction or
impediment and to replace the street or place in as good condition as it was
before the railroad or tracks were laid down. Should the company or its
officers neglect or refuse to obey such request, the Mayor may, upon the
expiration of the time limited in such notice, cause the obstruction or
impediment to be removed and the street or place to be restored as set forth in
this subsection at the expense of the railroad company.
(1979 Code § 12.36.050; amd. 1999 Code)
      2.   Time Limit: It is unlawful for any train, engine or cars to be
allowed to stand in or upon any sidewalk, street or crossing, or to obstruct
ordinary travel thereon, for a period longer than five (5) minutes. If the
obstruction of any street, sidewalk or crossing exceeds five (5) minutes, the
trains or cars shall be immediately opened at the crossing of every street over
the railroad track or depot grounds for the full width thereof. It shall be
unlawful for any railroad company, depot company or any of its officers, agents
or employees to allow, permit or cause any obstruction prohibited in this
subsection. It shall be unlawful to construct or place any railroad track or
switch upon, over or across any of the streets or sidewalks or street crossings
of the City without the consent of the Mayor.
(1979 Code § 12.36.070; amd. 1999 Code)
   B.   Railroad Tracks: It is unlawful for any person to wilfully obstruct any
railroad track in the City.
(1979 Code § 12.36.100)
7-13-5: RAILROADS PERMITTED TO CROSS EACH OTHER:
Nothing in the provisions of any ordinance or resolution granting the right of
way or franchise for a railroad shall be construed to prohibit any other
railroad company from crossing any railroad track already laid, and when any
railroad shall intersect or cross any other railroad, the rails shall be cut or
altered so as to permit the cars to pass over the same without obstruction.
(1979 Code § 12.36.090)
7-13-6: PENALTY:
Any person or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall
be deemed guilty of a Class B misdemeanor and shall be punished as set forth in
Title 1, Chapter 4 of this Code.
(1979 Code § 12.36.110; amd. 1999 Code)
CHAPTER 14
UTILITY POLES AND WIRES (ELECTRIC AND TELEPHONE POLES)
SECTION:
7-14-1: Permit Required
7-14-2: Right To Erect Alarm Systems
7-14-3: Prohibited Activities
7-14-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   Application; Conditions: No person shall erect or cause to be erected
in the city any telegraph, telephone, electric light or electric railroad poles
without first having obtained a permit therefor from the engineering division.
The applications for such permits must be signed by the person desiring to
erect the poles therein specified, must state the place or places where said
poles will be erected and must be accompanied by a fee of two dollars ($2.00)
for each pole. It shall be unlawful to erect any such poles except in strict
conformity with said permit. No permit shall be issued to any person unless the
applicant therefor holds a franchise from the city granting certain specified
and privileged uses of public streets which require the erection of said poles
and a copy of such franchise has been filed with the city engineer.
(1979 Code § 16.20.010; Ord. 88-46, 12-1-1988; amd. Ord. 92-6, 1-9-1992; Ord.
95-25, 5-16-1995)
   B.   Bond Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to erect any
telegraph, telephone, electric light or electric railroad poles within the
corporate limits of the city unless he has given bond to the city in the sum of
twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), conditioned that he will indemnify
and save the city harmless from any and all damages that may be caused by
reason of the erection, maintenance, management or use of such telegraph,
telephone or electric light poles, and the wires thereof, in the city. Such
bond shall be approved and filed with the city recorder before the erection of
any telegraph, telephone or electric light poles.
(1979 Code § 16.20.020; Ord. 88-46, 12-1-1988; amd. Ord. 92-6, 1-9-1992; Ord.
95-25, 5-16-1995; 1999 Code)
7-14-2: RIGHT TO ERECT ALARM SYSTEMS:
In case the city desires at any time to put in operation any fire alarm or
police telegraph system, it reserves to itself the right to use the top of or
space near the top of, any and all telegraph and telephone poles, free of
expense, for the purpose of attaching wires thereto for use in said fire alarm
or police telegraph, and the granting of any franchise to any person,
copartnership or company to erect poles for any of the purposes indicated in
this chapter shall be with the reservation of privilege or right specified in
this chapter.
(1979 Code § 16.20.050; Ord. 88-46, 12-1-1988; amd. Ord. 92-6, 1-9-1992; Ord.
95-25, 5-16-1995)
7-14-3: PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES:
   A.   Interference: It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or cause to
be erected any pole or poles in any street when the erecting thereof will in
any manner interfere with any sewer, sewer connection, gas or water main or
pipe, or which will in any way interfere with the free use of the streets and
the city engineer shall refuse to issue any permit for the erection of poles,
the setting of which will in any manner violate this subsection.
(1979 Code § 16.20.030; Ord. 88-46, 12-1-1988; amd. Ord. 92-6, 1-9-1992; Ord.
95-25, 5-16-1995)
   B.   Poles In Intersections: It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or
maintain any pole or other obstruction in the intersection of any streets.
(1979 Code § 16.20.040; Ord. 88-46, 12-1-1988; amd. Ord. 92-6, 1-9-1992; Ord.
95-25, 5-16-1995)
   C.   Damaging Or Removing Poles: It shall be unlawful for any person to
wilfully and negligently injure, pull down, break or deface any telegraph,
telephone or electric light pole or wire erected or standing in the streets of
the city.
(1979 Code § 16.20.060; Ord. 88-46, 12-1-1988; amd. Ord. 92-6, 1-9-1992; Ord.
95-25, 5-16-1995)
CHAPTER 15
TELECOMMUNICATIONS USE OF RIGHTS OF WAY
SECTION:
7-15-1: Declaration Of Finding And Intent
7-15-2: Power To Manage Rights Of Way
7-15-3: Scope Of Chapter
7-15-4: Excluded Activity
7-15-5: Definitions
7-15-6: Nonexclusive Franchise
7-15-7: Every Provider Must Obtain
7-15-8: Nature Of Grant
7-15-9: Current Providers
7-15-10: Nature Of Franchise
7-15-11: Regulatory Approval Needed
7-15-12: Term
7-15-13: Compensation
7-15-14: Franchise Application
7-15-15: Construction And Technical Requirements
7-15-16: Franchise And License Nontransferable
7-15-17: Oversight And Regulation
7-15-18: Rights Of The City
7-15-19: Obligation To Notify; Publicizing Work
7-15-20: Conflicts
7-15-21: Severability
7-15-22: New Developments
7-15-23: Notices
7-15-24: Exercise Of Police Power
7-15-25: Construction
7-15-26: Chapter Applicability
7-15-27: Other Applicable Ordinances
7-15-28: City Failure To Enforce
7-15-29: Construed According To Utah Law
7-15-1: DECLARATION OF FINDING AND INTENT:
   A.   Findings Regarding Rights Of Way: The city finds that the rights of way
within the city:
      1.   Are critical to the travel and transport of persons and property in
the business and social life of the city;
      2.   Are intended for public uses and must be managed and controlled
consistent with that intent;
      3.   Can be partially occupied by the facilities of utilities and other
public service entities delivering utility and public services rendered for
profit, to the enhancement of the health, welfare, and general economic well-
being of the city and its citizens; and
      4.   Are a unique and physically limited resource requiring proper
management to maximize the efficiency and to minimize the costs to the
taxpayers of the foregoing uses and to minimize the inconvenience to and
negative effects upon the public from such facilities' construction, placement,
relocation, and maintenance in the rights of way.
   B.   Finding Regarding Compensation: The city finds that the city should
receive fair and reasonable compensation for use of the rights of way.
   C.   Finding Regarding Local Concern: The city finds that while
telecommunications systems are in part an extension of interstate commerce,
their operations also involve rights of way, municipal franchising, and vital
business and community service, which are of local concern.
   D.   Finding Regarding Promotion Of Telecommunications Services: The city
finds that it is in the best interests of its taxpayers and citizens to promote
the rapid development of telecommunications services, on a nondiscriminatory
basis, responsive to community and public interest, and to assure availability
for municipal, educational and community services.
   E.   Findings Regarding Franchise Standards: The city finds that it is in
the interests of the public to franchise and to establish standards for
franchising providers in a manner that:
      1.   Fairly and reasonably compensates the city on a competitively
neutral and nondiscriminatory basis as provided herein;
      2.   Encourages competition by establishing terms and conditions under
which providers may use the rights of way to serve the public;
      3.   Fully protects the public interests and the city from any harm that
may flow from such commercial use of rights of way;
      4.   Protects the police powers and rights-of-way management authority of
the city, in a manner consistent with federal and state law;
      5.   Otherwise protects the public interests in the development and use
of the city infrastructure;
      6.   Protects the public's investment in improvements in the rights of
way; and
      7.   Ensures that no barriers to entry of telecommunications providers
are created and that such franchising is accomplished in a manner that does not
prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting telecommunication services, within
the meaning of the telecommunications act of 1996 ("Act") (public law no. 96-
104).
(1979 Code § 12.46.010; Ord. 97-69, 9-23-1997; amd. Ord. 2000-66, 11-21-2000)
7-15-2: POWER TO MANAGE RIGHTS OF WAY:
The city adopts this chapter pursuant to its power to manage the rights of way,
pursuant to common law, the Utah constitution and statutory authority, and
receive fair and reasonable, compensation for the use of rights of way by
providers as expressly set forth by section 253 of the act.
(1979 Code § 12.46.020; Ord. 97-69, 9-23-1997)
7-15-3: SCOPE OF CHAPTER:
This chapter shall provide the basic local scheme for providers of
telecommunications services and systems that require the use of the rights of
way, including providers of both the system and service, those providers of the
system only, and those providers who do not build the system but who only
provide services. This chapter shall apply to all future providers and to all
providers in the city prior to the effective date hereof, whether operating
with or without a franchise as set forth in section
7-15-7 of this chapter.
(1979 Code § 12.46.030; Ord. 97-69, 9-23-1997)
7-15-4: EXCLUDED ACTIVITY:
   A.   Cable: This chapter shall not apply to cable television operators
otherwise regulated by the cable television consumer protection and competition
act of 1992.
   B.   Wireless Services: This chapter shall not apply to personal wireless
service facilities.
   C.   Provisions Applicable To Excluded Providers: Providers excused by other
law that prohibits the city from requiring a franchise shall not be required to
obtain a franchise, but all of the requirements imposed by this chapter through
the exercise of the city's police power and not preempted by other law shall be
applicable.
(1979 Code § 12.46.040; Ord. 97-69, 9-23-1997)
7-15-5: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their
derivatives shall have the meanings set forth in this section, unless the
context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended. Words used in the
present tense include the future tense, words in the single number include the
plural number, words in the plural number include the singular. The words
"shall" and "will" are mandatory, and "may" is permissive. Words not defined
shall be given their common and ordinary meaning.
APPLICATION: The process by which a provider submits a request and indicates a
desire to be granted a franchise to utilize the rights of way of all, or a
part, of the city. An application includes all written documentation, verbal
statements and representations, in whatever form or forum, made by a provider
to the city concerning: the construction of a telecommunications system over,
under, on or through the rights of way; the telecommunications services
proposed to be provided in the city by a provider; and any other matter
pertaining to a proposed system or service.
CITY: Ogden City, Utah.
COMPLETION DATE: The date that a provider begins providing services to
customers in the city.
CONSTRUCTION COSTS: All costs of constructing a system, including make ready
costs, other than engineering fees, attorney or accountant fees, or other
consulting fees.
CONTROL OR CONTROLLING INTEREST: Actual working control in whatever manner
exercised, including, without limitation, working control through ownership,
management, debt instruments or negative control, as the case may be, of the
system or of a provider. A rebuttable presumption of the existence of control
or a controlling interest shall arise from the beneficial ownership, directly
or indirectly, by any person, or group of persons acting in concert, of more
than thirty five percent (35%) of any provider (which person or group of
persons is hereinafter referred to as "controlling person"). "Control" or
"controlling interest", as used herein, may be held simultaneously by more than
one person or group of persons.
FCC: The federal communications commission, or any successor thereto.
FRANCHISE: The rights and obligation extended by the city to a provider to own,
lease, construct, maintain, use or operate a system in the rights of way within
the boundaries of the city. Any such authorization, in whatever form granted,
shall not mean or include:
   A.   Any other permit or authorization required for the privilege of
transacting and carrying on a business within the city required by the
ordinances and laws of the city;
   B.   Any other permit, agreement or authorization required in connection
with operations on rights of way or public property including, without
limitation, permits and agreements for placing devices on or in poles, conduits
or other structures, whether owned by the city or a private entity, or for
excavating or performing other work in or along the rights of way.
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT: A contract entered into in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter between the city and a franchisee that sets forth, subject to
this chapter, the terms and conditions under which a franchise will be
exercised.
GROSS REVENUE: Includes all revenues of a provider that may be included as
gross revenue within the meaning of Utah Code Annotated title 11, chapter 26,
as amended. In the case of any provider not covered within the ambit of chapter
26, title 11, Utah Code Annotated, the definition of "Gross Revenue" shall be
that set forth in the franchise agreement.
INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER: A person providing to another, for the purpose of
providing telecommunication services to customers, all or part of the necessary
system which uses the rights of way.
OPEN VIDEO SERVICE: Any video programming services provided to any person
through the use of rights of way, by a provider that is certified by the FCC to
operate an open video system pursuant to section 651 et seq., of the
telecommunications act (to be codified at 47 USC title VI, part V), regardless
of the system used.
OPEN VIDEO SYSTEM: The system of cables, wires, lines, towers, wave-guides,
optic fiber, microwave, laser beams, and any associated converters, equipment,
or facilities designed and constructed for the purpose of producing, receiving,
amplifying or distributing open video services to or from subscribers or
locations within the city.
OPERATOR: Any person who provides service over a telecommunications system and
directly or through one or more persons owns a controlling interest in such
system, or who otherwise controls or is responsible for the operation of such a
system.
ORDINANCE OR TELECOMMUNICATIONS ORDINANCE: This chapter concerning the granting
of franchises in and by the city for the construction, ownership, operation,
use or maintenance of a telecommunications system.
PSC: The public service commission, or any successor thereto.
PERSON: Includes any individual, corporation, partnership, association, joint
stock company, trust, or any other legal entity, but not the city.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES FACILITIES: Has the same meaning as provided in
section 704 of the act (47 USC 332(c)(7)(c)), which includes what is commonly
known as cellular and PSC services that do not install any system or portion of
a system in the rights of way.
PROVIDER: An operator, infrastructure provider, resaler, or system lessee.
RESALER: Refers to any person that provides local exchange service over a
system for which a separate charge is made, where that person does not own or
lease the underlying system used for the transmission.
RIGHTS OF WAY: The surface of and the space above and below any public street,
sidewalk, alley, or other public way of any type whatsoever, now or hereafter
existing as such within the city.
SIGNAL: Any transmission or reception of electronic, electrical, light or laser
or radio frequency energy or optical information in either analog or digital
format.
SYSTEM LESSEE: Refers to any person that leases a system or a specific portion
of a system to provide services.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: The transmission, between or among points specified by the
user, of information of the user's choosing (e.g., data, video, and voice),
without change in the form or content of the information sent and received.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE OR SERVICES: Any telecommunications or
communications services provided by a provider within the city that the
provider is authorized to provide under federal, state and local law, and any
equipment and/or facilities required for and integrated with the services
provided within the city, except that these terms do not include "cable
service", as defined in the cable communications policy act of 1984, as amended
by the cable television consumer protection and competition act of 1992 (47 USC
521 et seq.), and the telecommunications act of 1996. Telecommunications system
or systems also includes an open video system.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM OR SYSTEM: All conduits, manholes, poles, antennas,
transceivers, amplifiers and all other electronic devices, equipment, wire and
appurtenances owned, leased, or used by a provider, located in the rights of
way and utilized in the provision of services, including fully digital or
analog, voice, data and video imaging and other enhanced telecommunications
services. Telecommunications system or systems also includes an open video
system.
WIRE: Fiber optic telecommunications cable, wire, coaxial cable, or other
transmission medium that may be used in lieu thereof for similar purposes.
(1979 Code § 12.46.050; Ord. 97-69, 9-23-1997; amd. Ord. 2000-66, 11-21-2000)
7-15-6: NONEXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE:
The city is empowered and authorized to issue nonexclusive franchises governing
the installation, construction, and maintenance of systems in the city's rights
of way, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The franchise is
granted through a franchise agreement entered into between the city and
provider.
(1979 Code § 12.46.060; Ord. 97-69, 9-23-1997)
7-15-7: EVERY PROVIDER MUST OBTAIN:
Except to the extent preempted by federal or state law, as ultimately
interpreted by a court of competent jurisdiction, including any appeals, every
provider must obtain a franchise prior to constructing a telecommunications
system or providing telecommunications services using the rights of way, and
every provider must obtain a franchise before constructing an open video system
or providing open video services via an open video system. Any open video
system or service shall be subject to the customer service and consumer
protection provisions applicable to the cable TV companies to the extent the
city is not preempted as ultimately interpreted by a court of competent
jurisdiction, including any appeals. The fact that particular
telecommunications systems may be used for multiple purposes does not obviate
the need to obtain a franchise for other purposes. By way of illustration and
not limitation, a cable operator of a cable system must obtain a cable
franchise, and, should it intend to provide telecommunications services over
the same system, must also obtain a telecommunications franchise.
(1979 Code § 12.46.070; Ord. 97-69, 9-23-1997)
7-15-8: NATURE OF GRANT:
A franchise shall not convey title, equitable or legal, in the rights of way. A
franchise is only the right to occupy rights of way on a nonexclusive basis for
the limited purposes and for the limited period stated in the franchise; the
right may not be subdivided, assigned, or subleased, except as may be expressly
provided in a franchise agreement. A franchise does not excuse a provider from
obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before collocating
its system on the property of others, including the city's property. This
section shall not be construed to prohibit a provider from leasing conduit to
another provider, so long as the lessee has obtained a franchise.
(1979 Code § 12.46.080; Ord. 97-69, 9-23-1997; amd. Ord. 2000-66, 11-21-2000)
7-15-9: CURRENT PROVIDERS:
Except to the extent exempted by federal or state law, any provider acting
without a franchise on the effective date hereof shall request issuance of a
franchise from the city within ninety (90) days of the effective date hereof.
If such request is made, the provider may continue providing service during the
course of negotiations. If a timely request is not made, or if negotiations
cease and a franchise is not granted, the provider shall comply with the
provisions of subsection 7-15-18B of this chapter.
(1979 Code § 12.46.090; Ord. 97-69, 9-23-1997)
7-15-10: NATURE OF FRANCHISE:
The franchise granted by the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be
a nonexclusive franchise providing the right and consent to install, repair,
maintain, remove and replace its system on, over and under the rights of way in
order to provide services.
(1979 Code § 12.46.100; Ord. 97-69, 9-23-1997)
7-15-11: REGULATORY APPROVAL NEEDED:
Before offering or providing any services pursuant to the franchise, a provider
shall obtain any and all regulatory approvals, permits, authorizations or
licenses for the offering or provision of such services from the appropriate
federal, state and local authorities, if required, and shall submit to the city
upon the written request of the city evidence of all such approvals, permits,
authorizations or licenses.
(1979 Code § 12.46.110; Ord. 97-69, 9-23-1997)
7-15-12: TERM:
No franchise issued pursuant to this chapter shall have a term of less than
five (5) years or greater than fifteen (15) years. Each franchise shall be
granted in a nondiscriminatory manner.
(1979 Code § 12.46.120; Ord. 97-69, 9-23-1997)
7-15-13: COMPENSATION:
As fair and reasonable compensation for any franchise granted pursuant to this
chapter, a provider shall have the following obligations:
   A.   Application Fee: In order to offset the cost to the city to review an
application for a franchise and in addition to all other fees, permits or
charges, a provider shall pay to the city, at the time of application, five
hundred dollars ($500.00) as a nonrefundable application fee.
   B.   Franchise Fees: The franchise fee, if any, shall be set forth in the
franchise agreement. The obligation to pay a franchise fee shall commence on
the completion date. The franchise fee is offset by any business license fee or
business license tax enacted by the city.
   C.   Excavation Permits: The provider shall also pay fees required for an
excavation permit as provided in chapter 5 of this title.
   D.   Timing: Unless otherwise agreed to in the franchise agreement, all
franchise fees shall be paid on a monthly basis within forty five (45) days of
the close of each calendar month.
   E.   Fee Statement And Certification: Unless a franchise agreement provides
otherwise, each fee payment shall be accompanied by a statement showing the
manner in which the fee was calculated and shall be certified as to its
accuracy.
   F.   Future Costs: A provider shall pay to the city or to third parties, at
the direction of the city, an amount equal to the reasonable costs and
reasonable expenses that the city incurs for the services of third parties
(including, but not limited to, attorneys and other consultants) in connection
with any renewal or provider-initiated renegotiation, or amendment of this
chapter or a franchise; provided, however, that the parties shall agree upon a
reasonable financial cap at the outset of negotiations.
   G.   Taxes And Assessments: To the extent taxes or other assessments are
imposed by taxing authorities, other than the city on the use of the city
property as a result of a provider's use or occupation of the rights of way,
the provider shall be responsible for payment of its pro rata share of such
taxes, payable annually unless otherwise required by the taxing authority. Such
payments shall be in addition to any other fees payable pursuant to this
chapter.
   H.   Interest On Late Payments: In the event that any payment is not
actually received by the city on or before the applicable date fixed in the
franchise, interest thereon shall accrue from such date until received at the
rate charged for delinquent state taxes.
   I.   No Accord And Satisfaction: No acceptance by the city of any fee shall
be construed as an accord that the amount paid is in fact the correct amount,
nor shall such acceptance of such fee payment be construed as a release of any
claim the city may have for additional sums payable.
   J.   Not In Lieu Of Other Taxes Or Fees: The fee payment is not a payment in
lieu of any tax, fee or other assessment except as specifically provided in
this chapter, or as required by applicable law. By way of example, and not
limitation, excavation permit fees and fees to obtain space on the city-owned
poles are not waived and remain applicable.
   K.   Continuing Obligation And Holdover: In the event a provider continues
to operate all or any part of the system after the term of the franchise, such
operator shall continue to comply with all applicable provisions of this
chapter and the franchise, including, without limitation, all compensation and
other payment provisions throughout the period of such continued operation;
provided, that any such continued operation shall in no way be construed as a
renewal or other extension of the franchise, nor as a limitation on the
remedies, if any, available to the city as a result of such continued operation
after the term, including, but not limited to, damages and restitution.
   L.   Costs Of Publication: A provider shall assume any publication costs
associated with its franchise that may be required by law.
(1979 Code § 12.46.130; Ord. 97-69, 9-23-1997)
7-15-14: FRANCHISE APPLICATION:
   A.   Form: To obtain a franchise to construct, own, maintain or provide
services through any system within the city, to obtain a renewal of a franchise
granted pursuant to this chapter, or to obtain the city approval of a transfer
of a franchise, as provided in section
7-15-16 of this chapter, granted pursuant to this chapter, an application must
be filed with city on the form attached to the ordinance codified herein as
exhibit A, which is hereby incorporated by reference. The application form may
be changed by the mayor so long as such changes request information that is
consistent with this chapter. Such application form, as amended, is
incorporated by reference.
   B.   Application Criteria: In making a determination as to an application
filed pursuant to this chapter, the city may, but shall not be limited to,
request the following:
      1.   A copy of the order from the PSC granting a certificate of
convenience and necessity, if any is necessary for provider's offering of
services within the state of Utah.
      2.   Certification of the provider's financial ability to compensate the
city for provider's intrusion, maintenance and use of the rights of way during
the franchise term proposed by the provider.
      3.   Provider's agreement to comply with the requirements of section
7-15-15 of this chapter.
      4.   Prior to making any attachments to poles, the willingness to enter
into a pole attachment agreement with the city.
   C.   Franchise Determination: The city, in its discretion, shall determine
the award of any franchise on the basis of these and other considerations
relevant to the use of the rights of way, without competitive bidding.
(1979 Code § 12.46.140; Ord. 97-69, 9-23-1997; amd. Ord. 97-76, 10-21-1997;
Ord. 2000-66, 11-21-2000)
7-15-15: CONSTRUCTION AND TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   General Requirement: No provider shall receive a franchise unless it
agrees to comply with each of the terms set forth in this section governing
construction and technical requirements for its system, in addition to any
other reasonable requirements or procedures specified by the city or the
franchise, including requirements regarding locating and sharing in the cost of
locating portions of the system with other systems or with city utilities. A
provider shall obtain an excavation permit, pursuant to the excavation
ordinance, before commencing any work in the rights of way.
   B.   Quality: All work involved in the construction, maintenance, repair,
upgrade and removal of the system shall be performed in a safe, thorough and
reliable manner using materials of good and durable quality. If, at any time,
it is determined by the FCC or any other agency granted authority by federal
law or the FCC to make such determination, that any part of the system,
including, without limitation, any means used to distribute signals over or
within the system, is harmful to the public health, safety or welfare, or
quality of service or reliability, then a provider shall, at its own cost and
expense, promptly correct all such conditions.
   C.   Licenses And Permits: A provider shall have the sole responsibility for
diligently obtaining, at its own cost and expense, all permits, licenses or
other forms of approval or authorization necessary to construct, maintain,
upgrade or repair the system, including, but not limited to, any necessary
approvals from persons and/or the city to use private property, easements,
poles and conduits. A provider shall obtain any required permit, license,
approval or authorization, including, but not limited to, excavation permits,
pole attachment agreements, etc., prior to the commencement of the activity for
which the permit, license, approval or authorization is required.
   D.   Relocation Of System:
      1.   New Grades Or Lines: If the grades or lines of any rights of way are
changed at any time in a manner affecting the system, then a provider shall
comply with the requirements of the excavation ordinance.
      2.   City Authority To Move System In Emergency: The city may, at any
time, in case of fire, disaster or other emergency, as determined by the city
in its reasonable discretion, cut or move any parts of the system and
appurtenances on, over or under the rights of way of the city, in which event
the city shall not be liable therefor to a provider. The city shall notify a
provider in writing prior to, if practicable, but in any event as soon as
possible and in no case later than the next business day following any action
taken under this section. Notice shall be given as provided in section
7-15-23 of this chapter.
      3.   Provider Required To Temporarily Move System For Third Party: A
provider shall, upon prior reasonable written notice by the city or any person
holding a permit to move any structure, and within the time that is reasonable
under the circumstances, temporarily move any part of its system to permit the
moving of said structure. A provider may impose a reasonable charge on any
person other than the city for any such movement of its systems.
      4.   Rights Of Way Change; Obligation To Move System: When the city is
changing a rights of way and makes a written request, a provider is required to
move or remove its system from the rights of way, without cost to the city, to
the extent provided in the excavation ordinance. This obligation does not apply
to systems originally located on private property pursuant to a private
easement, which property was later incorporated into the rights of way, if that
private easement grants a superior vested right. This obligation exists whether
or not the provider has obtained an excavation permit.
   E.   Protect Structures: In connection with the construction, maintenance,
repair, upgrade or removal of the system, a provider shall, at its own cost and
expense, protect any and all existing structures belonging to the City and all
designated landmarks, as well as all other structures within any designated
landmark district. A provider shall obtain the prior written consent of the
City to alter any water main, power facility, sewerage or drainage system, or
any other municipal structure on, over or under the rights of way of the City
required because of the presence of the system. Any such alteration shall be
made by the City or its designee on a reimbursable basis. A provider agrees
that it shall be liable for the costs incurred by the City to replace or repair
and restore to its prior condition in a manner as may be reasonably specified
by the City, any municipal structure or any other rights of way of the City
involved in the construction, maintenance, repair, upgrade or removal of the
system that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of any work thereon by
or on behalf of a provider pursuant to the franchise.
   F.   No Obstruction: In connection with the construction, maintenance,
upgrade, repair or removal of the system, a provider shall not unreasonably
obstruct the rights of way of fixed guide way systems, railways, passenger
travel, or other traffic to, from or within the City without the prior consent
of the appropriate authorities.
   G.   Safety Precautions: A provider shall, at its own cost and expense,
undertake all necessary and appropriate efforts to prevent accidents at its
work sites, including the placing and maintenance of proper guards, fences,
barricades, security personnel and suitable and sufficient lighting, and such
other requirements prescribed by OSHA and Utah OSHA. A provider shall comply
with all applicable Federal, State and local requirements, including, but not
limited to, the National Electric Safety Code.
   H.   Repair: After written reasonable notice to the provider, unless, in the
sole determination of the City, an eminent danger exists, any rights of way
within the City which are disturbed or damaged during the construction,
maintenance or reconstruction by a provider of its system may be repaired by
the City at the provider's expense, to a condition as good as that prevailing
before such work was commenced. Upon doing so, the City shall submit to such a
provider an itemized statement of the cost for repairing and restoring the
rights of ways intruded upon. The provider shall, within thirty (30) days after
receipt of the statement, pay to the City the entire amount thereof.
   I.   System Maintenance: A provider shall:
      1.   Install and maintain all parts of its system in a nondangerous
condition throughout the entire period of its franchise.
      2.   Install and maintain its system in accordance with standard prudent
engineering practices and shall conform, when applicable, with the National
Electrical Safety Code and all applicable other Federal, State and local laws
or regulations.
      3.   At all reasonable times, permit examination by any duly authorized
representative of the City of the system and its effect on the rights of way.
   J.   Trimming Of Trees: A provider shall have the authority to trim trees,
in accordance with all applicable utility restrictions, ordinance and easement
restrictions, upon and hanging over rights of way so as to prevent the branches
of such trees from coming in contact with its system.
   K.   Property Maintenance: Every franchise shall require that the provider
will maintain the general appearance of any buildings or similar property
belonging to the provider which are located within the City in a manner
consistent with the surrounding properties and applicable City ordinance
requirements. The obligation to maintain the appearance of property shall
include, but not be limited to, the landscaping of front yards and parkways in
residential or commercial zones; the installation of curb, gutter, sidewalk,
and parkway landscaping in those areas where similar improvement have been or
are being installed on contiguous properties; and the screening of such
property directly abutting a public street or abutting residential or
commercial property with appropriate landscaping or screening material as
required by the Planning Commission and applicable City ordinances.
(1979 Code § 12.46.150; Ord. 97-69, 9-23-1997)
7-15-16: FRANCHISE AND LICENSE NONTRANSFERRABLE:
   A.   Notification Of Sale:
      1.   Notification And Election: When a provider is the subject of a sale,
transfer, lease, assignment, sublease or disposed of, in whole or in part,
either by forced or involuntary sale, or by ordinary sale, consolidation or
otherwise, such that it or its successor entity is obligated to inform or seek
the approval of the PSC, the provider or its successor entity shall promptly
notify the City of the nature of the transaction. A request for a transfer
shall include a certification that the successor entity unequivocally agrees to
all of the terms of the original provider's franchise agreement.
      2.   Transfer Of Franchise: Upon receipt of a notification and
certification in accordance with the above provision, the City designee, as
provided in Section
7-15-18 of this Chapter, shall send notice affirming the transfer of the
franchise to the successor entity. If the City has good cause to believe that
the successor entity may not comply with this Chapter or the franchise
agreement, it may require an application for the transfer. The application
shall comply with Section
7-15-14 of this Chapter.
   B.   Events Of Sale: The following events shall be deemed to be a sale,
assignment or other transfer of the franchise requiring compliance with
subsection A1 of this Section: 1) the sale, assignment or other transfer of all
or a majority of a provider's assets to another person; 2) the sale, assignment
or other transfer of capital stock or partnership, membership or other equity
interests in a provider by one or more of its existing shareholders, partners,
members or other equity owners so as to create a new controlling interest in a
provider; 3) the issuance of additional capital stock or partnership,
membership or other equity interest by a provider so as to create a new
controlling interest in such a provider; or 4) the entry by a provider into an
agreement with respect to the management or operation of such provider or its
system.
(1979 Code § 12.46.160; Ord. 97-69, 9-23-1997; amd. Ord. 97-76, 10-21-1997)
7-15-17: OVERSIGHT AND REGULATION:
   A.   Insurance, Indemnity, And Security: Prior to the execution of a
franchise, a provider will deposit with the City an irrevocable, unconditional
letter of credit or surety bond as required by the terms of the franchise, and
shall obtain and provide proof of the insurance coverage required by the
franchise. A provider shall also indemnify the City as set forth in the
franchise.
   B.   Oversight: The City shall have the right to oversee, regulate and
inspect periodically the construction, maintenance, and upgrade of the system,
and any part thereof, in accordance with the provisions of the franchise and
applicable law. A provider shall establish and maintain managerial and
operational records, standards, procedures and controls to enable a provider to
prove, in reasonable detail, to the satisfaction of the City at all times
throughout the term, that a provider is in compliance with the franchise. A
provider shall retain such records for not less than the applicable statute of
limitations.
   C.   Maintain Records: A provider shall at all times maintain:
      1.   On file with the City, a full and complete set of plans, records and
"as-built" hard copy maps and, to the extent the maps are placed in an
electronic format, they shall be made in electronic format compatible with the
City's existing GIS system, of all existing and proposed installations and the
types of equipment and systems installed or constructed in the rights of way,
properly identified and described as to the types of equipment and facility by
appropriate symbols and marks which shall include annotations of all rights of
ways where work will be undertaken. As used herein, as-built maps includes file
construction prints. Maps shall be drawn to scale. "As-built" maps, including
the compatible electronic format, as provided above, shall be submitted within
thirty (30) days of completion of work or within thirty (30) days after
completion of modification and repairs. As-built maps are not required of the
provider who is the incumbent local exchange carrier for the existing system to
the extent they do not exist.
      2.   Throughout the term of the franchise, a provider shall maintain
complete and accurate books of account and records of the business, ownership,
and operations of a provider with respect to the system in a manner that allows
the City at all times to determine whether a provider is in compliance with the
franchise. Should the City reasonably determine that the records are not being
maintained in such a manner, a provider shall alter the manner in which the
books and/or records are maintained so that a provider comes into compliance
with this Section. All financial books and records which are maintained in
accordance with the regulations of the FCC and any governmental entity that
regulates utilities in the State, and generally accepted accounting principles
shall be deemed to be acceptable under this Section.
   D.   Confidentiality: If the information required to be submitted is
proprietary in nature or must be kept confidential by Federal, State or local
law, upon proper request by a provider, such information shall be classified as
a protected record within the meaning of the Utah Government Records Access and
Management Act (GRAMA), making it available only to those who must have access
to perform their duties on behalf of the City; provided, that a provider
notifies the City of, and clearly labels the information which a provider deems
to be confidential, proprietary information. Such notification and labeling
shall be the sole responsibility of the provider.
   E.   Provider's Expense: All reports and records required under this Chapter
shall be furnished at the sole expense of a provider, except as otherwise
provided in this Chapter or a franchise.
   F.   Right Of Inspection: For the purpose of verifying the correct amount of
the franchise fee, the books and records of the provider pertaining thereto
shall be open to inspection or audit by duly authorized representatives of the
City at all reasonable times, upon giving reasonable notice of the intention to
inspect or audit the books and records. The provider agrees to reimburse the
City the reasonable costs of an audit if the audit discloses that the provider
has paid ninety five percent (95%) or less of the compensation due the City for
the period of such audit. In the event the accounting rendered to the City by
the provider herein is found to be incorrect, then payment shall be made on the
corrected amount within thirty (30) calendar days of written notice, it being
agreed that the City may accept any amount offered by the provider, but the
acceptance thereof by the City shall not be deemed a settlement of such item if
the amount is in dispute or is later found to be incorrect.
(1979 Code § 12.46.170; Ord. 97-69, 9-23-1997)
7-15-18: RIGHTS OF THE CITY:
   A.   Enforcement And Remedies:
      1.   City Designee: The City is responsible for enforcing and
administering this Chapter, and the City or its designee, as appointed by the
Mayor, is authorized to give any notice required by law or under any franchise
agreement.
      2.   Enforcement Provisions: Any franchise granted pursuant to this
Chapter shall contain appropriate provisions for enforcement, compensation, and
protection of the public, consistent with the other provisions of this Chapter,
including, but not limited to, defining events of default, procedures for
accessing the bond/security fund, and rights of termination or revocation.
   B.   Force Majeure: In the event a provider's performance of any of the
terms, conditions or obligations required by this Chapter or a franchise is
prevented by a cause or event not within a provider's control, such inability
to perform shall be deemed excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be
imposed as a result thereof. For the purpose of this Section, causes or events
not within the control of a provider shall include, without limitation, acts of
God, strikes, sabotage, riots or civil disturbances, failure or loss of
utilities, explosions, acts of public enemies, and natural disasters such as
floods, earthquakes, landslides, and fires.
   C.   Extended Operation And Continuity Of Services:
      1.   Continuation After Expiration: Upon either expiration or revocation
of a franchise granted pursuant to this Chapter, the City shall have discretion
to permit a provider to continue to operate its system or provide services for
an extended period of time not to exceed six (6) months from the date of such
expiration or revocation. A provider shall continue to operate its system under
the terms and conditions of this Chapter and the franchise granted pursuant to
this Chapter.
      2.   Continuation By Incumbent Local Exchange Carrier: If the provider is
the incumbent local exchange carrier, it shall be permitted to continue to
operate its system and provide services without regard to revocation or
expiration, but shall be obligated to negotiate a renewal in good faith.
   D.   Removal Or Abandonment Of Franchise Property:
      1.   Abandoned System: In the event that: 1) the use of any portion of
the system is discontinued for a continuous period of twelve (12) months, and
thirty (30) days after no response to written notice from the City to the last
known address of provider; 2) any system has been installed in the rights of
way without complying with the requirements of this Chapter or franchise; or 3)
the provisions of Section
7-15-8 of this Chapter are applicable and no franchise is granted, a provider,
except the provider who is an incumbent local exchange carrier, shall be deemed
to have abandoned such system.
      2.   Removal Of Abandoned System: The City, upon such terms as it may
impose, may give a provider written permission to abandon, without removing,
any system, or portion thereof, directly constructed, operated or maintained
under a franchise. Unless such permission is granted or unless otherwise
provided in this Chapter, a provider shall remove within a reasonable time the
abandoned system and shall restore, using prudent construction standards, any
affected rights of way to their former state at the time such system was
installed, so as not to impair their usefulness. In removing its plant,
structures and equipment, a provider shall refill, at its own expense, any
excavation necessarily made by it and shall leave all rights of way in as good
condition as that prevailing prior to such removal without materially
interfering with any electrical or telephone cable or other utility wires,
poles or attachments. The City shall have the right to inspect and approve the
condition of the rights of way cables, wires, attachments and poles prior to
and after removal. The liability, indemnity and insurance provisions of this
Chapter and any security fund provided in a franchise shall continue in full
force and effect during the period of removal and until full compliance by a
provider with the terms and conditions of this Section.
      3.   Transfer Of Abandoned System To City: Upon abandonment of any system
in place, a provider, if required by the City, shall submit to the City a
written instrument, satisfactory in form to the City, transferring to the City
the ownership of the abandoned system.
      4.   Removal Of Above-Ground System: At the expiration of the term for
which a franchise is granted, or upon its revocation or earlier expiration, as
provided for by this Chapter, in any such case without renewal, extension or
transfer, the City shall have the right to require a provider to remove, at its
expense, all above-ground portions of a system from the rights of way within a
reasonable period of time, which shall not be less than one hundred eighty
(180) days. If the provider is the incumbent local exchange carrier, it shall
not be required to remove its system, but shall negotiate a renewal in good
faith.
      5.   Leaving Underground System: Notwithstanding anything to the contrary
set forth in this Chapter, a provider may abandon any underground system in
place so long as it does not materially interfere with the use of the rights of
way or with the use thereof by any public utility, cable operator or other
person.
(1979 Code § 12.46.180; Ord. 97-69, 9-23-1997)
7-15-19: OBLIGATION TO NOTIFY; PUBLICIZING WORK:
Before entering onto any private property, a provider shall make a good faith
attempt to contact the property owners in advance, and describe the work to be
performed.
(1979 Code § 12.46.190; Ord. 97-69, 9-23-1997)
7-15-20: CONFLICTS:
In the event of a conflict between any provision of this Chapter and a
franchise entered pursuant to it, the provisions of this Chapter shall control.
(1979 Code § 12.46.200; Ord. 97-69, 9-23-1997)
7-15-21: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this Chapter is held by any Federal, State or local court
of competent jurisdiction, to be invalid as conflicting with any Federal or
State statute, or is ordered by a court to be modified in any way in order to
conform to the requirements of any such law and all appellate remedies with
regard to the validity of the Chapter provisions in question are exhausted,
such provision shall be considered a separate, distinct, and independent part
of this Chapter, and such holding shall not affect the validity and
enforceability of all other provisions hereof. In the event that such law is
subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise changed, so that the
provision which had been held invalid or modified is no longer in conflict with
such law, the provision in question shall return to full force and effect and
shall again be binding on the City and the provider; provided, that the City
shall give the provider thirty (30) days, or a longer period of time as may be
reasonably required for a provider to comply with such a rejuvenated provision,
written notice of the change before requiring compliance with such provision.
(1979 Code § 12.46.210; Ord. 97-69, 9-23-1997)
7-15-22: NEW DEVELOPMENTS:
It shall be the policy of the City to liberally amend this Chapter, upon
application of a provider, when necessary to enable the provider to take
advantage of any developments in the field of telecommunications which will
afford the provider an opportunity to more effectively, efficiently, or
economically serve itself or the public.
(1979 Code § 12.46.220; Ord. 97-69, 9-23-1997)
7-15-23: NOTICES:
All notices from a provider to the City required under this Chapter or pursuant
to a franchise granted pursuant to this Chapter shall be directed to the
officer as designated by the Mayor. A provider shall provide in any application
for a franchise the identity, address and phone number to receive notices from
the City. A provider shall immediately notify the City of any change in its
name, address, or telephone number.
(1979 Code § 12.46.230; Ord. 97-69, 9-23-1997)
7-15-24: EXERCISE OF POLICE POWER:
To the full extent permitted by applicable law either now or in the future, the
City reserves the right to adopt or issue such rules, regulations, orders, or
other directives that it finds necessary or appropriate in the lawful exercise
of its police powers.
(1979 Code § 12.46.240; Ord. 97-69, 9-23-1997)
7-15-25: CONSTRUCTION:
This Chapter shall be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable
Federal and State statutes.
(1979 Code § 12.46.250; Ord. 97-69, 9-23-1997)
7-15-26: CHAPTER APPLICABILITY:
This Chapter shall apply to all franchises granted or renewed after the
effective date hereof. This Chapter shall further apply, to the extent
permitted by applicable Federal or State law to all existing franchises granted
prior to the effective date hereof and to a provider providing services,
without a franchise, prior to the effective date hereof.
(1979 Code § 12.46.260; Ord. 97-69, 9-23-1997)
7-15-27: OTHER APPLICABLE ORDINANCES:
A provider's rights are subject to the police powers of the City to adopt and
enforce ordinances necessary to the health, safety and welfare of the public. A
provider shall comply with all applicable general laws and ordinances enacted
by the City pursuant to its police powers. In particular, all providers shall
comply with the City zoning and other land use requirements.
(1979 Code § 12.46.270; Ord. 97-69, 9-23-1997)
7-15-28: CITY FAILURE TO ENFORCE:
A provider shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the
provisions of this Chapter or any franchise granted pursuant to this Chapter by
reason of any failure of the City to enforce prompt compliance.
(1979 Code § 12.46.280; Ord. 97-69, 9-23-1997)
7-15-29: CONSTRUED ACCORDING TO UTAH LAW:
This Chapter and any franchise granted pursuant to this Chapter shall be
construed and enforced in accordance with the substantive laws of the State.
(1979 Code § 12.46.290; Ord. 97-69, 9-23-1997)
CHAPTER 16
PENALTY
SECTION:
7-16-1: Penalty
7-16-1: PENALTY:
   A.   Criminal Penalties: Any person who violates any of the provisions of
this title, or who fails to comply with an order of suspension, revocation or
stop work issued pursuant to the provisions of this title, shall be deemed
guilty of a class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished
as set forth in title 1, chapter 4, article A of this code.
   B.   Civil Penalties: Failure to correct a violation of this title after
notice of violation and expiration of the applicable warning period may be
enforced by imposition of the following civil penalties pursuant to title 1,
chapter 4, article B of this code:
      1.   The first civil citation issued after expiration of the warning
period shall subject the person to the initial penalty as provided in
subsection C of this section.
      2.   The second civil citation issued after expiration of the warning
period and the prior imposition of the initial penalty shall subject the person
to the intermediate penalty as provided in subsection C of this section.
      3.   Any subsequent civil citation issued after expiration of the warning
period and the prior imposition of an intermediate penalty, or any reoccurring
violation under section
1-4B-6 of this code, shall subject the person to the maximum penalty as
provided in subsection C of this section.
   C.   Penalty Schedule: Violations of this title shall carry civil penalties
pursuant to the following schedule:
 
Violation      Initial Intermediate Maximum
Classification Penalty Penalty      Penalty
1. Failure to remove snow or ice as required by
section                                               $ 25.00 $ 50.00  $100.00
7-2-8 of this title
2. Vegetation or structures within a sight triangle
of a lot obstructing the view of drivers under        125.00  250.00   500.00
section
7-3-1 of this title
3. Failure to adequately display a building address
as required by section                                25.00   50.00    100.00
7-1-3 of this title
4. Unlawful deposits or accumulations upon the
sidewalk, parking, gutter or half of the street next
to property owned, occupied or under the control of                   
the violator, as prohibited by section
7-2-1 of this title:
 For deposits or accumulations of leaves, snow or ice 25.00   50.00    100.00
 Any other deposit or accumulation                    125.00  250.00   500.00
5. Failure to maintain landscaping within the public
way in the manner required under section              125.00  250.00   500.00
7-2-11 of this title
6. Unlawful structures upon or in sidewalks, parkways
or other portion of the public way in violation of    125.00  250.00   500.00
section
7-2-3 of this title
7. Failure to alter, modify or relocate facilities
located in the public way in violation of section     125.00  250.00   500.00
7-5-10 of this title
8. Failure to obtain a permit required under the      500.00  1,000.00 1,000.00
provisions of this title
9. Failure to comply with a stop work issued pursuant 500.00  750.00   1,000.00
to the provisions of this title
10. Failure to restore public property as required in
section                                               250.00  500.00   1,000.00
7-5-12 or
7-5-16 of this title
11. Other violations of this title                    125.00  250.00   500.00
 
   D.   Injunctive Relief: This title may also be enforced by injunction,
mandamus, abatement or any other appropriate judicial action in law or equity.
   E.   Separate Offense Each Day: Each day that any violation of this title
continues or occurs shall be considered a separate offense for purposes of the
penalties and remedies available to the city.
   F.   Penalties And Remedies Cumulative: Any one, all, or any combination of
the penalties and remedies available to the city may be used to enforce the
provisions of this title.
(Ord. 2015-33, 7-7-2015)
CHAPTER 17
NEWSRACKS
SECTION:
7-17-1: Title
7-17-2: Permit Required
7-17-3: Definitions
7-17-4: Newsrack Allowed Only In Specified Areas
7-17-5: Yearly Permit Or Certification Requirement
7-17-6: Permit Application
7-17-7: Permit Fee, Bond
7-17-8: Issuance Of Permit
7-17-9: Certification Of Application
7-17-10: Transitional Filings
7-17-11: Hold Harmless
7-17-12: Insurance Requirements
7-17-13: Number Of Newsracks Per Block, Grouping
7-17-14: Location Restrictions
7-17-15: Location Changes
7-17-16: Rights Granted
7-17-17: Anchorage Of Newsracks
7-17-18: Design Standards
7-17-19: Permittee's Obligation To Maintain; External Appearance; Notice To
Permittee To Maintain
7-17-20: Nonemergency Removal; Permittees
7-17-21: Immediate Removal; Permittees
7-17-22: Unauthorized Newsracks
7-17-23: Noncomplying Designs Outside The Central Business District
7-17-24: Noncomplying Locations Within The Central Business District
7-17-25: Noncomplying Designs Within The Central Business District
7-17-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the OGDEN CITY NEWSRACK ORDINANCE.
(Ord. 2012-41, 7-10-2012)
7-17-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It is unlawful to place or maintain any newsrack on a property owned by the
city or on publicly owned sidewalks without obtaining a permit for distributing
materials through newsracks on such property pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 2012-41, 7-10-2012)
7-17-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning
given them:
ADJACENT: A distance of not more than two feet (2').
BLOCK FACE: One side of that portion of any street that has street numbers
ranging between any two (2) consecutive multiples of one hundred (100), such as
between 100 and 200, or between 2200 and 2300, etc.
BLOCK, SQUARE: The area within the four (4) major street sides of a block with
street numbers ranging between any two (2) consecutive multiples of one hundred
(100), such as between 100 and 200, or between 2200 and 2300, etc. A square
block includes any midblock streets (block faces) that run within the boundary
of the four (4) major streets, such as 2250 or Kiesel.
HEARING OFFICER: The mayor or a person appointed by the mayor pursuant to
section
4-4A-1 of this code.
NEWSRACK: Any outdoor self-service structure, container, box or enclosure used
or maintained for the distribution of publications, such as newspapers, news
periodicals or other printed advertising or reading material, regardless of
whether a fee is charged.
NEWSRACK GROUP: Up to three (3) single box newsracks located adjacent to one
another or one multibox newsrack.
NEWSRACK, MULTIBOX: A single integrated newsrack housing that is designed to
dispense between two (2) and six (6) publications.
NEWSRACK, SINGLE BOX: A newsrack housing that is designed to dispense a single
publication.
STREET: Includes any street, avenue, highway, alley or other public
thoroughfare, including the entire width from property line to property line.
(Ord. 2012-41, 7-10-2012)
7-17-4: NEWSRACK ALLOWED ONLY IN SPECIFIED AREAS:
   A.   Newsracks are permitted on streets within the central business district
("CBD") zone, as defined by the zoning map of Ogden City.
   B.   Outside the CBD, newsracks in place on a street as of December 1, 2011,
and which substantially conform to the provisions of this chapter and which are
listed on exhibit A attached to the ordinance codified herein, a copy of which
shall be filed with the city recorder along with said ordinance, may remain in
their present locations subject to their compliance with all provisions of this
chapter. Other than those newsracks found under exhibit A, or described in
subsection C of this section, no other newsracks will be permitted on streets
within Ogden City boundaries outside of the CBD.
   C.   Newsracks located on any street lying entirely within the Weber State
University campus are not regulated by this chapter and shall be governed by
the university. These regulations do apply to streets on the perimeter of the
existing campus, including Skyline Drive and Harrison Boulevard.
   D.   It is unlawful to own, operate, place or maintain a newsrack on a
street in violation of the terms of this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-41, 7-10-2012)
7-17-5: YEARLY PERMIT OR CERTIFICATION REQUIREMENT:
Any person desiring to locate or establish a newsrack on a city street shall,
prior to any initial use, and thereafter before October 31 of each year but not
earlier than July 1 submit the required permit application or certification as
specified below. The annual renewal deadline for existing newsrack locations
shall be October 31 in any given year. A yearly permit shall cover a full
calendar year beginning on November 1 of a given year and ending on October 31
of the following year.
(Ord. 2012-41, 7-10-2012)
7-17-6: PERMIT APPLICATION:
An application for a newsrack permit to distribute periodicals and other print
material through newsracks on a city street ("permit") shall be filed upon a
form provided by the development services supervisor and shall include the
following:
   A.   The name, address, telephone number and e-mail address of the
applicant;
   B.   The name, address, telephone number and e-mail address of a responsible
person whom the city may notify or contact at any time concerning the
applicant's newsracks;
   C.   Evidence of the applicant's qualification to do business in the state
of Utah;
   D.   Evidence of the applicant's Ogden City business license;
   E.   The name of the materials to be distributed by the newsrack;
   F.   The number and location of newsracks on city owned property or publicly
owned sidewalks which will be, or are expected to be used and maintained by the
applicant; and
   G.   The evidence of insurance or self-insurance required by section
7-17-12 of this chapter;
   H.   A map of the central business district showing the proposed location(s)
of newsracks subject to the permit, which is maintained by the permittee. If
the permit holder proposes to distribute more than one publication through the
newsracks, the map shall identify which publication is distributed at which
newsrack location. The proposed map shall be subject to final approval by the
Ogden City planning division, prior to issuance of the permit.
The permit required under this section is an annual renewal permit not subject
to the encroachment permit designations under section
7-4-2 of this title. Any permit issued under this section shall be subject to
the compliance provisions of this chapter only.
(Ord. 2012-41, 7-10-2012)
7-17-7: PERMIT FEE, BOND:
   A.   The permit application, and each annual renewal, shall be accompanied
by a fee in the amount of five dollars ($5.00) for each single box newsrack, or
fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each multibox newsrack.
   B.   In addition to the permit fee, an applicant shall post a bond in the
form of cash or a surety bond to ensure the proper removal of the newsrack and
obedience to this chapter. The bond shall be determined by the total number of
newsracks the applicant maintains throughout the city. Each multibox newsrack
shall count as three (3) single box newsracks in making the calculation. The
amount of the bond shall be in the following amounts:
 
Total Number  
Of Newsracks
1 - 6        $  600.00
7 or more    1,000.00
 
Any violation of this chapter by the permittee, including failure to remove a
newsrack following the expiration of the permit period, may result in the city
calling on the bond to pay for the cost of removal and remediation of the site.
(Ord. 2012-41, 7-10-2012)
7-17-8: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
   A.   The Ogden City planning division shall issue a permit to the newsrack
owner once the permit application has been approved by any necessary
administrative process, the filing of the completed application and payment of
the application fee and bond.
   B.   Ogden City planning division may deny any application for permit based
upon a given permittee's past noncompliance with the requirements of this
chapter.
   C.   A permittee whose application has been denied may appeal that
determination within ten (10) days using the process described in section
7-17-20 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-41, 7-10-2012)
7-17-9: CERTIFICATION OF APPLICATION:
For any subsequent year after the newsrack permit has been issued the permittee
shall, with their renewal permit application, submit a certificate, on a form
to be provided by the city, which shall include the following:
   A.   Any changes in the information provided to the city by the permit
application, and
   B.   A current map with the information required by subsection 7-17-6H of
this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-41, 7-10-2012)
7-17-10: TRANSITIONAL FILINGS:
   A.   Any person owning or maintaining an existing newsrack on a city street
shall obtain a permit for the existing location by filing a permit application
and the yearly certification on or before August 15, 2012, for the period
through October 31, 2012. No fee shall be required for a transitional filing.
All transitional permittees shall have until October 31, 2012, to come into
full compliance with this chapter.
   B.   If the number of transitional filings for a particular location exceed
the number of newsracks allowed under section
7-17-13 of this chapter, the planning department shall first attempt to
apportion the number of available locations through the use of a newsrack
group, and if more newsracks remain to be accommodated, shall hold a lottery
between the applicants for the available spaces.
   C.   Failure to make a transitional filing within the time allowed shall be
deemed an intent by the owner of an existing newsrack to relinquish the right
to maintain a newsrack at the existing location.
   D.   Any newsrack in a nonconforming location shall comply with all other
terms of this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-41, 7-10-2012)
7-17-11: HOLD HARMLESS:
Any person owning or maintaining a newsrack on a city street shall agree to
indemnify, defend and hold Ogden City and its officers, agents and employees
harmless for any loss or damage, including attorney fees, arising out of the
use or placement of such newsrack(s).
(Ord. 2012-41, 7-10-2012)
7-17-12: INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
Any person owning or maintaining a newsrack on a city street shall maintain
liability insurance with an insurer insuring against all liability that the
owner or maintainer of the newsrack may incur by virtue of the placement, care,
use, operation and existence of the newsrack. Such insurance shall have a limit
of no less than two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) for each
occurrence or, if the provisions of the Utah governmental immunity act are
modified, such other limit as may be required by the city attorney to protect
the city from liability. This insurance shall name the city as an additional
insured and evidence of such insurance shall be submitted with the original
application and each renewal.
(Ord. 2012-41, 7-10-2012)
7-17-13: NUMBER OF NEWSRACKS PER BLOCK, GROUPING:
   A.   There shall be no more than sixteen (16) single box newsracks on a
square block and no more than six (6) single box newsracks on any block face.
One multibox newsrack may stand in the place of three (3) single box newsracks,
except that there shall be no more than one multibox newsrack on any block
face.
   B.   Each newsrack group shall be separated from another newsrack or
newsrack group by a distance of not less than two hundred feet (200') and each
single box newsrack within a newsrack group shall be separated by not more than
two feet (2') from the nearest other single box newsrack in the group.
   C.   A newsrack group located within thirty feet (30') of an intersection or
street corner, measured from the back of curb, shall be deducted from the total
number of newsracks and publication types allowed on both block faces.
   D.   No more than four (4) newsracks on any block may dispense the same
publication. No more than two (2) newsracks on any block face shall dispense
the same publication.
   E.   If the design of any special improvement district or redevelopment
district requires a different grouping pattern on any block face, the grouping
on that block face shall be as required by the district design.
(Ord. 2012-41, 7-10-2012)
7-17-14: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
Newsracks shall be located only in the area no closer than two and a half feet
(21/2') from the back of curb and no further than five feet (5') from the back
of curb; except that with the written permission of the abutting property owner
a newsrack or newsrack group may be located on the inside of the sidewalk next
to a building. No newsrack shall be connected to or located adjacent to any
mailbox, post, pole, bench, bus shelter, bike rack, kiosk, sign, water feature,
art, or monument, or next to or connected to or within any raised planter,
unless the original design of such items specifically provides for newsracks in
an integrated design feature. No newsrack shall be located in a manner which:
   A.   Impedes or interferes with the reasonable use of a crosswalk;
   B.   Impedes or interferes with the reasonable use of any kiosk, bench,
trash receptacle, drinking fountain, bicycle rack, driveway, alley or bus
shelter;
   C.   Interferes with the reasonable use of any fire hydrant, traffic signal
box, fire call box, police call box, or other emergency facility;
   D.   Impairs or interferes with pedestrian traffic;
   E.   Interferes with or impairs the vision of operators of vehicles at
street intersections or interferes with or impairs any aspect of any sight
triangle field of vision as outlined under section
7-3-2 of this title;
   F.   Reduces the clear, unimpeded sidewalk width to:
      1.   Seven feet (7') or less on sidewalks over twelve feet (12') in
width, or
      2.   Less than four feet (4') on sidewalks less than twelve feet (12') in
width.
In determining an unimpeded sidewalk, features such as fountains, fire
hydrants, or similar structures shall be considered.
(Ord. 2012-41, 7-10-2012)
7-17-15: LOCATION CHANGES:
   A.   Newsracks may be moved from one permitted location to another permitted
location, as long as the provisions of this chapter can be met.
   B.   Additional newsracks may be installed by a permittee during the year of
any permit or certification as long as the additional newsracks comply with
this chapter. If any newsracks are added after the annual permit or
certification filing, the permittee shall pay the full year's fee for such
added locations at the time of installation, regardless of proximity of
installation date to any future filing deadline.
(Ord. 2012-41, 7-10-2012)
7-17-16: RIGHTS GRANTED:
The approval of any location for use as a newsrack shall not be interpreted as
granting the user or permittee any right or interest to or in the property
owned by the city. The rights granted by this chapter are merely a license to
use the property for permitted purposes, subject to the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 2012-41, 7-10-2012)
7-17-17: ANCHORAGE OF NEWSRACKS:
   A.   Newsracks shall be anchored to the ground or sidewalk at their site by
means of bolts attached in the sidewalk or, if in a park strip, anchored to a
cement pad in a manner approved by the city traffic engineer. Newsracks may not
be anchored to trees, posts or poles with chains, rope, cable or any other tie
in or binding agent.
   B.   The permittee shall be responsible for any damage or repairs to the
newsracks or to anything the newsrack is anchored to that is:
      1.   Caused or necessitated by the removal of any newsrack that is not in
compliance with this chapter; or
      2.   Results from the installation of any newsrack under permit; and
      3.   Which damages any aspect of the site, where repair is required to
bring the site back to its original condition.
   C.   Upon removal of a newsrack the bolt system shall also be removed and
the concrete repaired so there is a flush surface with the existing sidewalk
and no visible sign of the bolts or, if in a park strip, so that the park strip
is returned to the same condition as the park strip on both sides of the
removed newsrack.
(Ord. 2012-41, 7-10-2012)
7-17-18: DESIGN STANDARDS:
All permitted newsracks shall comply with the following design standards:
   A.   Height: As measured from the surface of the ground or sidewalk to the
highest point of the newsrack, no newsrack shall exceed:
      1.   A height of fifty four inches (54") for all single box newsracks; or
      2.   A height of sixty eight inches (68") for all multibox units.
   B.   Depth: No single box or multibox newsrack shall exceed a depth of
twenty four inches (24").
   C.   Width: No newsrack shall exceed:
      1.   A width of twenty four inches (24") for all single box newsracks; or
      2.   A width of seventy two inches (72") for all multibox newsracks.
   D.   Color: Newsracks shall be flat black, brown or almond, or the
designated fixture color as part of any special improvement district or
redevelopment district with an overall street design theme which specifies
particular colors. In the event that the design of a district requires that
newsracks be enclosed within particular materials or colors, any permittee with
newsracks within such district shall be notified of the pending requirements
and shall comply with them.
   E.   Advertising:
      1.   Newsracks shall carry no advertising on the exterior of the newsrack
except a logo or other information identifying the newspaper or periodical.
This information may be displayed on the newsrack on the upper two-thirds (2/3)
of the sides with the wording limited to a height of six inches (6") and width
of thirteen inches (13"). This information may also appear on the bottom one-
third (1/3) of the front of the box with the wording limited to a height of
three inches (3") and width of twenty inches (20").
      2.   The logo or other information identifying the newspaper or
periodical shall be alphanumeric in nature. Trademarked commercial symbols and/
or drawings identifying the newspaper or periodical may also be used.
      3.   A temporary promotional vinyl applique may be placed on up to
seventy percent (70%) of the newsrack for a period of up to four (4) weeks in
any three (3) month period. The applique shall be a single color which shall
contrast from the base color of the rack to which it is applied.
   F.   Materials: Newsracks shall be constructed out of metal and shall be
waterproof. All newsracks shall also be fadeproof, which may occur as a result
of extensive exposure to sun or other weather elements. Permittees shall be
responsible to ensure all newsracks are repaired in the event of fade, which
comes as a result of extensive exposure to sun or other weather elements.
(Ord. 2012-41, 7-10-2012)
7-17-19: PERMITTEE'S OBLIGATION TO MAINTAIN; EXTERNAL APPEARANCE; NOTICE TO
PERMITTEE TO MAINTAIN:
   A.   Each permittee shall maintain the newsrack at all times and keep the
newsrack in a continual state of good repair, including repair of exterior
damage to the newsrack, and removal of graffiti, noncompliant markings,
stickers, etc.
   B.   Within three (3) days of electronic notice, or within five (5) days if
notified by mail, after the city has sent notice to the permittee of any issue
of noncompliance regarding the outside appearance of the newsrack, the
permittee shall remove or repair said noncompliance. If the last day of the
period is a weekend or holiday the period shall be extended to the next
business day.
   C.   If the permittee does not comply with this section after notice has
been sent by either first class mail or electronic delivery, city may either:
1) clean up the noncompliant markings on the outside of the newsrack and bill
permittee for the work or 2) proceed under section
7-17-20 of this chapter to remove said newsrack under the nonemergency removal
process.
(Ord. 2012-41, 7-10-2012)
7-17-20: NONEMERGENCY REMOVAL; PERMITTEES:
   A.   Notice: If at any time it is determined by the city that a newsrack is
not in compliance with the requirements of this chapter, a "notice of intent to
remove" shall be issued, in writing, to the permittee by mail. Such notice will
state the violation constituting the basis of the proposed removal. The notice
shall allow the permittee ten (10) days from the date of mailing to request a
hearing before removal of the newsrack. If no hearing is requested within the
time allowed, the city may proceed with removal and recover the cost from the
permittee.
   B.   Hearing: If a hearing is requested, it shall be held not less than
fifteen (15) days from the date a request for hearing is filed. Prior to the
hearing the permittee may file a written response specifically setting forth
the reason that the newsrack should not be removed. At the hearing the hearing
officer shall determine whether the newsrack complies with the provisions of
this chapter. In the event that the hearing officer determines that the
newsrack is not in compliance with this chapter, the newsrack shall be removed
by the permittee within ten (10) days or otherwise brought into compliance with
this chapter. If the newsrack is not removed as required, the city may remove
the newsrack and recover the expense of removal from the permittee.
   C.   Appeal: The permittee may appeal any decision or order to the mayor or
the mayor's designee. Any appeal shall be filed in writing within ten (10) days
of the decision of the hearing officer and shall specify the basis for the
appeal. The mayor shall consider the appeal based on the written submissions.
(Ord. 2012-41, 7-10-2012)
7-17-21: IMMEDIATE REMOVAL; PERMITTEES:
   A.   Removal: In the event that the traffic engineer, the police department
or fire department determines that the location or operation of the newsrack
constitutes an immediate physical threat to public safety or health, the
newsrack may be removed by the city immediately without any prior notice or
hearing. This provision shall not allow the removal of a newsrack or a
publication based on the content of the material distributed in the newsrack.
   B.   Undocumented Content Of Newsracks That Is Not Explicit Or Sexual Or
Erotic In Nature: In the event that any newsrack contains periodicals,
newspapers or other printed material that has not been properly identified on
the permit application as pertaining to a particular newsrack, the city may
remove the publications or require the permittee to recertify the newsrack to
include the periodical or written material content of said newsrack on the
permit under section
7-17-9 of this chapter.
   C.   Undocumented Content Of Newsracks That Is Explicit, Erotic Or Sexual In
Nature: In the event that any newsrack contains periodicals, newspapers or
other printed material with lewd pictures, photos, drawings or illustrated
depictions, such material may be removed immediately by city personnel without
notice or hearing. For purposes of this section, lewdness means:
      1.   An act of sexual intercourse or sodomy;
      2.   The exposed male or female genitals, the female breast below the top
of the areola, the buttocks, the anus, or the pubic area;
      3.   An act of masturbation; or
      4.   Any other act of lewdness.
   D.   Notice And Hearing: In the event of the immediate removal of a newsrack
or printed material under this section, the city shall contact the permittee's
designated representative appearing on permittee's permit application as soon
as reasonably possible and inform the representative of the removal and the
reason(s) therefor. If requested by the representative, the city shall hold a
hearing before a hearing officer to determine whether or not the removed
newsrack constituted an immediate threat to the public's life, safety and/or
health or whether the material was properly removed. If the hearing officer
determines that the newsrack did not constitute such an immediate threat, the
city shall immediately, at its own expense, replace the newsrack at its
location. In the event that no immediate hearing is requested by the
permittee's representative, a hearing shall be conducted, within five (5)
business days of the emergency removal action, by a hearing officer in order to
review ordinance compliance on the subject newsrack. In the event that the city
determines that permittee is not in compliance with this chapter, then the city
shall retain the newsrack, return it to the permittee, and recover the expense
of removal from the owner.
   E.   Appeal: The permittee may appeal any decision or order to the mayor or
the mayor's designee. Any appeal shall be filed in writing within ten (10) days
of the decision and shall specify the basis for the appeal. The mayor shall
consider the appeal based on the written submissions. The permittee shall not
be entitled to replacement of the newsrack or any material removed by the city
during the appeals process.
(Ord. 2012-41, 7-10-2012)
7-17-22: UNAUTHORIZED NEWSRACKS:
Any newsrack on a city street, except those for which a permit has been
obtained pursuant to this chapter, shall be impounded by the city without prior
notice or hearing. The city shall take reasonable efforts to determine the
owner of the newsrack and shall notify the owner of the impoundment. The owner
of any impounded newsrack shall be responsible for the expense of removal and
storage of such newsrack. If the owner of an unauthorized newsrack or a
permittee of a removed newsrack fails to reclaim the impounded newsrack and pay
the expenses of removal and storage within thirty (30) days from notice of
impoundment, the newsrack may be deemed unclaimed property and may be disposed
of pursuant to law.
(Ord. 2012-41, 7-10-2012)
7-17-23: NONCOMPLYING DESIGNS OUTSIDE THE CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT:
Newsracks which are not in the CBD but whose location is permitted by this
chapter, as designated on exhibit A attached to the ordinance codified herein,
and for which a permit has been obtained, shall comply with the design
standards of this chapter before October 31, 2012, whereupon said newsracks
must then come into full compliance with all design standards required by this
chapter.
(Ord. 2012-41, 7-10-2012)
7-17-24: NONCOMPLYING LOCATIONS WITHIN THE CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT:
Newsracks for which a permit has been obtained and which comply with the design
standards of this chapter but are located at a site which does not comply with
the location requirements of this chapter may remain in the present location
until October 31, 2012, or any such earlier date when the city owned property
or publicly owned sidewalk where such newsrack is located is substantially
repaired or altered by a special improvement district or other similar project.
After October 31, 2012, newsracks shall be permitted according to first in time
on filing a permit application with the city, first in right subject to Ogden
City's right to deny a permit under section
7-17-8 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-41, 7-10-2012)
7-17-25: NONCOMPLYING DESIGNS WITHIN THE CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT:
Newsracks for which a permit has been obtained, which are in compliance with
all requirements of this chapter and which are substantially in compliance with
the design provisions of this chapter, may remain with their present design
until December 31, 2012, whereupon said newsracks must then come into full
compliance with all design standards required by this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-41, 7-10-2012)
CHAPTER 18
NAMING AND RENAMING OF CITY FACILITIES
SECTION:
7-18-1: Purpose
7-18-2: Scope
7-18-3: Naming Or Renaming Procedures
7-18-4: Naming Or Renaming Criteria
7-18-5: Revision, Addition, Revocation Or Removal Of Names
7-18-6: Sponsorship Naming
7-18-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish criteria, guidelines and procedures
for the naming and renaming of certain city owned real property, facilities,
and amenities, which are collectively referred to in this chapter as "city
facilities".
(Ord. 2012-55, 12-18-2012)
7-18-2: SCOPE:
This chapter shall only apply to the naming or renaming of certain city
facilities as defined or identified under this chapter.
As used in this chapter, "city facilities" is defined as the city's physical
plant, including any buildings, parks, cultural arts and recreational
facilities, and other infrastructure, that are solely owned by the city and
have a fair market value of more than thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00).
This chapter shall not apply to the naming or renaming of the following city
facilities:
   A.   Any street, the naming of which shall be governed by chapter 1 of this
title.
   B.   Any trail, or a portion of any trail, the naming of which shall be an
administrative decision upon recommendation of the Ogden trails network
committee pursuant to title 3, chapter 22 of this code.
   C.   Any monuments, historical markers, statues, plaques or other similar
objects located on city property which are governed by title 6, chapter 4 of
this code.
   D.   Any building the city leases to a tenant who places that tenant's name
or information on such building consistent with lease terms.
(Ord. 2012-55, 12-18-2012)
7-18-3: NAMING OR RENAMING PROCEDURES:
It is the policy of the city that the naming or renaming of any city facility
shall be mutually accomplished through joint cooperation of the mayor and city
council. Accordingly, an ordinance naming or renaming any city facility
described in this chapter shall only be adopted consistent with a joint
resolution of the city council and the mayor.
(Ord. 2012-55, 12-18-2012)
7-18-4: NAMING OR RENAMING CRITERIA:
The criteria set forth in this section may be considered by the city council
and mayor in determining whether to name or rename a city facility. Additional
criteria may also be considered by the city council and mayor, as may be deemed
appropriate.
   A.   The following accomplishments, achievements and circumstances may be
considered when evaluating any proposal to name or rename a city facility after
any individual or group of individuals:
      1.   Extraordinary civic contribution to the community.
      2.   Loss of life in the line of duty while serving as a city employee.
      3.   Loss of life and/or performing a heroic act while serving in any
branch of the United States armed forces.
      4.   Widespread recognition as a national or historical figure.
      5.   Contributions of significant cost of acquisition and/or development
of a specific city facility.
The naming of a city facility for a deceased person will generally not be
considered until at least one year after the date of death.
   B.   The following accomplishments, achievements and circumstances may be
considered when evaluating any proposal to name or rename a city facility after
any organization, including any nonprofit or for profit entity:
      1.   Extraordinary civic contribution to the community.
      2.   Contributions of significant cost of acquisition and/or development
of a specific city facility.
   C.   Any city facility may be appropriately named or renamed after an event
(or series of events) with cultural or historical significance, provided such
event has a meaningful and direct nexus to the city.
   D.   Any city facility may be appropriately named after adjacent or nearby
streets, landmarks, neighborhoods or other similarly identifiable geographic
areas.
   E.   With regard to naming or renaming a city facility after any individual:
      1.   That individual should not be an incumbent elected or appointed
official in local, state or federal government.
      2.   That individual should not have been convicted of a felony.
      3.   The city shall obtain, or shall make a reasonable attempt to obtain,
consent from such individual or, if such individual is deceased or cannot be
contacted, from members of the individual's family.
   F.   City facilities should not be given any name that may:
      1.   Cause confusion due to duplication of, or similarity to, an existing
named city facility or location within the city.
      2.   Include or may be associated with the name of:
         a.   Any individual, group of individuals, or organization commonly
associated with tobacco, alcohol, obscenity, or any sexually oriented business
or activity;
         b.   Any religious or political organization, unless the name relates
to a historic or civic contribution of such organization; or
         c.   Any religious leader, unless such leader is being honored or
recognized solely for the leader's civic contribution.
      3.   Have an inappropriate acronym, short form, or modification.
      4.   Is discriminatory, derogatory or offensive.
      5.   Relates to or may create a controversial event or situation.
      6.   Recognizes a single individual for a contribution similar or
identical to a contribution made by others within a particular group associated
with that individual.
(Ord. 2012-55, 12-18-2012)
7-18-5: REVISION, ADDITION, REVOCATION OR REMOVAL OF NAMES:
   A.   The naming or renaming of such city facility shall not be deemed as
permanent nor exclusive, nor shall it constitute a property interest owned by
any person or organization.
   B.   Names may be revised or added to any city facility pursuant to the
criteria, guidelines and procedures of this chapter.
   C.   The ordinance approving the naming or renaming of a city facility may
include a sunset provision under which the name will be removed from the city
facility at the end of a specified period of time or upon a particular date. In
the event the ordinance fails to include such a sunset provision, the naming or
renaming of such city facility shall endure until modified.
   D.   When a city facility is removed, replaced or destroyed, the name of the
city facility shall cease to endure unless renamed pursuant to this section.
   E.   Upon circumstances arising after naming that would cast a negative
image upon the city, the name of any city facility may be immediately revoked
at the sole discretion of the mayor.
(Ord. 2012-55, 12-18-2012)
7-18-6: SPONSORSHIP NAMING:
   A.   The mayor may, on behalf of the city, enter into a sponsorship naming
agreement with an individual, group of individuals or organization under which
a city facility specifically used to promote cultural arts or recreation is
named or renamed in exchange for cash or other significant contributions to the
city. Any such agreement must be in writing, and the naming or renaming of any
city facility pursuant to such agreement must comply with the naming criteria
of this chapter. The written agreement must be specifically referenced in the
joint resolution approving such naming or renaming. The sponsorship naming
agreement must:
      1.   Describe the consideration given in exchange for naming rights;
      2.   If deemed necessary, provide for an endowment fund or other
financial resources sufficient to pay the city facility's ongoing maintenance
costs;
      3.   State that the city reserves the right to immediately and
unilaterally remove the city facility name should the city learn or otherwise
determine that the individual, group of individuals or organization (including
any owner, officer or director of such organization) has engaged in conduct or
activities deemed contrary to community standards of justice, honesty or good
morals, or has breached the sponsorship naming agreement;
      4.   Specify the circumstances under which the agreement may be
terminated;
      5.   Specify the exact length of time the city facility name will be
used. A sponsorship naming right should not endure in perpetuity and is subject
to renaming except as limited in the sponsorship naming agreement; and
      6.   Be reviewed and approved by the city attorney's office prior to
execution by the mayor. A sponsorship naming agreement signed by the mayor is
subject to and contingent upon adoption of a joint resolution and ordinance
pursuant to this chapter to name the city facility.
   B.   The donation of land, facilities, or funds for the acquisition,
renovation or maintenance of any real property, facilities, amenities, or any
other resources directly or indirectly related to any city facility shall not
constitute an obligation by the city to name such city facility, or any portion
thereof, after any individual, group of individuals, or organization, except as
set forth in a sponsorship naming agreement executed and approved pursuant to
this section.
(Ord. 2012-55, 12-18-2012)
CHAPTER 19
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
SECTION:
7-19-1: Use Of Right-Of-Way For Small Wireless Facilities And Utility Poles
7-19-2: Definitions
7-19-3: Small Wireless Facilities; Restrictions
7-19-4: Permits, When Required
7-19-5: Design Standards Applicable To All Small Wireless Facilities
7-19-6: Design Standards Applicable To Collocated Small Wireless Facilities
7-19-7: Design Standards Applicable To Small Wireless Facilities On New Stand-
Alone Utility Poles
7-19-8: Design Standards Applicable To Decorative Poles, Historic Districts And
Design Districts
7-19-9: Undergrounding
7-19-10: Application Process
7-19-11: Procedure For Administrative Review Of Applications
7-19-12: Fees
7-19-13: Damage And Repair
7-19-14: Removal Of Small Wireless Facilities
7-19-15: Conflicts
7-19-16: Other Applicable Ordinances
7-19-17: Orders, Rules And Regulations
7-19-18: City Failure To Enforce
7-19-19: Construed According To Utah Law
7-19-1: USE OF RIGHT-OF-WAY FOR SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES AND UTILITY POLES:
   A.   Subject to the provisions of this chapter and along, across, upon or
under a right-of-way, a wireless provider may:
      1.   Collocate a small wireless facility, including collocation on a City
pole;
      2.   Install, operate, modify, maintain or replace:
         a.   A utility pole associated with the wireless provider's
collocation of small wireless facilities;
         b.   A stand-alone pole owned by a wireless provider for use with a
small wireless facility; or
         c.   Equipment described in Utah Code Annotated subsection 54-21-101
(25)(b)(i) through (ix) required for a wireless provider's operation or
collocation of small wireless facilities.
   B.   An applicant may not install a new utility pole or a small wireless
facility, including any associated equipment, upon or under a residential
street without the City's discretionary written consent.
   C.   This chapter applies to the construction, modification, removal and
operation of small wireless facilities installed in the public right-of-way.
   D.   This chapter does not apply to video service systems, wireline
services, or wireless facilities that are not small wireless facilities.
   E.   All references to small wireless facilities in this chapter shall refer
only to small wireless facilities in the right-of-way and not small wireless
facilities located anywhere outside of the right-of-way.
   F.   No person shall install, construct, modify, or otherwise place any
small wireless facility within the public right-of-way except pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.
   G.   Microwave, macro towers, and other wireless backhaul facilities are not
permitted within the right-of-way.
   H.   The definitions used in this chapter apply only to this chapter.
(Ord. 2018-27, 8-28-2018)
7-19-2: DEFINITIONS:
   A.   Except as modified in this section, the terms used in this chapter
shall be defined as provided in the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act,
section 54-21-101 Utah Code Annotated, or its successor provision.
   B.   For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivatives shall have the meanings set forth in this section, unless the
context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended. Words used in the
present tense include the future tense, words in the single number include the
plural number, words in the plural number include the singular. The words
"shall" and "will" are mandatory, and "may" is permissive. Words not defined
shall be given their common and ordinary meaning.
   CITY POLE: An authority pole owned by Ogden City.
   DESIGN DISTRICT: Includes the East Central Community as defined in section
15-41-2 of this Code.
   HISTORIC DISTRICT: Includes the 25th Street Historic District, the Eccles
Historic District, the Jefferson Historic District and the Crossroads of the
West Historic District.
   RESIDENTIAL STREET: A public right-of-way that is not more than sixty feet
(60') wide, as shown on a deed, dedication plat, City bible sheet, or other
official plat record on file with the Office of the Weber County Recorder and
that is adjacent to single-family residential lots, other multifamily
residences or undeveloped land that is designated for residential use by zoning
or deed restriction.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY: Does not include private streets; private abutter's alleys;
utility easements owned by the City, including public utility easements shown
on a recorded subdivision plat; the interior of public parks or other public
grounds including internal sidewalks, parking areas or roads; or trails and
paths that are not immediately adjacent to and parallel with a public right-of-
way.
   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY: A type of wireless facility: 1) on which each
wireless provider's antenna could fit within an enclosure of no more than six
(6) cubic feet in volume; and 2) for which all wireless equipment associated
with the wireless facility, whether ground-mounted or pole-mounted, is
cumulatively no more than twenty eight (28) cubic feet in volume, not including
any: a) electric meter; b) concealment element; c) telecommunications
demarcation box; d) grounding equipment; e) power transfer switch; f) cut-off
switch; g) vertical cable run for the connection of power or other service; h)
wireless provider antenna; or i) coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is
immediately adjacent to or directly associated with a particular collocation,
unless the cable is a wireline backhaul facility.
   STAND-ALONE POLE: A pole installed by a wireless provider in the public
right-of-way for use in connection with a small wireless facility.
(Ord. 2018-27, 8-28-2018)
7-19-3: SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES; RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   A small wireless facility, including associated poles, equipment and
structures, installed under this chapter may not:
      1.   Obstruct or hinder the usual travel or public safety on a right-of-
way;
      2.   Be located within two feet (2') of a curb, provided that this
restriction does not apply to an existing utility pole that is used for
collocation unless the pole is proposed to be replaced;
      3.   Utilize guy wires to support, provided that this restriction does
not apply to an existing utility pole with a guy wire;
      4.   Interfere with or impair the vision of operators of vehicles at
street intersections or interfere with or impair any aspect of any sight
triangle field of vision as outlined under section
7-3-2 of this title; or
      5.   Obstruct, damage, or interfere with:
         a.   Another utility facility in a right-of-way; or
         b.   A utility's use of the utility's facility in a right-of-way.
   B.   Construction and maintenance of any pole, equipment or small wireless
facility by a wireless provider shall comply with all applicable legal
obligations for the protection of underground and overhead utility facilities.
   C.   A wireless provider shall indemnify, save harmless, and defend City,
its officers and employees, from and against all losses, claims, counterclaims,
demands, actions, damages, costs, charges, and causes of action of every kind
or character, including attorneys' fees, arising out of or in connection with
such provider's wireless facilities or use of the public way, unless and to the
extent caused by the City's negligence.
   D.   A wireless provider is solely responsible for establishing electrical
power service for its small wireless facilities and for the payment of all
electrical utility charges associated with the small wireless facility.
   E.   All small wireless facilities and wireless provider-owned structures
shall be maintained by the wireless provider in a clean and good condition,
free of graffiti, and rusting, excessive dirt, and peeling paint. The City
shall have the authority to conduct inspections of the small wireless
facilities and structures at any time to determine whether such facilities and
structures comply with the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 2018-27, 8-28-2018)
7-19-4: PERMITS, WHEN REQUIRED:
   A.   When Permit Required: An applicant shall obtain a permit prior to:
      1.   Collocating a small wireless facility in a public right-of- way;
      2.   Installing a new, modified, or replacement utility pole, authority
pole or stand-alone pole associated with a small wireless facility in a right-
of-way; or
      3.   Permanently removing a small wireless facility.
   B.   Agreements: The City will not provide a permit to a wireless provider
until the wireless provider and City have first entered into a master license
agreement, and, if required, a franchise agreement.
   C.   Exceptions To Permitting: Unless the work requires the closing of
sidewalks or vehicular lanes in the public right-of-way, an application for a
permit is not required for:
      1.   Routine maintenance of a small wireless facility or support
structures for a small wireless facility;
      2.   The replacement of one small wireless facility with another small
wireless facility of substantially similar or smaller size;
      3.   The installation, placement, operation or maintenance of a micro
wireless facility that is strung on a cable between two (2) existing utility
poles in compliance with the National Electrical Safety Code; or
      4.   Non-substantial modifications.
   D.   Notice: A wireless provider shall give notice to the City of an
activity described in subsection C of this section at least five (5) business
days prior to conducting the activity.
(Ord. 2018-27, 8-28-2018)
7-19-5: DESIGN STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO ALL SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES:
   A.   Integrated Design Consideration: Small wireless facilities, including
equipment associated with the small wireless facility, shall be integrated into
the stand-alone pole, utility pole or authority pole where possible and
generally shall be installed in a manner minimizing the visual impact. Whether
the small wireless facility is collocated or is placed on its own pole:
      1.   Small wireless facilities should not be readily noticed;
      2.   All equipment, including electric meters, should be located on or
within the pole unless prohibited by the owner of the pole, in which case an
alternative power meter box must be approved by the Engineering Department;
      3.   A small wireless facility and associated equipment located on the
exterior of a pole shall be enclosed in a shroud or enclosure painted to match
the existing pole color;
      4.   All small wireless facilities shall be constructed out of or
finished with non-reflective materials (visible exterior surfaces only);
      5.   For metal poles:
         a.   Cable runs should be inside of the pole to the maximum extent
practicable;
         b.   Equipment associated with the small wireless facility should,
where practicable, be enclosed at the base of the wireless support structure in
a space not more than twenty four inches (24") in diameter and not more than
five feet eight inches (5'8") in height; and
         c.   Poles used for collocation shall be designed to separate
different pole users, such as through dual chamber or tri-chamber design;
      6.   If equipment cannot be installed inside of the pole, pole
attachments within fifteen feet (15') of ground level shall be positioned on
the side of the pole facing away from approaching traffic in the travel lane
closest to the pole, provided that if the equipment would extend over a
sidewalk or road surface, the equipment shall be positioned in a way to avoid
such encroachment;
      7.   Wireless facility equipment on the outside of a utility pole shall
be placed at least eight feet (8') above the public way, unless otherwise
permitted by City;
      8.   Shall not be lighted or marked unless required by the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC), the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), or
other applicable governmental authority; and
      9.   Signs located at the small wireless facility shall be limited to
ownership and contact information, FCC antenna registration number (if
required) and any other information as required by applicable governmental
authority. Commercial advertising is strictly prohibited.
   B.   Antennae:
      1.   Each individual antenna shall be located entirely within a shroud
enclosure of not more than three (3) cubic feet in volume. All antennas
associated with the small wireless facility shall not exceed a combined space
of six (6) cubic feet.
      2.   The diameter of the antenna or antenna enclosure should generally
not exceed the diameter of the top of the wireless support structure pole, and
to the maximum extent practical, should appear as a seamless vertical extension
of the pole.
      3.   In no case shall the maximum diameter of the shroud be wider than
one and one-half (11/2) times the diameter of the top of the pole.
      4.   Where maximum shroud diameter exceeds diameter of the top of the
pole, the shroud shall be tapered to meet the top of the pole.
      5.   Unless technologically infeasible or otherwise appropriate based on
neighborhood context, all antennas shall be mounted to the top of the wireless
support structure pole, aligned with the centerline of the structure.
      6.   Antennas shall be generally cylindrical in shape.
      7.   Antenna shall be completely housed within a cylindrical shroud that
is capable of accepting paint to match the wireless support structure.
   C.   Height Limitations: Except for small wireless facilities on a
residential street:
      1.   The height of a structure used for collocation of a small wireless
facility, including the wireless facility, measured at the base of the
structure shall not exceed the lesser of:
         a.   The minimum height needed for the operation of the wireless
facility; or
         b.   For a new or modified utility pole or authority pole, fifty feet
(50') above ground level together with the minimum antenna height necessary for
one antenna contained within any approved concealment feature.
      2.   A utility pole existing on or before September 1, 2018 that is used
for the collocation of a small wireless facility may, on only one occasion, be
increased by up to ten feet (10') to allow for the attachment of the small cell
wireless antenna together with any approved concealment feature.
      3.   A stand-alone pole shall not exceed thirty feet (30') in height.
Including any antenna.
   D.   Cabinets; Vaults: If a ground mounted or buried equipment cabinet is
proposed, the cabinet or vault:
      1.   May be placed above ground in a landscaped park strip or, if there
is no landscaped park strip it shall be placed underground;
      2.   Shall meet the same separation standards as required for a new
utility pole from trees and drive approaches; and
      3.   For an above ground cabinet:
         a.   Shall be secured to a concrete foundation or slab with a
breakaway design in the event of collisions; and
         b.   Shall not exceed three feet (3') in height, unless special
conditions exist that would result in the cabinet encroaching into the sidewalk
or to within two feet (2') of the curb.
(Ord. 2018-27, 8-28-2018)
7-19-6: DESIGN STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO COLLOCATED SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES:
Collocated small wireless facilities shall, in addition to the requirements of
section
7-19-5 of this chapter, meet the following design standards:
   A.   To the maximum extent practicable, all small cell facilities,
associated equipment and cabling shall be completely concealed from view within
an enclosure.
   B.   Where equipment cannot reasonably be incorporated into the base of the
authority pole in accordance with subsection 7-19-5A5 of this chapter, it may
be installed within:
      1.   An equipment enclosure mounted to the authority pole; or
      2.   A ground-mounted cabinet physically independent from the authority
pole.
   C.   Equipment enclosures mounted to an authority pole:
      1.   Protrusion: Shall not protrude more than eighteen inches (18")
beyond the face of the pole to the outermost portion of the enclosure.
      2.   Installation: Should be installed as flush to the pole as practical.
In no case shall an enclosure be installed more than four inches (4") from the
wireless support structure pole.
      3.   Multiple Enclosures: Where multiple enclosures are proposed on a
wireless support structure pole, the enclosures shall be grouped as closely
together as possible on the same side of the pole.
      4.   Enclosure Size: Small wireless facility equipment enclosures should
be the smallest size practicable to house the necessary facilities and
equipment.
      5.   Enclosure Shape: Small wireless facility equipment enclosures shall
be cylindrical or rectangular in shape, and should generally be no wider than
the maximum outside diameter of the pole to which it is attached, to the
maximum extent possible.
      6.   Attachment: The shroud enclosure shall be securely strapped to the
wireless support structure pole using stainless steel banding straps. Through-
bolting or use of lag bolts on publicly-owned wireless support structures is
prohibited.
(Ord. 2018-27, 8-28-2018)
7-19-7: DESIGN STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES ON NEW STAND-
ALONE UTILITY POLES:
If an applicant proposes to install a new stand-alone utility pole in
connection with a small wireless facility, the pole and facilities shall, in
addition to the requirements of section
7-19-5 of this chapter, meet the following design standards:
   A.   Design of the pole shall be cylindrical and shall match the aesthetics
of existing streetlight poles and streetlights installed adjacent to the pole.
   B.   Together with the small wireless facility components shall be sized to
be visually pleasing.
      1.   For a pole to be considered visually pleasing, the transition
between the equipment cabinet and upper pole should be considered;
      2.   The equipment associated with the small wireless facility shall be
enclosed at the base of the wireless support structure in a space described in
subsection
7-19-5A5 of this chapter, provided that if a separate equipment cabinet or
vault not exceeding twenty eight (28) cubic feet in size may be used if the
equipment cannot reasonably be contained in the space allowed;
      3.   A decorative transition shall be installed over the equipment
cabinet upper bolts, or decorative base cover shall be installed to match the
equipment cabinet size and shall taper between different pole diameters, with
no horizontal or flat spaces greater than 1.5 inches;
      4.   The upper pole shall be scaled to 0.5 to 0.75 the size of the
equipment cabinet, with a ten inch (10") minimum outer diameter at the widest
portion of the pole;
      5.   All hardware connections shall be hidden from view;
      6.   No horizontal flat spaces greater than 1.5 inches shall exist on the
equipment cabinet to prevent cups, trash, and other objects from being placed
on the equipment cabinet;
      7.   Each pole component shall be architecturally compatible to create a
cohesive aesthetic; and
      8.   The pole shall be made of steel and shall be powder coated black.
   C.   Shall not be located within one hundred feet (100') of the apron of a
fire station or other adjacent emergency service facility.
   D.   Shall be placed in alignment with existing trees, utility poles, and
streetlights.
   E.   Shall be located such that it in no way impedes, obstructs, or hinders
the usual pedestrian or vehicular travel, affect public safety, obstruct the
legal access to or use of the public ROW, violate applicable law, violate or
conflict with public ROW design standards, specifications, or design district
requirements, violate the Federal Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990, or
in any way create a risk to public health, safety, or welfare.
   F.   Shall be located at intersecting property lines as much as possible.
   G.   Whenever possible, shall be located on the secondary street.
   H.   Shall be located a minimum of fifteen feet (15') away from trees or
outside of the tree drip line, whichever is greater, to prevent disturbance
within the critical root zone of any tree.
   I.   Shall be located at least five feet (5') away from the widest part of
an alley or drive approach, including any flare associated with the approach.
   J.   Shall not be installed between the perpendicular extension of the
primary street-facing wall plane of any single or two-family residence and the
street.
   K.   When located adjacent to a commercial establishment, such as a shop or
restaurant, care should be taken to locate the pole such that it does not
negatively impact the business.
      1.   Shall not be located in-front of store front windows, primary
walkways, primary entrances or exits, or in such a way that it would impede a
delivery to the building.
      2.   Should be located between properties as much as possible.
(Ord. 2018-27, 8-28-2018)
7-19-8: DESIGN STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO DECORATIVE POLES, HISTORIC DISTRICTS AND
DESIGN DISTRICTS:
Small wireless facilities located on decorative poles or in a historic or
design district shall, in addition to any other requirements of this chapter,
meet the following design standards:
   A.   Decorative Poles: If necessary to collocate a small wireless facility,
a wireless provider may replace a decorative pole, if the replacement pole
reasonably conforms to the design aesthetic of the displaced decorative pole as
approved by the Planning Manager. A replacement pole does not reasonably
conform to the design aesthetic if it extends the current pole height by more
than twenty five percent (25%).
   B.   Historic And Design Districts: Within a historic district or design
district:
      1.   A wireless provider shall participate in a pre-application meeting
with the City's planning staff and obtain design approval from the City before
collocating a new small wireless facility or installing a new utility pole in
an area that is zoned or otherwise designated as a historic district or a
design district.
      2.   City's preference in historic and design districts is for small
wireless facilities to be located on traffic signal poles at intersections.
      3.   The City may, require a reasonable, technically feasible,
nondiscriminatory, or technologically neutral design or concealment measure,
unless the facility is excluded from evaluation for effects on historic
properties under 47 CFR section 1.1307(a)(4).
      4.   All small wireless facilities shall, to the extent possible, use
design techniques including, but not limited to the use of materials, colors,
textures, screening, undergrounding, or other design options that will blend
the small wireless facilities to the surrounding natural setting and built
environment. Design, materials and colors of small wireless facilities shall be
compatible with the surrounding environment. Designs shall be compatible with
structures and vegetation located in the right- of-way and on adjacent parcels.
      5.   Should the Planning Manager determine that such design meets the
intent of this Code and the community is better served thereby, the design
shall include the use of camouflage measures such as man-made trees, clock
towers, bell steeples, light poles, traffic signals, buildings, and similar
alternative design mounting structures that are compatible with the natural
setting and surrounding structures, and conceals the presence of antennas or
poles so as to make them architecturally compatible with the surrounding area
pursuant to this chapter.
      6.   A design or concealment measure described in subsection B2 of this
section may not:
         a.   Have the effect of prohibiting a provider's technology; or
         b.   Be considered a part of the small wireless facility for purposes
of the size parameters in the definition of a small wireless facility.
(Ord. 2018-27, 8-28-2018)
7-19-9: UNDERGROUNDING:
   A.   A wireless provider will place newly constructed lines and cables
underground whenever practicable when building in:
      1.   New residential subdivision areas where other utilities have been
placed underground;
      2.   Within the Central Business District of the City; and
      3.   Within areas where other utilities have been located underground.
   B.   A wireless provider shall locate wires, cables, or other facilities
that are not required to be above ground underground.
   C.   Any request by a wireless provider for location of any overhead or
aerial facilities (other than the antennas or other facilities required to
remain above ground in order to be functional) shall be considered by City in
accordance with applicable rules and regulations.
(Ord. 2018-27, 8-28-2018)
7-19-10: APPLICATION PROCESS:
   A.   Applications for the installation or collocation of a small wireless
facility shall be filed with the City Engineer on a form or forms to be
furnished by the City Engineer.
   B.   All applications shall contain the following:
      1.   The application form shall be signed by the applicant or its
authorized representative;
      2.   The name, address, telephone, facsimile number, and email address of
the applicant. Where an applicant is not the owner of the utility pole to be
installed, maintained or repaired in the public way, the application also shall
include the name, address, telephone, facsimile number and email address of the
owner;
      3.   A description of the location, purpose, method of the proposed work,
and surface and subsurface area to be affected;
      4.   A plan showing the dimensions of any excavation and the facilities
to be installed, maintained, or repaired in connection with the work, and such
other details as the City Engineer may require;
      5.   Construction drawings which demonstrate the application meets the
minimum requirements of this chapter, including:
         a.   A scaled site plan, rendering or photo simulation, scaled
elevation view and other supporting drawings and calculations, showing the
location and dimension of all improvements; and
         b.   Sufficient information to determine compliance with the standards
and requirements of this chapter, specifically including information concerning
structure height and location within the right-of-way, compliance with the
City's intersection and driveway sight distance standards, and compliance with
the ADA;
      6.   The appropriate application fee as set forth in subsection 7-19-12B
of this chapter;
      7.   An affidavit or attestation that the applicant or, if the applicant
does not provide wireless services, a wireless service provider will provide
wireless service using the small wireless facility and that the installation or
collocation of the small wireless facility shall be completed within two
hundred seventy (270) days after the day on which the City issues a right-of-
way permit except in the case that:
         a.   The City and the applicant agree to extend the two hundred
seventy (270) day period; or
         b.   Lack of commercial power or communications transport
infrastructure to the site delays completion;
      8.   If the applicant does not provide wireless service to an end user
associated with the small wireless facility or facilities to be installed,
maintained, or repaired, the applicant must demonstrate in a form and manner
specified by the City Engineer that the applicant is authorized to act on
behalf of a wireless service provider;
      9.   An affidavit or attestation that each proposed small wireless
facility, pole, and associated equipment is eligible for an exemption from
environmental or historical assessment under 47 CFR 1.1312(e) or, if not
exempt, evidence of compliance with such required assessment;
      10.   An affidavit or attestation from a Utah licensed engineer that the
proposed wireless facility will be in compliance with the radio frequency
emissions limits established by the FCC;
      11.   The proposed start date of work;
      12.   The proposed duration of the work, which shall include the duration
of the restoration of the right-of-way physically disturbed by the work;
      13.   Written certification that all material to be used in the work and
restoration of the right-of-way, will be on hand and ready for use so as not to
delay the work and the prompt restoration of the public way;
      14.   For an application that proposes collocation of the small wireless
facility:
         a.   An industry-standard pole load analysis indicating that the
structure on which the wireless facilities will be mounted will safely support
the load;
         b.   Evidence that the applicant has permission to collocate the
proposed small wireless facility on the pole; and
         c.   If a small wireless facility cannot be safely installed on the
respective structure, the applicant shall either replace the structure with a
compliant structure of the same type, or propose a new location;
      15.   For an application that proposes use of a decorative pole or
placement of a small wireless facility in a design district or historic
district, a copy or other documentation that the applicant has complied with
section
7-19-8 of this chapter;
      16.   Written certification that the applicant and the wireless service
provider are in compliance with all terms and conditions of this chapter, the
orders, and all applicable rules and regulations of the City Engineer, and that
the applicant and owner are not subject to any outstanding assessments, fees or
penalties that have been finally determined by the City;
      17.   Evidence of insurance as required by either section
7-5-13 of this title or the applicable agreement with the City;
      18.   Certification of the applicant and owner's financial ability to
compensate the City for the use of the public way during the term of the
respective franchise agreement or master license agreement;
      19.   Any other information that may reasonably be required by the City
Engineer.
   C.   After an application has been approved, the applicant shall obtain any
required permits, including right-of-way, excavation or electrical permits,
prior to commencing installation or construction of the small wireless
facility.
(Ord. 2018-27, 8-28-2018)
7-19-11: PROCEDURE FOR ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW OF APPLICATIONS:
   A.   City shall review a complete application, including a consolidated
application of up to twenty five (25) small wireless facilities, and approve or
deny the application within the time frames and subject to the standards
contained in Utah Code Annotated section 54-21-302(3) through (9).
   B.   City is a category one authority for purposes of determining the total
number of small wireless facility applications allowed on a monthly basis under
Utah law.
   C.   If construction of an approved small wireless facility is not complete
within two hundred seventy (270) days after an application has been approved,
the approval shall lapse and a new application will be required for the
designated location.
(Ord. 2018-27, 8-28-2018)
7-19-12: FEES:
   A.   Right To Use And Occupy: Unless a wireless provider is subject to the
Municipal Telecommunications License Tax under title 10, chapter 1, part 4 Utah
Code Annotated, for the right to use and occupy the right-of-way:
      1.   The wireless provider shall pay to the City an annual fee equal to
the greater of:
         a.   3.5 percent of all annual gross revenue related to the wireless
provider's use of the right-of-way within the City; or
         b.   Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) annually for each small
wireless facility located in the City.
      2.   The annual fee, together with the fee described in subsection C of
this section, shall be paid on or before December 31, with the fee for any new
small wireless facility installed in the prior year pro-rated by the number of
months after the facility has been approved. Upon written request by City to
the wireless provider, payments shall be made on a monthly basis.
      3.   Annually, on or before December 31, a person required to make a
payment under subsection A1 of this section shall provide City with gross
revenue upon which payments are calculated and a description, of reasonable
specificity, of the small wireless facilities which have generated the revenue
upon which the payment is based.
         a.   Such report shall include such information related to such
payment as the City may reasonably request.
         b.   The records pertaining to the reports and payment required by
this chapter, including but not limited to any records deemed necessary or
useful by the City to calculate or confirm gross revenue, and all other records
of the wireless provider reasonably required by City to assure compliance by
the wireless provider with the terms of this chapter shall be open to
inspection by the City and its duly authorized representatives upon reasonable
notice at all reasonable business hours of the wireless provider.
   B.   Application Fee: With each application to locate a small wireless
facility within the City, an applicant shall pay an application fee of:
      1.   Collocation: One hundred dollars ($100.00) per small wireless
facility on the same application where the application requests collocation of
the facility; or
      2.   Stand-Alone Pole: Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per small
wireless facility on the same application where the application requests the
installation, modification or replacement of a stand-alone pole associated with
the facility.
   C.   Annual Fee: The wireless provider shall pay the City an annual fee for
each collocation on a City pole in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) per
pole.
   D.   Other Fees: A wireless provider or applicant shall pay all other
applicable fees established by City, specifically including but not limited to
electrical permit fees and right-of-way permit fees prior to installing an
approved small wireless facility in the right-of-way.
(Ord. 2018-27, 8-28-2018)
7-19-13: DAMAGE AND REPAIR:
   A.   If a wireless provider's activity disrupts or causes damage to a right-
of-way, the wireless provider shall restore or repair the right-of-way to
substantially the same condition as before the disruption or damage and in
accordance with City's engineering standards.
   B.   If a wireless provider fails to make a repair required by the City
under subsection A of this section within a reasonable time after written
notice, the City may:
      1.   Make the required repair; and
      2.   Charge the wireless provider the reasonable, documented, actual cost
for the repair.
   C.   If the damage described in subsection A of this section causes an
urgent safety hazard, the City may:
      1.   Immediately make the necessary repair; and
      2.   Charge the wireless provider the reasonable, documented, actual cost
for the repair.
(Ord. 2018-27, 8-28-2018)
7-19-14: REMOVAL OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES:
   A.   Abandoned System: In the event that: 1) the use of any portion of a
small wireless facility is discontinued for a continuous period of twelve (12)
months, and thirty (30) days after no response to written notice from the City
to the last known address of the wireless provider; 2) the term of the
applicable master license agreement has expired; or 3) any small wireless
facility has been installed in the rights-of-way without complying with the
requirements of this chapter or master license agreement; a wireless provider
shall be deemed to have abandoned such small wireless facility.
   B.   Removal Of Abandoned Facility: The City, upon such terms as it may
impose, may give a wireless provider written permission to abandon, without
removing, any small wireless facility, or portion thereof, directly
constructed, operated or maintained under a master license agreement. Unless
such permission is granted or unless otherwise provided in this chapter, a
wireless provider shall remove within a reasonable time the abandoned small
wireless facility and shall restore, using prudent construction standards, any
affected rights-of-way to their former state at the time such system was
installed and in accordance with the then adopted engineering standards, so as
not to impair their usefulness. In removing its facilities and equipment, a
wireless provider shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation necessarily
made by it and shall leave all rights- of-way in as good condition as that
prevailing prior to such removal without materially interfering with any
authority pole or other utility wires, poles or attachments. The City shall
have the right to inspect and approve the condition of the rights-of- way,
attachments and poles prior to and after removal. The liability, indemnity and
insurance provisions of this chapter and any security fund provided in a master
license agreement shall continue in full force and effect during the period of
removal and until full compliance by a wireless provider with the terms and
conditions of this section.
   C.   Transfer Of Abandoned Facility To City: Upon abandonment of any small
wireless facility or wireless support structure in place, a wireless provider,
if required by the City, shall submit to the City a written instrument,
satisfactory in form to the City, transferring to the City the ownership of
such poles or equipment allowed to remain within the right-of-way.
   D.   Removal Of Above-Ground System: At the expiration of the term for which
a master license agreement is granted, or upon its revocation or earlier
expiration, in any such case without renewal, extension or transfer, the City
shall have the right to require a provider to remove, at its expense, all
above-ground portions of small wireless facilities within a reasonable period
of time, which shall not be less than one hundred eighty (180) days.
   E.   Leaving Underground System: Upon written approval by City, a wireless
provider may abandon underground portions of a small wireless facility in place
so long as it does not materially interfere with the use of the rights-of-way
or with the use thereof by any public utility, cable operator or other person.
   F.   Provider Defaults: If a wireless provider defaults under any provision
of this chapter and such default is not cured within thirty (30) days following
notice by City to wireless provider of its default, City shall maintain all its
rights and remedies, at law and in equity, including the ability to charge
fines, recover fees and costs. In the alternative, the City may remove the
small wireless facilities and associated equipment and charge the reasonable,
documented, actual cost to the wireless provider.
(Ord. 2018-27, 8-28-2018)
7-19-15: CONFLICTS:
In the event of a conflict between any provision of this chapter and a master
license agreement entered pursuant to it, the provisions of this chapter shall
control.
(Ord. 2018-27, 8-28-2018)
7-19-16: OTHER APPLICABLE ORDINANCES:
The use of the right-of-way under this chapter is subject to the police powers
of the City to adopt and enforce ordinances necessary to the health, safety and
welfare of the public. A person using the right-of-way pursuant to this chapter
or a master license agreement shall comply with all applicable general laws and
ordinances enacted by the City pursuant to its police powers.
(Ord. 2018-27, 8-28-2018)
7-19-17: ORDERS, RULES AND REGULATIONS:
In addition to the requirements set forth in this chapter, the City may adopt
such orders, rules and regulations which are reasonably necessary to accomplish
the purposes of this chapter and are consistent herewith.
(Ord. 2018-27, 8-28-2018)
7-19-18: CITY FAILURE TO ENFORCE:
A person shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the
provisions of this chapter or any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter by
reason of any failure of the City to enforce prompt compliance.
(Ord. 2018-27, 8-28-2018)
7-19-19: CONSTRUED ACCORDING TO UTAH LAW:
This chapter and any master license agreement granted pursuant to this chapter
shall be construed and enforced in accordance with the substantive laws of the
State.
(Ord. 2018-27, 8-28-2018)
TITLE 8
AIRPORT
CHAPTER 1
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS 1
SECTION:
8-1-1: Definitions
8-1-2: Officials; Authority
8-1-3: Agreement To Follow Rules
8-1-4: Airport Advisory Committee
8-1-5: Grievance Procedure
 
Notes
1 1. UCA §§ 72-10-201 et seq.,
  10-8-8.
8-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this title, the following terms mean:
ADVISORY COMMITTEE: Shall mean and have reference to the Ogden Airport Advisory
Committee created by this title.
AERONAUTICAL ACTIVITY: Any activity which involves, makes possible or is
required for the operation of aircraft, or which contributes to or is required
for the safety of such operations; for example, air taxi and charter operation,
scheduled or nonscheduled air carrier services, pilot training, aircraft rental
and sightseeing, aerial photography, crop dusting, aerial advertising and
surveying, aircraft sales and service, aircraft parking and storage, sale of
aviation petroleum products, aircraft manufacturing, general aviation specialty
services, airpark aviation operations, repairs and maintenance of aircraft and
sale of aircraft parts.
AIRCRAFT ACCESSORY SERVICES OPERATOR: A person providing repairs or sale of
aircraft radios, propellers, instruments, accessories, painting or upholstery.
AIRCRAFT AIRFRAME AND ENGINE REPAIR OPERATOR: A person providing airframe and/
or power plant maintenance and/or overhaul services. This category also
includes the sale of aircraft parts and accessories.
AIRCRAFT CHARTER OPERATOR: A person providing air transportation to the public
for hire, either on a charter basis or as an air taxi operator, as defined in
the Federal Aviation Act of 1958.
AIRCRAFT MANUFACTURING SERVICES OPERATOR: A person engaged in the manufacture,
fabrication, or assembly of aircraft or aircraft/aerospace parts, systems and
components.
AIRCRAFT OPERATION: An aircraft arrival or departure from the airport.
AIRCRAFT OWNER: A person to whom an aircraft is registered and a person who
exercises the full incidents of ownership of an aircraft under a long term
lease agreement.
AIRCRAFT RENTAL OPERATOR: A person engaged in the rental of aircraft to the
public. It shall not include an aircraft owner who loans his or her aircraft
for reimbursement on a nonprofit basis.
AIRCRAFT SALES OPERATOR: A person engaged in the sale of new and/or used
aircraft or who acts as an aircraft broker.
AIRPARK: Shall mean the taxilane and areas located outside the airport, and
intended for airport/airpark access, and all real property adjacent to any
portion of the airpark taxilanes, presently constituting approximately 30.35
acres. The current survey coordinates are:
A part of the Southeast Quarter of the Northwest Quarter of section 12,
Township 5 North, Range 2 West, Salt Lake Base and Meridian, U.S. Survey;
beginning at a point on the south line of said northwest quarter which is 17.04
feet South 89°52'04" West along said south line from the southeast corner of
said northwest quarter; thence North 00°46'04" East 1,035.12 feet along a
fence; thence North 88°17'54" West 750.81 feet along a fence; thence South
44°48'51" West 1,449.65 feet along a fence; thence North 89°52'04" East 440.81
feet; thence South 01°16'19" West 33.02 feet; thence North 89°52'03" East
1,318.26 feet to the point of beginning.
AIRPORT: Shall mean and have reference to all areas comprising Ogden-Hinckley
airport that now exist or may hereafter be expanded, together with their
appurtenant facilities. The current survey coordinates are:
A part of Section 6, T 5 N, R 1 W and parts of Sections 1 and 12 T 5 N, R 2 W
S. L. B. & M.; beginning at a point that bears South 197.3 feet and West 192.4
feet from the NE corner of the NW 1/4 of said Section 6, and running thence S.
21° 51' W. 249.5 ft.; thence S. 14° 06' W. 2,083.9 ft. to a point that is 115.0
feet perpendicular distant from the centerline of the east track of the
U.P.R.R.; thence S. 35° 13' W. 5,192.7 ft.; thence N. 51° 47' W. 17.0 ft.;
thence S. 38° 13' W. 1,674.9 ft.; thence S. 89° 22' W. 297.9 ft.; thence N. 0°
31' E. 591.1 ft.; thence N. 29° 12' W. 799.6 ft.; thence S. 89° 40' W. 919 ft.;
thence N. 0° 35' E. 1,231.4 ft.; thence N. 0° 02' W. 9,659 ft.; thence N. 24°
09' W. 1,493.0 ft.; thence S. 89° 48' W. 601.5 ft.; thence Northeasterly and to
the right on an arc of a 749.0 foot radius curve 572.9 ft. (the long chord of
said curve bears N. 35° 15' 30" E. 558.9 ft.); thence S. 32° 50' E. 30.0 ft.;
thence N. 57° 10' E. 1,259.6 ft.; thence Northeasterly and to the right and
tangent to the previous course on the arc of 1,970.0 foot radius curve 315.50
ft.; thence N. 67° 16' E. 1,651.8 ft.; thence N. 62° 10" E. 449.7 ft.; thence
N. 67° 15' E. 1,421.2 ft.; thence Southeasterly and to the right on the arc of
a 2,774.9 foot radius curve 781.4 feet (the long chord of said curve bears N.
82° 04' E. 778.7 ft.); thence S. 89° 52' E. 1,182.5 ft.; thence S. 26° 44' E.
108.8 ft.; thence N. 87° 00' E. 443.7 ft.; thence S. 63° 33' E. 39.5 ft. to the
point of beginning; containing 691.68 acres.
AIRPORT LAYOUT PLAN (ALP): The FAA approved chart identifying the location for
various uses and activities on the airport.
APRON: The areas surrounding buildings to which aircraft have access.
COMMERCIAL ACTIVITIES: Revenue producing activities and business activities
engaged in for profit. The subletting of one's private hangar upon the airport
shall not be construed as a commercial activity.
COMMERCIAL AERONAUTICAL ACTIVITIES PERMIT: A permit required to be obtained
from the city and maintained during any period in which a person conducts any
commercial aeronautical activity upon the airport or airpark, except that a
person with an airport lease permitting a commercial aeronautical activity
shall not be required to obtain a separate commercial aeronautical activities
permit to engage in that activity upon the airport.
COMMERCIAL AERONAUTICAL ACTIVITY: Any aeronautical activity or service
conducted on the airport or airpark as a revenue producing business or service
activity engaged in for profit, including the activities of an FBO or
specialized service operator upon the airport or airpark, and the activities of
a general aviation specialty services operator upon the airpark. The subletting
of one's private hangar upon the airport shall not be construed as a commercial
aeronautical activity.
COMMERCIAL FLYING SERVICES OPERATOR: A person providing any of the following
activities: sightseeing flights; crop dusting; seeding and spraying; banner
towing and aerial advertising; aerial photography or survey; firefighting;
power line or pipeline patrol and wildlife spotting; or any other operations
specifically excluded from FAR part 135.
COMMERCIAL FUEL SALES: Shall include all fuel sold or dispensed by anyone other
than an aircraft owner or his or her employees into the aircraft owner's own
aircraft.
COMMERCIAL OPERATIONS: Operations performed for compensation or hire. The
subletting of one's private hangar shall not be construed as a commercial
operation.
CONCESSION: A commercial activity operated within a city owned building with a
negotiated fee schedule.
CONTROL TOWER: The FAA air traffic control tower at the airport.
DOPING: The application of a preparation to strengthen and tighten aircraft
fabric.
ELECTRICALLY BONDED: The connection of the fueling service vehicle with an
unpainted metal point on the aircraft or vehicle using a functional bonding
cable.
FAA: The federal aviation administration.
FAR: Federal aviation regulations.
FIXED BASE OPERATOR (Also Known As FBO): Any person who performs the basic
essential aeronautical services including aviation fuel and oil sales, ramp
parking, tie down and storage, minor aircraft repair, passenger loading and
towing.
FLAMMABLES: Any material that has a flash point at or below one hundred degrees
Fahrenheit (100°F).
FLIGHT TRAINING OPERATOR: A person engaged in training pilots in any aircraft
and providing related ground school instruction if necessary.
FLYING CLUB: Three (3) or more persons jointly owning or leasing one or more
aircraft where payment is made to the club for the operating time of such
aircraft.
FUEL FARM: One or more fuel storage tanks.
FUEL SERVICING EQUIPMENT: Vehicles and equipment used for fueling or defueling
aircraft or vehicles.
FUELING OPERATIONS: Fueling or defueling aircraft, equipment or vehicles.
GENERAL AVIATION: Shall include all phases of aviation other than aircraft
manufacturing, military aviation and regulated air carrier operations.
GROUND TRANSPORTATION: Transportation for hire or compensation to or from the
airport.
GROUNDED: The connection of a functional grounding cable from the fueling
vehicle to a point or points of zero electrical potential to prevent the
buildup of static electricity.
HAZARDOUS AND TOXIC MATERIALS: Shall include petroleum products, pesticides,
solvents, paint, explosives, flammables and any other substance that requires
special handling under current or future federal, state or local environmental
safety and health regulations.
NATIONAL TESTING LABORATORY: Shall include National Fire Protection
Association, Underwriter's Laboratory and similar organizations that develop
professional standards for fueling equipment.
PARK: To leave the aircraft or vehicle unattended.
PROFESSIONAL SKILLS: Any skill obtained after special study or the use of which
requires a license under FAA regulations or federal, state or local law.
RAMP: The paved area of the airport normally used for aircraft parking and
loading.
RUN UP: Engine acceleration to test its functions while the aircraft is
stationary.
RUNWAY: The paved area designated for aircraft landing and takeoff.
SERVICE EQUIPMENT: Devices designed for aircraft servicing or other airport
functions or devices regularly used at the airport, including, but not limited
to, fuel trucks, aircraft starting units, mobile aircraft stairs, etc.
SPECIALIZED SERVICE OPERATOR: A person who provides aircraft accessory
services, flight training, commercial flying services, aircraft sales, aircraft
airframe and engine repair, aircraft manufacturing, aircraft rental or charter,
hangar rental or any other commercial aeronautical activities or services,
except fuel sales.
TAXIWAY: The paved area of the airport designated for aircraft movement from
the runway to the ramp.
TIE DOWN: An unenclosed space where an aircraft is parked, with dimensions of
forty feet by forty feet (40' x 40'), centered on the center of the triangle
formed by the tie down eyehooks. Where tie downs overlap under this definition,
the overlapping area shall be divided equally between adjoining tie downs. When
adjacent tie downs in the same row are leased, any space between those tie
downs will be incorporated in the lease.
VEHICLE: A device (not an aircraft) in, upon or by which any person or property
is or may be propelled, moved, transported, hauled or drawn upon any roadway or
ground surface at the airport.
(Ord. 2005-45, 7-19-2005; amd. Ord. 2018-20, 6-26-2018)
8-1-2: OFFICIALS; AUTHORITY:
   A.   Mayor; Chief Administrative Officer: The Mayor or Chief Administrative
Officer is authorized to implement this title; and to recommend to the City
Council such additional ordinances governing the use of the airport as are
necessary or desirable. This title, any administrative orders implementing it
and any amendments thereto shall be available to the public.
   B.   Airport Manager:
      1.   Under the direction of the Mayor and Chief Administrative Officer,
the Airport Manager shall have full power to carry out, administer and enforce
this title to oversee its implementation, to receive applications and reports,
to issue permits, approvals, and authorizations and to make designations on
behalf of the City as provided in this title, and to manage the airport and
airpark.
      2.   The Airport Manager, his or her representatives, and the City police
shall have the authority to take the steps necessary for the handling, policing
and protection of the public while at the airport and airpark.
(Ord. 2005-45, 7-19-2005)
8-1-3: AGREEMENT TO FOLLOW RULES:
Any person who enters upon or uses the airport or its facilities or any part
thereof impliedly agrees that a condition of that use is compliance with
airport ordinances, rules and regulations.
(Ord. 2005-45, 7-19-2005)
8-1-4: AIRPORT ADVISORY COMMITTEE:
   A.   Purpose: This section is enacted and intended for the purpose of
establishing the Ogden Airport Advisory Committee, whose objectives and
purposes shall be to advise the City Council and the Mayor in matters
pertaining to the operations of the airport.
   B.   Established: There is hereby established the Ogden Airport Advisory
Committee which shall consist of not fewer than five (5) but not more than
seven (7) members, appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the
City Council.
   C.   Appointment; Eligibility:
      1.   In order to be eligible for appointment to the advisory committee, a
person shall:
         a.   Be not less than twenty one (21) years of age;
         b.   Be a resident of Weber County or Davis County; and
         c.   Be a representative of a cross section of business, aviation and
community interests, such as pilots, engineers, travel industry, or education
and economic development representatives, etc.
      2.   At least two (2) members of the advisory committee shall be
residents of Ogden City or persons whose continuing principal place of business
is in Ogden City.
   D.   Terms Of Office: Advisory committee members shall be appointed for two
(2) year terms, three (3) of which will expire in odd numbered years and two
(2) of which shall expire in even numbered years on March 30 of the second
year. If a sixth or seventh advisory committee member is appointed, their terms
shall expire in even numbered years on March 30 of the second year. Each member
may serve beyond that date as needed until a successor is appointed and
qualified.
   E.   Vacancies: Vacancies occurring in the advisory committee shall be
filled by appointment of the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City
Council for the unexpired term.
   F.   Compensation; Expenses: Advisory committee members shall serve without
compensation but may be reimbursed for reasonable out of pocket expenses
incurred as committee members, if approved in advance of the expenditure.
   G.   Removal From Office: Any advisory committee member may be removed from
office by the Mayor at any time for any reason.
   H.   Members' Ethics: Advisory committee members shall be subject to and
bound by the provisions of the Municipal Officers' and Employees' Ethics Act,
Utah Code Annotated section 10-3-1301 et seq., as amended.
   I.   Meetings:
      1.   The advisory committee shall meet at least twice throughout the
year. Meetings may be called by the Airport Manager or the Committee Chair. The
meetings shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of the Utah Open
and Public Meetings Law, Utah Code Annotated section 52-4-1 et seq., as
amended.
      2.   Meetings shall be held at the airport or at another public place.
      3.   The advisory committee shall keep written minutes of its proceedings
which shall be available for public inspection at the Airport Manager's Office.
Copies of the minutes shall also be filed with the City Recorder's Office.
      4.   The advisory committee may adopt rules of procedure for its
meetings.
   J.   Election Of Officers: At its first regular meeting after March 30 each
year, the advisory committee shall elect a Chair, and a Vice Chair who will
perform the duties of Chair during the absence or disability of the Chair.
   K.   Staffing Services: The Mayor, through the Department of Community and
Economic Development, shall provide such administrative support and staff
assistance to the committee as is determined by the Mayor to be necessary for
the operations of the committee, within existing budgetary restraints.
   L.   Functions: The advisory committee shall assist the Airport Manager in
development and promotion of the airport in order to best serve the local and
regional requirements for airport service. The committee shall review matters
presented to it by the Airport Manager, the Mayor, the City Council or
citizens; make suggestions; and submit its recommendation in writing to the
Airport Manager, the Mayor or City Council. As requested by the City, the
advisory committee shall:
      1.   Assist in the development of goals, objectives and strategies for
the operation and development of the airport and the identification of the
means and methods of implementation and their associated costs;
      2.   Assist the Planning Commission in the development of the airport
master plan as part of the Ogden City general plan;
      3.   Assist in the development of ordinances, rules and regulations for
the effective and efficient operation of the airport;
      4.   Review proposed changes in rates and charges;
      5.   Assist in the development of a capital improvement plan for the
airport, including the Federal and State airport grant programs;
      6.   Review complaints and suggestions from airport users and affected
neighbors as requested;
      7.   Assist in the development of marketing strategies for the economic
development of the airport; and
      8.   Annually submit in writing to the City Council and the Mayor a
report of the activities of the committee during the year, together with any
recommendations for the subsequent year.
   M.   Sunset Provision: Unless subsequently extended by appropriate action,
the term of this committee shall sunset and expire on June 30, 2023.
(Ord. 2018-20, 6-26-2018)
8-1-5: GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE:
   A.   Hearing Request: Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Airport
Manager or any person whose compliance with this title would create severe
hardship may request a hearing before the Chief Administrative Officer or his/
her designated representative. Such request shall be made in writing and such
hearing shall be held within ten (10) days of receipt of said request.
   B.   Present Evidence: Any person requesting a hearing shall present all
evidence, records and testimony of which that person has knowledge concerning
the grievance or hardship.
   C.   Decision: The Chief Administrative Officer or his/her designated
representative shall issue written findings of fact and a decision concerning
the grievance or hardship within fifteen (15) working days, such decision to be
final. The Mayor may elect to review the Chief Administrative Officer's
decision when requested by the aggrieved party in writing within ten (10)
working days after the findings and decision have been rendered.
(Ord. 2005-45, 7-19-2005)
CHAPTER 2
RULES AND REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8-2-1: Fuel Servicing
8-2-2: Hazardous And Toxic Materials
8-2-3: Fire Protection
8-2-4: Aircraft Operation
8-2-5: Vehicles
8-2-6: General Rules Of Conduct
8-2-1: FUEL SERVICING:
   A.   Permit Required: No person shall conduct fueling operations until he or
she has completed the fueling application form and received a fueling permit
from the city. In order to receive a fueling permit, the person shall be an
aircraft owner fueling his or her own aircraft and vehicles with his or her own
personnel and equipment; or a person having a valid written lease agreement
with the city or a commercial aeronautical activities permit from the city for
commercial fuel sales. Each person receiving the fueling permit shall comply
with all applicable regulations in this title, and the information provided on
the fueling application form.
   B.   Authorized Personnel: Each fueling permit holder shall assure that each
person responsible to the present holder for fueling is trained in the safe
operation of the equipment used, in the operation of emergency controls, and in
emergency procedures, before allowing that person to fuel or defuel aircraft or
vehicles.
   C.   Equipment:
      1.   Maintenance: All fuel servicing equipment shall comply with a
national testing laboratory standard for that equipment. Equipment shall be
maintained in a safe operating condition. Equipment shall be removed from
service when it leaks or malfunctions.
      2.   Parking: No person shall park a fuel servicing vehicle or allow it
to remain within fifty feet (50') of any building. No person shall park fuel
servicing vehicles or allow them to remain parked side by side with less than
ten feet (10') between them.
   D.   Location Designated: Fueling operations shall be conducted in areas
designated by the city. No fuel servicing shall be conducted inside a hangar or
building; within twenty five feet (25') of any hangar or building; or within
fifty feet (50') of any open flame, combustion and ventilation air intake or
any boiler, heater, or incinerator.
   E.   Spills:
      1.   Prevention; Cleanup: Each fueling permit holder shall exercise care
to prevent fuel spills. When a spill occurs, fuel servicing shall be stopped
immediately and shall not continue until the fuel spill has been cleaned up.
Each fueling permit holder shall be responsible to clean up the permit holder's
own spills. If the fueling permit holder fails to do so immediately, the city
may have it done and bill the responsible party for the cost of the cleanup.
      2.   Notification: The responsible party shall notify appropriate
emergency services and the airport manager immediately when a fuel spill
occurs.
   F.   Grounding: During fuel servicing operation, the aircraft and fuel
servicing equipment shall be grounded and electrically bonded to prevent
ignition of volatile gases by static electricity.
   G.   Prohibited When: Fueling and defueling are prohibited when any of the
following conditions are present:
      1.   The engine is running on the aircraft or vehicle being fueled or
defueled, unless authorized by the aircraft operating manual.
      2.   When a combustion heater, charger, radio transmitter or any other
potential ignition source is being operated within fifty feet (50') of the fuel
servicing operation.
      3.   When lightning is within five (5) nautical miles of the airport.
   H.   Smoking: Smoking is prohibited within fifty feet (50') of any fuel
servicing operation, any fuel truck, and any aircraft while fueling operations
are taking place.
   I.   Attendant Required: Each fueling permit holder shall assure that a
cabin attendant is stationed near the cabin door, if passengers are on board an
aircraft while it is being fueled or defueled.
   J.   Fire Extinguisher: At least one fire extinguisher with a minimum 10-B:
C classification shall be within seventy five feet (75') of all fuel servicing
operations.
(Ord. 2005-45, 7-19-2005)
8-2-2: HAZARDOUS AND TOXIC MATERIALS:
   A.   Notification: Prior to storing or using hazardous or toxic materials on
the airport, except that permitted under subsection C2 of this section, the
responsible party must advise the city in writing and comply with all relevant
lease provisions and this title.
   B.   Spills:
      1.   Insurance Requirements; Alternatives: Each person storing or using
hazardous or toxic materials on the airport, except that permitted under
subsection C2 of this section, shall maintain an escrow account; or provide
insurance naming the city as an additional named insured; or post a performance
bond with the city; or provide the personal guarantee of an individual with
sufficient assets; or have sufficient assets to assure that any spill is
completely cleaned up in accordance with federal, state and local standards.
The amount required will vary depending on the type and amount of material
stored and method of storage. The city shall determine the amount in each case,
which shall be binding unless the affected party provides evidence in writing
from an authoritative source (the EPA, a licensed commercial cleanup provider,
etc.) that potential cleanup costs are less than the amount named, in which
case the lesser amount will be required.
      2.   Notification: The responsible party shall notify the airport manager
immediately if a spill or contamination occurs, and when any immediate hazard
exists. The responsible party shall also notify the appropriate emergency
services when any immediate hazard exists.
   C.   Storage:
      1.   Tanks: Any owner of a storage tank located on the airport presently
or formerly containing hazardous or toxic materials shall advise the city of
its location, maintain it in a safe condition so that leaks are prevented,
immediately clean up any leaks, and otherwise comply with federal and state
environmental protection laws.
      2.   Flammables: Except for five (5) gallons in national testing
laboratory approved containers, or any amount in aircraft fuel tanks, no person
shall store or allow to be stored flammable liquids, gases or similar material
in hangars or buildings on the airport.
      3.   Oil: No person shall keep or store lubricating oils in or about the
hangars unless stored in closed containers which meet national testing
laboratory standards.
      4.   Hazardous And Toxic Materials: Hazardous and toxic materials shall
be stored in a safe manner as determined by federal, state and local
environmental and safety standards. Each tank owner and tank lessee shall
submit to the city a copy of all compliance forms required by federal, state
and local storage and use regulations.
   D.   Fuel Farms: No person shall operate or maintain a fuel farm at the
airport unless he or she has entered into a valid written lease agreement for
that activity.
   E.   Contamination Prohibited: No person shall store, use or dispose of
hazardous or toxic materials in any manner that will allow them to contaminate
the air, ground or water supply at the airport.
   F.   Oil Dumping: No person shall dump or drain oil on the ground at the
airport, nor in the storm drains.
(Ord. 2005-45, 7-19-2005)
8-2-3: FIRE PROTECTION:
   A.   Airport Users; Responsibility: Each airport user shall take whatever
steps are reasonable and necessary to prevent fire. If a fire occurs, the
responsible party, or any other person observing it, shall notify the fire
department and the airport manager immediately.
   B.   Aircraft Cleaning: No person shall use flammable or volatile materials
in the cleaning of any aircraft, aircraft engine or propeller or any other
appliance unless the cleaning operations are conducted in open areas outside
buildings and at not less than fifty feet (50') from other aircraft, buildings
or hangars; or in a room specifically approved by the city fire marshal for
that purpose, which is fireproofed and equipped with readily accessible fire
extinguishing apparatus.
   C.   Painting And Doping: No person shall paint or dope an aircraft or
vehicle except in a room adequately ventilated and approved by the city fire
marshal.
   D.   Heating Equipment: All heating equipment and fuel burning appliances
installed or used in any structure shall be in accordance with state and local
building codes.
   E.   Heating Oil: No person shall heat oil in any manner except with steam,
hot water, hot air or electric heaters.
   F.   Welding And Open Flames: No person shall weld or use open flame in any
operation except in shop space designated for that purpose and approved by the
city fire marshal.
   G.   Floor Care: All building owners and lessees shall keep their hangar
floors, shop floors, storeroom floors, aprons and areas adjacent thereto free
of all grease, waste or other flammable material.
   H.   Waste Receptacles: Each building owner and lessee shall provide metal
receptacles with self-closing covers for the storage of waste, rags and other
rubbish, and the contents thereof shall be removed as often as necessary, but
at least weekly.
   I.   Accumulation Of Litter: No boxes, crates, rubbish, paper or other
litter shall be permitted to accumulate in, about or around any hangar. All
oil, paint and varnish containers shall be removed from the hangar immediately
upon being emptied.
   J.   Fire Extinguishers: The owner, lessee, and/or user of every building,
repair shop, doping or welding room on the airport shall provide adequate fire
extinguishers approved by the city fire marshal, which shall be maintained in
working condition at all times.
   K.   Storage Of Materials: No person shall store or stock any material or
equipment in such a manner as to constitute a fire hazard.
   L.   Leaking Fuel Or Oil: No person shall keep any aircraft or vehicle at
the airport without providing for the containment of leaking oil or fuel.
Repairs or cleanup necessitated by failure to contain leaks shall be made at
the expense of the aircraft or vehicle owner.
   M.   Ignition Source: No person shall start an engine or create any other
spark when flammables are close enough to create a fire hazard, or closer than
fifty feet (50').
(Ord. 2005-45, 7-19-2005)
8-2-4: AIRCRAFT OPERATION:
   A.   Based Aircraft; Notification: The owner of each aircraft based at the
airport shall notify the airport manager in writing within ten (10) days of its
basing of the registration number of the aircraft and the person responsible
for it, including off hours emergency phone numbers.
   B.   Certificates And License Required: No person may operate an aircraft on
the airport unless he or she is in possession of a valid pilot certificate,
medical certificate and any additional FAA licenses required for the activity
being performed. Aircraft maintenance personnel may taxi and run up aircraft if
they have:
      1.   Permission: Specific written permission from the aircraft owner; and
      2.   Certification: Certification from a pilot qualified to operate the
aircraft that they have a working knowledge of aircraft operating and emergency
procedures, FAA taxiing procedures, use of aircraft radio and this title.
   C.   Aircraft Owners; Responsibilities: No aircraft owner or operator shall
permit another to operate his or her aircraft within the limits of the airport
until such owner or operator has assured that:
      1.   Certified And Qualified: The person is certificated and qualified to
operate the aircraft in the specific activity;
      2.   Medical Certificate: The pilot has in his/her possession a current
medical certificate; and
      3.   Knowledge: The pilot has an understanding and working knowledge of
FAA airport traffic control procedure, use of the aircraft radio and this
title.
   D.   Taxiing:
      1.   Care: No person shall taxi any aircraft carelessly or without due
regard for the safety of other aircraft, vehicles and persons.
      2.   Out Of Hangars: No person shall move any aircraft into or out of any
hangar while the engine is running.
      3.   Areas Restricted: No person shall taxi or tow any aircraft on areas
other than runways, taxiways, ramps and aprons without prior express written
approval of the city.
   E.   Aircraft:
      1.   Working Condition: No person may keep or store any aircraft at the
airport unless it is in operating condition, is actively being repaired, or is
enclosed in a hangar. The city may give permission to keep an inoperable
aircraft for a reasonable time when good cause exists.
      2.   Securing: No person shall leave an aircraft unattended unless it is
within a hangar, tied down, chocked or otherwise properly secured. The aircraft
owner shall be responsible for all damages caused by failure to secure the
aircraft.
      3.   Damaged; Removal: Every aircraft owner, operator and pilot, jointly
and severally, shall be responsible for the prompt removal of wrecked aircraft,
together with the debris that may have resulted therefrom, as soon as FAA
regulations permit. Care shall be exercised to avoid damaging airport property.
      4.   Repair: No person shall repair or allow to be repaired any aircraft
or aircraft part except in areas built or designated by the city for aircraft
repair or in his or her own hangar. Any person can perform or have performed
items of preventive maintenance on his or her own aircraft in the hangar or tie
down to which it is normally assigned.
   F.   Parking:
      1.   Ramp: No person shall park an aircraft on the ramp other than on
painted parking spots designated for that use.
      2.   Fees: No person shall park or tie down an aircraft at the airport
without paying the prescribed rates and charges for use of the parking space.
   G.   Starting Engines:
      1.   Competent Person: No person shall start an aircraft engine unless
there is a competent person at the controls, and the brake is fully applied or
the wheels have been securely blocked with chocks equipped with ropes suitable
for removing them safely.
      2.   Hangars: No person shall start an aircraft engine or run it while in
a hangar.
   H.   Cleanliness: Each aircraft owner and attendant shall assure that the
area adjacent to its aircraft is kept clean.
   I.   Maximum Pavement Weights: No person shall operate an aircraft weighing
in excess of published structural limitations on any runway, taxiway, ramp or
apron on the airport except with permission from the city.
   J.   Two-Way Radio Required: No person shall operate an aircraft on the
airport unless it is equipped with an operable two-way radio for communication
with the control tower without prior approval, except in an emergency, during
the hours the control tower is manned.
   K.   Noise Abatement: No person shall knowingly violate noise abatement
procedures agreed to by the city and the FAA.
   L.   Restricted Activities; Exceptions And Conditions:
      1.   Reckless Aircraft Operation: No person shall manifest wilful
disregard for the safety of persons or property at the airport. No person may
operate an aircraft on the airport while under the influence of alcohol or
drugs, or while impaired.
      2.   Skydiving: No person shall conduct or participate in skydiving
activity at the airport unless he or she has notified the airport manager of
the proposed activity; complied with any insurance and safety requirements the
airport manager may deem necessary to protect the city and airport users; and
obtained FAA approval.
      3.   Jet Blast: No person shall taxi or operate any aircraft or
helicopter on the airport where the jet or propeller blast may cause injury to
persons or damage to property. If necessary, the aircraft/helicopter operator
shall shut down the engine and have the aircraft towed to its destination.
      4.   Run Up Procedure: No person shall run up any aircraft except in the
run up areas at the approach or departure ends of runways, or in other areas
designated by the airport manager.
      5.   Holding On Runways: No person shall board or disembark from any
aircraft on the runway except in an emergency, nor hold an aircraft there while
an instructor coaches a student. Instructors shall not solo students except
from the ends of the runways and in doing so shall clear the runway before
disembarking from the aircraft.
(Ord. 2005-45, 7-19-2005)
8-2-5: VEHICLES:
   A.   Operator's License Required: No person may operate a motor vehicle on
airport premises unless that person has a valid operator's license.
   B.   Safe Operating Condition: No person shall operate a vehicle at the
airport unless it is in safe operating condition as described by Utah Code
Annotated section 41-6a-1601, as amended.
   C.   Parking:
      1.   Locations: No person shall park a vehicle on the airport other than
in a manner and at locations indicated by posted traffic signs or markings. A
tenant may dedicate a portion of his/her hangar for nonaviation storage, so
long as the hangar is primarily used for aviation purposes.
      2.   Hangars: No person shall park a vehicle in front of any hangar or
building, except for delivery and service vehicles actually making a delivery,
and then only long enough to complete the delivery.
      3.   Designated Parking Areas: The city may designate and mark a parking
space on a tenant's leased area at the request of that tenant if doing so will
not create a hazard, impede snow removal or other airport operations and the
tenant pays the cost of having the space marked or does it himself or herself.
No designated parking space may be used to store campers, motor homes,
trailers, trucks (except passenger vehicle pickups), boats or recreational
vehicles.
   D.   Identification: Mobile service equipment must display identification
visible from fifty feet (50'), identifying the vehicle owner.
   E.   Runways And Taxiways; Permission Required: No person shall operate a
vehicle on any runway or taxiway without:
      1.   Approval: The express approval of the airport manager;
      2.   Clearance: Specific clearance by the control tower; and
      3.   Communication; Escort: Two-way radio communication with the control
tower, unless exempted by written tower agreement or escorted by a vehicle with
such communication.
   F.   Right Of Way: Drivers of vehicles must yield the right of way to
aircraft and pedestrians on the airport.
   G.   Speed Limits: No person may drive a vehicle in excess of the posted
speed limit on Airport Road, or anywhere else on the airport in excess of ten
(10) miles per hour.
   H.   Prohibited Vehicles: Vehicle access to the ramp (aircraft nonmovement
area) is limited to vehicles bearing Ogden- Hinckley airport ramp passes issued
by the city. Vehicle operators desiring to obtain the required ramp pass must
verify that they have received, and are familiar with, airport ground vehicle
operation instructions and material provided by the city. The ramp pass shall
be displayed on all vehicles at all times while operating in the ramp and
aircraft nonmovement areas of the airport. No person shall operate, drive, or
store any go-cart, horse trailer or similar vehicle, or horse on any ramp,
runway or taxiway.
   I.   Inoperable Vehicles: No person shall store or keep any inoperable
vehicle at the airport except while actively repairing it. The city may give
written permission to keep an inoperable vehicle at the airport for a
reasonable time for good cause, if no health hazard or impediment to airport
operations exists and if the vehicle is not visible or accessible to the
public.
   J.   Number Of Passengers; Conduct: No person may operate a vehicle on the
airport while carrying more people or cargo than for which the vehicle was
designed. No person may operate a vehicle unless all occupants are wholly
inside the vehicle.
   K.   Traffic Signals: No person shall fail to obey the directions posted on
traffic signs, signals or pavement markings on the airport.
(Ord. 2005-45, 7-19-2005)
8-2-6: GENERAL RULES OF CONDUCT:
   A.   Ordinances; Applicability: For the purposes of this title, the airport
shall be deemed to be a public place. All city ordinances apply at the airport
unless they are expressly inapplicable or they contradict this title.
   B.   Accidents; Reporting: Any person involved in an accident that causes
damage to property or injury to persons or both at the airport shall report the
accident immediately to the applicable emergency services and to the airport
manager; and comply with all other reporting requirements under local, state or
federal law. The persons involved shall remain at the scene of the accident
without moving any debris until it has been investigated by an appropriate
agency.
   C.   Damage; Liability: Any person causing damage of any kind to airport
property or fixtures shall promptly pay the city for all repairs necessary. If
the city prevails in a legal action to collect damage, the city may also
collect reasonable attorney fees.
   D.   Littering: No person shall throw, drop or otherwise release or permit
to be released upon the airport premises any trash, gravel or other substance
except in proper receptacles. Each person shall pick up any material that is
accidentally or purposely released in violation of the above and dispose of it
properly.
   E.   Property:
      1.   Abandonment: The city may remove and dispose of abandoned property
as provided by law.
      2.   Preservation: No person shall:
         a.   Destroy, damage or disturb in any way any building sign,
equipment, marker or other structure, tree, flower, lawn or other public
property on the airport.
         b.   Trespass on any airport property or within any building on
airport property, or enter or remain in a building without authorization from
its owner or lessee.
         c.   Interfere or tamper with or damage any part of the airport or any
equipment thereon, or operate a vehicle or walk upon any portion of the airport
not intended for such use without permission of the city.
         d.   Interfere or tamper with, enter or climb upon any aircraft, or
commit any act which would endanger an aircraft operating at the airport, or
start any aircraft engine without authorization from its owner or lessee.
   F.   Animal Control:
      1.   Use Of Firearms: The city may authorize use of firearms when
necessary for bird and animal control and in accordance with any required state
permits.
      2.   Dogs: No person shall bring a dog or other animal into the airport
terminal unless it is a seeing eye or hearing dog. No person shall bring a dog
or other animal onto other airport premises unless the animal is controlled by
a leash. No person shall allow an animal to escape on the airport. Any person
bringing a dog or other animal onto the airport shall immediately clean up any
messes it causes and shall be responsible for any damage or injury it causes.
   G.   Pedestrians:
      1.   Runways And Taxiways: Pedestrian traffic, except as provided in
subsection 8-2-4L5 of this chapter, in any form is strictly forbidden on
runways and taxiways. Maintenance crews and others performing essential
functions with the permission of the city are not considered pedestrian
traffic.
      2.   Right Of Way: Pedestrians must yield the right of way to aircraft on
the airport.
   H.   Service Equipment: All service equipment must be secured in approved
parking areas.
   I.   Lost And Found: Any person finding a lost article on the airport shall
turn it into the airport manager's office. Articles unclaimed in sixty (60)
days shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of Utah statutes on
unclaimed property.
   J.   Model Airplanes: No person may operate a model aircraft or other
unpiloted flying device on the airport except with written permission of the
city. Such written permission shall set forth the manner of operation and
location that is permitted. No person may violate the terms of that written
permission.
(Ord. 2005-45, 7-19-2005)
CHAPTER 3
COMMERCIAL ACTIVITIES
SECTION:
8-3-1: Permission Required
8-3-2: Insurance Requirements
8-3-3: Leases And Agreements
8-3-4: Lessee; Cost Responsibilities
8-3-5: Construction; Written Agreement
8-3-6: Record Keeping And Audits
8-3-7: Commercial Signs And Advertising
8-3-8: Site Development Standards
8-3-1: PERMISSION REQUIRED:
   A.   No person shall use any area or facility on the airport for any
commercial activities without first: 1) complying with applicable city
regulations; 2) obtaining a permit for the activity from the city or signing a
lease, whichever is required; 3) paying the rates and charges prescribed for
that activity in chapter 5 of this title; 4) agreeing to indemnify the city as
outlined in subsection 8-3-3D5 of this chapter; and 5) meeting the minimum
standards for the activity.
   B.   Permission will expire: 1) if the permitted commercial activity ceases
for a period of twelve (12) months; or 2) as specified by the lease, concession
agreement or permit.
(Ord. 2005-45, 7-19-2005)
8-3-2: INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Minimum Limits Of Insurance:
      1.   Each person conducting a commercial activity involving aircraft
operation, including, but not limited to, aircraft instruction, rental or
charter, shall maintain aircraft liability insurance with limits of not less
than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per combined single limit per
occurrence for bodily injury, personal injury, and property damage.
      2.   Each person conducting any commercial activity in which customers,
vehicles or aircraft have access to or are operated on the ramps, apron,
taxiways or runways shall maintain commercial general liability insurance with
limits of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single
limit per occurrence for bodily injury, personal injury and property damage;
business automobile liability insurance with limits of not less than one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single limit per accident for bodily
injury and property damage; workers' compensation limits as required by the
laws of the state; and employer's liability insurance with limits of not less
than one hundred thousand/five hundred thousand/one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00/500,000.00/100,000.00).
      3.   Each person selling or maintaining aircraft, aircraft parts or fuel
shall maintain products and completed operations liability insurance with
limits of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single
limit.
      4.   During construction, the lessee or owner, or the contractor of the
lessee or owner, shall maintain all applicable liability insurance as stated in
subsections A1, A2 and A3 of this section, commercial general liability
insurance with limits of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00)
combined single limit per occurrence for bodily injury, personal injury and
property damage; business automobile liability insurance with limits of not
less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single limit per
accident for bodily injury and property damage; workers' compensation limits as
required by the laws of the state; employers' liability insurance with limits
of not less than one hundred thousand/five hundred thousand/one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000.00/500,000.00/100,000.00); and all-risk builders'
liability insurance coverage in the amount of the project cost and any other
construction obligations that may arise.
   B.   Deductibles And Self-Insured Retentions: Any deductibles or self-
insured retentions greater than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) must be
declared to and approved by the city.
   C.   Other Provisions: The policies are to contain, or be endorsed to
contain, the following provisions:
      1.   The city, its officials, employees and volunteers are to be covered
as additional named insured on all policies to include liability arising out of
aircraft operation and commercial activities; products and completed
operations; premises owned, leased or used; and automobiles owned, leased,
hired or borrowed by a commercial operator or contractor. The coverage shall
contain no special limitations on the scope of protection afforded to the city,
its officials, employees or volunteers.
      2.   The operator's, contractor's or lessee's insurance coverage shall be
primary insurance as respects the city, its officials, employees and
volunteers. Any insurance or self- insurance maintained by the city, its
officials, employees or volunteers shall be in excess of the operator's,
contractor's or lessee's insurance and shall not contribute with it.
      3.   The operator's, contractor's or lessee's insurer shall agree to
waive all rights of subrogation against the city, its officials, employees and
volunteers for losses arising under workers' compensation and employers'
liability coverage.
      4.   Each insurance policy required shall be endorsed to state that
coverage shall not be suspended, voided, canceled, reduced in coverage or in
limits except after thirty (30) days' prior written notice has been given to
the city by certified mail, return receipt requested.
   D.   Acceptability Of Insurers: Insurance is to be placed with insurers
carrying a "Bests" rating of not less than B+XII.
   E.   Verification Of Coverage: Each operator, contractor or lessee shall
furnish the city with certificates of insurance affecting coverage required by
this title. The certificates for each insurance policy are to be signed by a
person authorized by that insurer to bind coverage on its behalf. The
certificates are to be on forms acceptable to the city and are to be received
and approved by the city before activity commences.
   F.   Subcontractors: The operator, contractor or lessee shall include all
subcontractors and sub subcontractors as insured under its policies or shall
furnish separate certificates for each subcontractor. All coverage for
subcontractors shall be subject to all of the requirements stated herein.
(Ord. 2005-45, 7-19-2005)
8-3-3: LEASES AND AGREEMENTS:
   A.   Policy: It shall be the airport's policy to negotiate lease terms that
make the airport as self-sufficient as possible; that provide flexibility to
manage the airport; that provide high quality and all necessary services; and
that provide a fair return on lessee's investment in capital improvements.
   B.   Proposal And Permits: A request to the city to lease airport land or
facilities for commercial activities, to issue a commercial aeronautical
activities permit, or to issue any other permit to conduct nonaeronautical
commercial activities should be made in writing and include a proposal which
sets forth the scope of operations proposed, including the following:
      1.   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
      2.   The services the applicant will offer.
      3.   The proposed date of commencement of the activity and term of
conducting the same.
      4.   A detailed description of the scope of the intended operation.
      5.   The means and methods to be employed to accomplish the contemplated
services.
      6.   The amount of land the applicant desires to lease.
      7.   The size and position of the building the applicant will lease or
construct, if applicable.
      8.   The number of aircraft the applicant will provide, if applicable.
      9.   The number and qualifications of persons the applicant will employ.
      10.   The proposed hours of operation.
      11.   The amount and type of insurance coverage the applicant will
maintain.
      12.   Evidence of the applicant's financial capability to perform and
provide the proposed services and facilities.
   C.   Terms:
      1.   Length Of Lease:
         a.   Land on which private hangars for aircraft storage are
constructed may be leased for a fifteen (15) year term.
         b.   Land on which a commercial special service operator building is
constructed may be leased for a twenty (20) year term.
         c.   Land on which a fixed base operator building is constructed may
be leased for a twenty five (25) year term.
         d.   The city reserves the right at its discretion to negotiate leases
in excess of the above limits when a prospective lessee agrees to make a
substantial capital investment.
      2.   Renewal: Upon lease expiration, lessee shall have the "first right
of refusal" to renew their lease; provided however, that the lease is not in
default. Each renewal term will be for five (5) years.
      3.   Final Decision: The above lease terms are not absolute and are
subject to negotiation. A final decision will be made by the mayor, upon
consultation with the FAA.
   D.   Mandatory Provisions: Every lease or agreement entered into shall be
subject to and shall contain the following provisions, or similar substitute
provisions approved by the city attorney:
      1.   The lessee agrees to comply with provisions of this title, and as it
may hereafter be amended, and with implementing administrative orders as they
may hereafter be adopted or amended. The lessee further agrees that more than
three (3) violations of this title during any three (3) month period by lessee,
its agents or employees; or any other pattern of violations that manifests
reckless disregard for the health, safety and general welfare of the public
and/or airport users shall be a material breach which may terminate the
agreement at the option of the city. The city shall not exercise this option
until it has notified the lessee and given the lessee a reasonable opportunity
to retrain employees or otherwise demonstrate that lessee, its employees and
agents can and will conform to this title. In addition to the above penalties,
this agreement may be canceled by the city if the lessee fails to pay, when
due, the whole or any part of the amounts agreed upon for rents and charges and
such default continues for thirty (30) days after the city has demanded payment
in writing.
      2.   The city may terminate any nonaeronautically related lease upon
ninety (90) day notice to the lessee.
      3.   The lessee shall maintain the leased premises in a reasonable
condition of repair, cleanliness and general maintenance.
      4.   It is understood and agreed that the lessee is an independent
contractor and not an agent or employee of the city, and the city is an
independent contractor and not an agent or employee of the lessee with regard
to its acts or omissions hereunder.
      5.   Lessee shall protect, defend and hold lessor and its officials,
employees, agents and volunteers completely harmless from and against any and
all liabilities, losses, suits, claims, judgments, fines or demands arising by
reason of injury or death of any person or damage to any property, including
all reasonable costs for investigation and defense thereof (including, but not
limited to, attorney fees, court costs and expert fees), of any nature
whatsoever arising out of or incident to this agreement and/or the use or
occupancy of the leased premises or the acts or omissions of lessee's officers,
agents, employees, contractors, subcontractors, licensees or invitees,
regardless of where the injury, death or damage may occur, unless such injury,
death or damage is caused by the sole negligence of the lessor. The lessor
shall give the lessee reasonable notice of any such claims or actions. The
lessee shall also use counsel reasonably acceptable to lessor in carrying out
its obligations hereunder. The provisions of this subsection shall survive the
expiration or early termination of this agreement. In carrying out any of the
provisions herein, or in exercising any power or authority granted to lessee,
there shall be no liability upon any official of the city, its authorized
assistants, consultants or employees, either personally or as officials of the
city, it being understood that in such matters they act as agents and
representatives of Ogden City Corporation. It is further understood and agreed
that the city assumes no responsibility for any damages or losses that may
occur to the lessee's property, except the obligation that the city will not
wilfully, intentionally or negligently damage the property of the lessee.
      6.   Upon the expiration or other termination of this lease agreement,
the lessee shall have the right to remove any building owned by the lessee from
the leasehold premises, and upon removal agrees to restore the land to as good
condition as it was before the erection of any building. Removal must be
accomplished within ninety (90) days, or as otherwise mutually agreed, after
termination of any agreement and must be done without injury to the demised
premises. If the city is required to terminate a lease through legal action and
the lessee is not in default, the city shall pay the lessee the fair market
value for the leasehold improvements.
      7.   No person may sublease or assign any facility or lease or contract
at the airport except with approval of the city. The city shall be entitled to
receive any revenue that the lessee/assignor of a city owned building receives
from a sublessee/assignee that exceeds the amount the lessee/assignee is
required to pay the city pursuant to the lessee's/assignee's agreement.
      8.   The airport manager or a designated representative may enter any
facility or property on the airport at reasonable times and for reasonable
purposes without prior notice.
      9.   There is hereby reserved to the city, its successors and assigns,
for the use and benefit of the public a right of flight for the passage of
aircraft in the airspace above the surface of the premises hereby leased,
together with the right to cause in said airspace such noise as may be inherent
in the operation of aircraft, not known or hereafter used for navigation of or
flight in the air, using said airspace or landing at, taking off from or
operating on the airport.
      10.   The lessee by accepting a lease expressly agrees for itself, its
successors and assigns that it will not erect nor permit the erection of any
structure or object nor permit the growth of any tree on the land leased
hereunder exceeding the obstacle identification surfaces as specified by FAR
part 77. In the event the aforesaid covenant is breached, the lessor reserves
the right to enter upon the land leased hereunder and to remove the offending
structure or object and cut the offending tree, all of which shall be at the
expense of the lessees.
      11.   In addition to those provisions required by subsections D1 through
D10 of this section, every agreement concerning a commercial activity for which
payments are based on revenue generated shall contain the following provision:
The concessionaire/permit holder agrees to maintain records in compliance with
section
8-3-6 of this chapter and to fully cooperate with any audit hereunder.
Concessionaire/permit holder further agrees to pay costs of the audit when
required thereunder.
   E.   Aeronautical Activities: In addition to the provisions in subsection D
of this section, every lease or agreement concerning aeronautical activity
shall be subject to and shall contain the following provisions, or similar
substitute provisions approved by the city attorney:
      1.   The lessee agrees to operate the premises leased for the use and
benefit of the public and to furnish such service on a fair, equal and not
unjustly discriminatory basis to all users thereof, and to charge fair,
reasonable and not unjustly discriminatory prices for each unit or service;
provided, however, that the lessee may be allowed to make reasonable and
nondiscriminatory discounts, rebates or other similar types of price reductions
to volume purchasers.
      2.   The lessee, for himself, his heirs, personal representatives,
successors in interest and assigns, as part of the consideration hereof, does
hereby covenant and agree, as a covenant running with the land, that in the
event facilities are constructed, maintained or otherwise operated on the said
property described in this lease for a purpose for which a department of
transportation program or activity is extended or for any other purpose
involving the provision of a similar service or benefit, the lessee shall
maintain and operate such facilities and services in compliance with all other
requirements imposed pursuant to title 49, code of federal regulations,
department of transportation, subtitle A, office of the secretary, part 21,
nondiscrimination in federally assisted programs of the department of
transportation-effectuation of title VI of the civil rights act of 1964 and any
provisions of said regulations as may in the future be amended.
      3.   The lessee, for himself, his personal representatives, successors in
interest and assigns, as part of the consideration hereof, does hereby covenant
and agree, as a covenant running with the land, that no person on the grounds
of sex, race, color, creed, national origin or disability shall be excluded
from participation in, denied the benefits of, or otherwise be subjected to
discrimination in the use of said facilities, that in the construction of any
improvements on, over or under such land and the furnishings of services
thereof, no person on the grounds of sex, race, color, creed, national origin
or disability shall be excluded from participation in, denied the benefits of,
or otherwise be subject to discrimination; that the lessee shall use the
premises in compliance with all other requirements imposed by, or pursuant to
title 49, code of federal regulations, department of transportation, subtitle
A, office of the secretary, part 21, nondiscrimination in federally assisted
programs of the department of transportation - effectuation of title VI of the
civil rights act of 1964, and such provisions of said regulations as may in the
future be amended.
      4.   That in the event of a breach of any of the nondiscrimination
covenants pursuant to part 21 of the regulations of the office of the secretary
of transportation, the lessor shall have the right to terminate this lease and
to reenter and repossess said land and the facilities thereon and hold the same
as if said lease had never been made or issued.
      5.   It is clearly understood and agreed by the lessee that no right or
privilege has been granted which would operate to prevent any person, firm or
corporation operating aircraft on the airport from performing services on its
own aircraft with its own regular employees (including, but not limited to,
maintenance and repair) that it may choose to perform.
      6.   It is understood and agreed that nothing herein contained shall be
construed to grant or authorize the granting of an exclusive right.
      7.   Lessor reserves the right to further develop or improve the airport
as it sees fit, regardless of the desires or views of the lessee and without
interference or hindrance from lessee.
      8.   Lessor reserves the right, but without obligation to lessee, to
maintain and keep in repair the landing areas of the airport and all publicly
owned facilities of the airport, together with the right to direct and control
all activities of lessee in this regard.
      9.   During the time of war or national emergency, lessor shall have the
right to lease the landing area or any part thereof to the United States
government for military or naval use and if such lease is executed, the
provisions of this instrument, insofar as they are inconsistent with the
provisions of the lease to the government, shall be suspended.
      10.   Lessor reserves the right to take any action it considers necessary
to protect the aerial approaches of the airport against obstruction, together
with the right to prevent lessee from erecting, or permitting to be erected,
any building or other structure on or adjacent to the airport which, in the
opinion of the lessor, would limit the usefulness of the airport or constitute
a hazard to aircraft.
      11.   This lease shall be subordinate to the provisions of any existing
or future agreement between lessor and the United States, relative to the
operation or maintenance of the airport, the execution of which has been or may
be required as a condition precedent to the expenditures of federal funds for
the development of the airport.
      12.   The lessor reserves the right to temporarily close the airport or
any of the facilities thereon for maintenance, improvement or for the safety of
the public.
   F.   Commercial Aeronautical Activities Permit: A commercial aeronautical
activities permit is required of all persons conducting commercial aeronautical
activities upon the airport who do not have an airport lease with the city
permitting the activity, such as when the person subleases airport property
from another airport lessee. A commercial aeronautical activities permit is
required of all persons conducting commercial aeronautical activities upon the
airpark. A commercial aeronautical activities permit shall be subject to and
shall contain terms similar to an airport lease, as follows:
      1.   A commercial aeronautical activities permit shall endure for a term
not to exceed the length of a lease term for conducting similar activities as
set forth in subsection C of this section, and shall not exceed the term of any
existing lease of airport or airpark property upon which the commercial
aeronautical activities are proposed to be conducted.
      2.   A commercial aeronautical activities permit shall be subject to and
shall contain substantially the same mandatory provisions included within an
airport lease, as set forth in subsections D and E of this section, modified as
reasonably required and approved by the city attorney to make such provisions
applicable to a permit rather than a lease.
   G.   Noncommercial Activities: A request to the city to lease airport
facilities or land for noncommercial activities should be made in writing and
include a proposal which sets forth the scope of the activity, which shall
minimally include:
      1.   The name, address and phone number of the applicant.
      2.   The amount of land the applicant desires to lease.
      3.   The building space the applicant will lease or construct.
   H.   Processing: The city will approve or deny any application under
subsections B and G of this section within thirty (30) days of its submission
to the airport manager, except that the thirty (30) days may be extended if the
applicant has been requested to provide additional information.
(Ord. 2005-45, 7-19-2005)
8-3-4: LESSEE; COST RESPONSIBILITIES:
   A.   Taxes: The lessee shall at its own expense pay all taxes and
assessments against the leasehold premises or improvements.
   B.   Utilities: All utilities are to be paid by the lessee, unless otherwise
provided.
   C.   Building Maintenance: All building maintenance on city owned facilities
will be the responsibility of the lessee.
   D.   Pavement Maintenance: Routine maintenance of the entire lease area
shall be the responsibility of the lessee.
(Ord. 2005-45, 7-19-2005)
8-3-5: CONSTRUCTION; WRITTEN AGREEMENT:
Prior to any occupancy or commencement of any construction on the airport, the
prospective lessee shall enter into a written agreement with the city.
(Ord. 2005-45, 7-19-2005)
8-3-6: RECORD KEEPING AND AUDITS:
Each person conducting a commercial activity who pays the city a percentage of
the revenue generated shall maintain and keep available for inspection at
reasonable times and places, accurate records of the services performed and
items sold, and the charges therefor. Each such person shall provide the
airport manager a statement of the charges made for services or sales performed
at least every six (6) months. The city shall have the right to inspect all
such records and to audit them for completeness and accuracy. If an audit
produces evidence that the city is entitled to revenue previously undisclosed,
the person conducting the commercial activity shall reimburse the city for the
cost of conducting the audit, as well as paying any past due amounts.
(Ord. 2005-45, 7-19-2005)
8-3-7: COMMERCIAL SIGNS AND ADVERTISING:
   A.   Regulations: No person shall erect, post or maintain commercial signs
or advertising on city owned property unless:
      1.   Designated Area: The sign or advertising is placed in a location
designated by the city;
      2.   Space Is Leased: The sign/advertising space is leased, at a
negotiated rate.
   B.   Compliance; Existing Signs: Nothing in this section shall prevent a
tenant conducting an approved commercial activity from erecting or maintaining
signs on his/her own leased space, so long as the sign complies with the city
sign ordinances, FAR part 77 and section
8-3-8 of this chapter. Existing signs on the date of the enactment of this
title, that are on city property but otherwise meet the above requirements, may
be incorporated into the owner's lease.
(Ord. 2005-45, 7-19-2005)
8-3-8: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
No person may construct, remodel, erect or rehabilitate any facility or sign on
the airport except in compliance with applicable codes; FAR part 77; and the
airport layout plan (or in an area approved by the FAA and the city). Site
development plans must be approved by the city which approval shall not
unreasonably be withheld. Construction may only be performed by a bonded
contractor.
(Ord. 2005-45, 7-19-2005)
CHAPTER 4
AERONAUTICAL ACTIVITIES; MINIMUM STANDARDS
SECTION:
8-4-1: Scope
8-4-2: Fixed Base Operator
8-4-3: Aircraft Accessory Services Operator
8-4-4: Commercial Flying Services
8-4-5: Flight Training
8-4-6: Aircraft Sales
8-4-7: Aircraft Airframe And Engine Repair
8-4-8: Aircraft Rental
8-4-9: Aircraft Charter
8-4-10: Aircraft Manufacturing
8-4-11: Flying Clubs
8-4-12: Other Services
8-4-13: Part Time Operators
8-4-1: SCOPE:
Any person conducting a commercial aeronautical activity shall comply with the
minimum standards herein for that activity. If a person conducts multiple
commercial aeronautical activities, requirements need not be cumulative where a
combination use can reasonably and feasibly be established, such determination
to be made by the city.
(Ord. 2005-45, 7-19-2005)
8-4-2: FIXED BASE OPERATOR:
Any person desiring to sell or dispense fuel on the airport shall:
   A.   Licenses And Certification: Obtain and keep current any licenses or
certification required by the FAA.
   B.   Lease Or Own Adequate Land: Lease or own adequate land on the airport
or airpark to provide buildings, aircraft parking, space for required equipment
(including, but not limited to, fuel trucks), customer parking and space to
perform any other requirements herein, for an aggregate size of not less than
twenty five thousand (25,000) square feet.
   C.   Adequate Buildings: Construct or lease a building on the airport or
airpark which will provide adequate square footage of properly lighted and
heated floor space for office; public lounge; sanitary public restrooms; and a
working public telephone; and space for indoor repair of at least two (2)
general aviation aircraft; for an aggregate size of not less than ten thousand
(10,000) square feet.
   D.   Trained Personnel: Provide at least one properly trained person on duty
at all times that the FAA control tower is in operation.
   E.   Adequate Inventory: Maintain an adequate inventory of at least two (2)
generally accepted grades of aviation fuel, engine oil and lubricants.
   F.   Mobile Equipment: Provide mobile fuel dispensing equipment, with FAA
approved marking devices, capable of servicing all types of general aviation
aircraft. This mobile equipment shall have at least three hundred (300) gallon
capacity and separate dispensing pumps for each grade of fuel.
   G.   Adequate Tank Storage: Provide fuel tank storage capacity adequate to
accommodate all customer fueling needs.
   H.   Dispensers: Provide metered, filter equipped dispensers for dispensing
gasoline from storage tanks.
   I.   Electrical Grounding Facilities: Install and maintain adequate
electrical grounding facilities at all fueling locations.
   J.   Meet Applicable Codes: Meet all applicable fire codes, federal, state
and local laws, statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations, pertaining to fire
safety.
   K.   Quality Fuel: Deliver clean, bright and pure fuel, free of microscopic
organisms, water and other contaminants. Quality control of fuel is the
responsibility of the FBO.
   L.   Adequate Equipment:
      1.   Provide adequate passenger loading equipment, towing equipment, fire
extinguisher, emergency starting equipment, oxygen, compressed air and wheel
chocks.
      2.   Provide adequate hard surface hangar storage facilities and adequate
aircraft parking and tie down spaces; and demonstrate the ability to move
aircraft to such areas and park in compliance with airport and airpark
regulations.
   M.   Aircraft Repair And Service: Provide trained personnel and adequate
equipment for repairing and inflating aircraft tires, servicing oleo struts,
changing engine oil, washing aircraft windows, cleaning aircraft interiors and
recharging or energizing discharged aircraft batteries.
   N.   Fuel Spills; Plan: Provide a copy of a plan to contain fuel spills.
   O.   Fire Marshal Certification: Provide proof of certification of fueling
operations by city fire marshal.
   P.   Disposal Of Materials: Provide for adequate and sanitary off airport
and off airpark disposal of all trash, oil, solvents and other waste material,
not less than once a week.
   Q.   Maintenance: Maintain all areas in a clean and well kept manner.
(Ord. 2005-45, 7-19-2005)
8-4-3: AIRCRAFT ACCESSORY SERVICES OPERATOR:
Any person desiring to conduct activities of an aircraft accessory services
operator shall:
   A.   Lease Or Own Sufficient Land: Lease or own land and provide facilities
(buildings, parking, etc.) on the airport or airpark sufficient to support the
specialized aircraft service.
   B.   Certified Repairman: Have at least one FAA certified repairman
qualified to perform each type of repair provided by the operator.
(Ord. 2005-45, 7-19-2005)
8-4-4: COMMERCIAL FLYING SERVICES:
Any person desiring to conduct activities of a commercial flying service
operator shall:
   A.   Lease Or Own Sufficient Land: Lease or own land and provide facilities
(buildings, parking, aircraft tie downs, etc.) on the airport or airpark
sufficient to support the commercial flying service.
   B.   Chemical Drainage: In case of crop dusting, aerial application or other
commercial use of chemicals, the operator shall provide a centrally drained,
paved area of not less than four thousand (4,000) square feet for aircraft
loading, unloading, washing and servicing. This area must be built and operated
in full compliance with the environmental protection agency, state and local
regulations governing such activities. The operator shall also provide for the
safe storage and containment of all chemical materials, and comply with section
8-2-2 of this title. The operator shall provide tanks for the handling of
liquid spray and mixing equipment for the same containment, storage, handling
and safe loading of all noxious chemicals and materials.
   C.   Aircraft: Provide and have based on its leasehold, either owned or
under written lease to the operator, at least one airworthy aircraft, suitably
equipped for and meeting all the requirements of the FAA for the type of
activity performed.
(Ord. 2005-45, 7-19-2005)
8-4-5: FLIGHT TRAINING:
Any person desiring to conduct flight training shall:
   A.   Lease Or Own Sufficient Land: Lease or own land on the airport or
airpark sufficient for buildings, parking, and aircraft storage or tie down to
support flight training.
   B.   Provide Sufficient Facilities: Provide sufficient facilities on the
airport or airpark for storing, parking, servicing and repairing the aircraft
used in flight training.
   C.   Certified Flight Instructor: Have available at least one FAA certified
flight instructor.
   D.   Aircraft: Maintain at least one dual equipped aircraft for flight
instruction.
   E.   Office And Classroom Space: Maintain sufficient office and classroom
space on the airport or airpark for students with proper restroom and seating
facilities.
   F.   Certified Ground Instructor: Have available at least one FAA certified
ground instructor providing ground school instructions sufficient to enable
students to pass the FAA written examinations.
   G.   Certification Requirements: Meet certification requirements for the FAA
for the flight training proposed.
(Ord. 2005-45, 7-19-2005)
8-4-6: AIRCRAFT SALES:
Any person desiring to conduct aircraft sales shall:
   A.   Lease Or Own Sufficient Land: Lease or own land and provide facilities
(buildings, parking, aircraft storage, etc.) on the airport or airpark
sufficient to support aircraft sales.
   B.   Repair And Servicing: Provide satisfactory arrangements for the repair
and servicing of aircraft, for the duration of any sales guarantee or warranty
period.
   C.   Certified Pilot: Have available an FAA certified pilot capable of
demonstrating aircraft for sale.
(Ord. 2005-45, 7-19-2005)
8-4-7: AIRCRAFT AIRFRAME AND ENGINE REPAIR:
Any person desiring to conduct aircraft airframe and engine repair shall:
   A.   Lease Or Own Sufficient Land: Lease or own land on the airport or
airpark sufficient for buildings, parking and aircraft storage or tie down to
support aircraft, airframe and engine repair.
   B.   Sufficient Hangar Space: Have sufficient hangar space on the airport or
airpark to house any aircraft upon which airframe or engine repairs are being
performed.
   C.   Sufficient Shop Space: Have sufficient shop space on the airport or
airpark to house the equipment, and adequate equipment and machine tools,
jacks, lifts and testing equipment to perform maintenance and repair of parts
as required for FAA certification.
   D.   Suitable Storage: Have suitable storage on the airport or airpark for
aircraft before and after repair and maintenance have been accomplished.
   E.   Certified Inspector: Have at least one person certified by FAA with
ratings appropriate to the work being performed who holds an airframe, power
plant or aircraft inspector rating.
   F.   Disposal Facilities: Maintain facilities for the safe storage and
disposal of waste fuel, solvents and old parts and equipment.
   G.   Trained Personnel: Maintain the capability and trained personnel to
remove disabled or abandoned general aviation aircraft.
(Ord. 2005-45, 7-19-2005)
8-4-8: AIRCRAFT RENTAL:
Any person desiring to conduct aircraft rental shall:
   A.   Lease Or Own Sufficient Land: Lease or own land and provide facilities
(buildings, parking, aircraft storage, etc.) on the airport or airpark
sufficient to support aircraft rental.
   B.   Certified Aircraft: Have available for rental, either owned or under
written lease to the operator, at least one certified aircraft.
   C.   Adequate Facilities: Provide adequate facilities on the airport or
airpark for servicing the aircraft.
   D.   Certified Pilot: Have available an FAA certified pilot capable of
demonstrating aircraft for rental or for checking out other pilots in rental
aircraft.
   E.   Checklists And Manuals: Keep proper checklists and operating manuals on
all aircraft rented.
(Ord. 2005-45, 7-19-2005)
8-4-9: AIRCRAFT CHARTER:
Any person desiring to conduct aircraft charters shall:
   A.   Lease Or Own Sufficient Land: Lease or own land on the airport or
airpark sufficient for building, parking and aircraft storage or tie down.
   B.   Adequate Buildings: Construct or lease a building on the airport or
airpark with sufficient area to provide a conveniently located, lighted and
heated passenger waiting lounge and restrooms for charter passengers and
greeters.
   C.   Aircraft: Provide aircraft either owned or under written lease to the
operator, which meet the requirements of the FAA air taxi commercial
certificate.
   D.   Passenger Services: Demonstrate satisfactory arrangements for passenger
ticketing and check in, baggage handling and ground transportation.
(Ord. 2005-45, 7-19-2005)
8-4-10: AIRCRAFT MANUFACTURING:
Any person desiring to conduct aircraft manufacturing shall:
   A.   Lease Or Own Sufficient Land: Lease or own land on the airport or
airpark sufficient to accommodate the proposed manufacturing operations.
   B.   Adequate Buildings: Construct or lease one or more buildings on the
airport or airpark with sufficient area to accommodate the proposed
manufacturing operations.
(Ord. 2005-45, 7-19-2005)
8-4-11: FLYING CLUBS:
   A.   Organization: Flying clubs shall be organized as nonprofit corporations
or unincorporated associations under state law for the purpose of fostering
recreational flying; for the development of aeronautical skills including
piloting or navigation; and for the development of general public awareness of
and appreciation for aviation and aeronautics requirements and techniques.
   B.   Aircraft Registration: The FAA aircraft registration must show the
names of all owners if the club is unincorporated, or the name of the
incorporated flying club.
   C.   Copies Of Documents: Flying clubs shall furnish the city with copies of
their bylaws, articles of incorporation, operating rules and membership
agreements; the location of the club's registered agent; and the name, address
and phone number of the person responsible for club members' compliance with
airport rules and regulations.
   D.   Commercial Activities; Prohibited: Flying clubs shall not engage in any
commercial activity at or from the airport or airpark. Aircraft owned, leased
or used by flying clubs shall not be leased or loaned to others for any
commercial activity. The club's aircraft shall not be used: 1) by other than
bona fide club members for rental; or 2) by anyone for charter or taxi lease.
Flying clubs shall not derive greater revenue from the use of its aircraft than
the amount necessary for its actual operation, maintenance, and replacement.
(Ord. 2005-45, 7-19-2005)
8-4-12: OTHER SERVICES:
Any person providing any activities and services not listed in this chapter
shall meet requirements promulgated by the mayor or chief administrative
officer for engaging in such activities and services.
(Ord. 2005-45, 7-19-2005)
8-4-13: PART TIME OPERATORS:
A flight instructor, aircraft mechanic or aircraft broker who works less than
eighty (80) hours per month on the airport or airpark may operate on the
airport or airpark without becoming a special services operator or meeting the
requirements therefor if he or she:
   A.   Permit: Obtains a permit as required by section
8-3-1 of this title.
   B.   Compliance: Complies with all other applicable airport and airpark
rules and regulations.
   C.   Certificates, Licenses And Insurance: Obtains and keeps current any
city and FAA required certificates, licenses and insurance.
   D.   Designated Area: Performs the activity in a properly designated area.
(Ord. 2005-45, 7-19-2005)
CHAPTER 5
RATES AND CHARGES
SECTION:
8-5-1: Landing Fees
8-5-2: Land Rental
8-5-3: Tie Down Fees
8-5-4: Fuel Flowage Fees
8-5-5: General Airport Fees
8-5-6: Concessionaires
8-5-7: Other Commercial Activities
8-5-8: Escalation
8-5-9: Billing Procedures And Late Charges
8-5-10: Authorization To Waive Fees
8-5-1: LANDING FEES:
   A.   Aircraft: The owner or operator of any aircraft landing at the airport
that weighs in excess of twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) pounds shall pay
to the City a landing fee at the rate of seventy five cents ($0.75) per one
thousand (1,000) pounds of the aircraft's maximum gross landing weight rounded
to the nearest one thousand (1,000) pounds.
   B.   Fixed Base Operator: Each fixed base operator shall, on a monthly
basis, pay or collect and remit the landing fees imposed above for aircraft for
which the fixed base operator provides billable services (fueling, tie down,
etc.). If no billable services are provided, the fixed base operator shall not
be responsible for the collection of the landing fee. Each fixed base operator
required to pay or collect and remit landing fees shall comply with the
recording, reporting and payment requirements imposed under subsection C of
this section.
   C.   Recording; Reporting; Payment: Each fixed base operator shall:
      1.   Maintain a record indicating the date, N number, category of
aircraft and the amount billed or collected, which record shall be maintained
for three (3) years.
      2.   On or before the fifth day of the month next succeeding each
calendar month, submit a report to the City, concurrently with monthly fuel
flowage reports, regarding total landing fees billed or collected for the
previous month.
      3.   Remit the amount of the landing fees billed or collected, on or
before the fifth day of the month next succeeding the month of the report,
minus the collection fee provided in subsection D of this section.
      4.   Give the owner or operator of the aircraft a receipt for the fee
collected or bill the fee as a separate item.
   D.   Retention: A fixed base operator who is required to pay or collect and
remit landing fees under this section may retain twenty eight percent (28%) of
the landing fees collected for the cost to it of collecting and remitting such
fees.
   E.   Separate Account Not Required: A fixed base operator is not required to
maintain a separate account for the fees collected, but is deemed to be a
person charged with receipt, safekeeping, and transfer of public monies. Fees
collected by a fixed base operator pursuant to this section shall be held in
trust for the benefit of the City and for payment to the City in the manner and
at the times provided herein.
   F.   Exception To Fee: No landing fee will be assessed against airport or
airpark based aircraft.
(Ord. 2018-14, 6-26-2018)
8-5-2: LAND RENTAL:
   A.   Aeronautical Activities: Any person leasing improved land at the
airport for commercial or noncommercial aeronautical activities shall annually
pay the City twenty eight cents ($0.28) per square foot of land. Any person
leasing unimproved land at the airport for commercial or noncommercial
aeronautical activities shall annually pay the City fifteen cents ($0.15) per
square foot.
   B.   Nonaeronautical Activities: Any person leasing improved land at the
airport for commercial or noncommercial nonaeronautical activities shall
annually pay the City four (4) times the rate for improved land used for
aeronautical activities. Any person leasing unimproved land at the airport for
commercial or noncommercial nonaeronautical activities shall annually pay the
City four (4) times the rate for unimproved land used for aeronautical
activities. A tenant shall owe the nonaeronautical activities rate for all time
periods that tenant uses leased ground for nonaeronautical activities,
regardless of whether the nonaeronautical use is permitted or allowed by
tenant's lease.
   C.   Definitions: For purposes of this section, "improved land" means land
that is occupied by hangars or other structures; "unimproved land" means land
not occupied by structures, including all support areas such as ramps,
uncovered storage, or customer parking areas.
(Ord. 2018-14, 6-26-2018)
8-5-3: TIE DOWN FEES:
   A.   First Twenty Four Hours: Any nonbased aircraft may use a transient City
tie down without charge for the first twenty four (24) hours, if available.
   B.   Enumerated: Any person not described in subsection A of this section
using a City tie down shall pay the City the fee prescribed for its use, based
on the aircraft's maximum certificated takeoff weight, as follows:
 
Size                  Daily       Monthly      Yearly
                      (Overnight) (In Advance)
12,500 pounds or less $15.00      $35.00       $350.00
Over 12,500 pounds    25.00       50.00        500.00
 
(Ord. 2018-14, 6-26-2018)
8-5-4: FUEL FLOWAGE FEES:
   A.   Royalty: Any person selling or dispensing fuel on the airport or
airpark shall pay the City a royalty of five and one-half cents ($0.055) per
gallon for fueling of air carrier aircraft certified pursuant to 49 CFR part
121 and seven cents ($0.07) per gallon for fueling of all other aircraft. Any
person selling or dispensing fuel to aircraft certified pursuant to 49 CFR part
121 shall maintain a record indicating the date, aircraft registration number
(N number), category of aircraft and the gallons sold, which record shall be
maintained for three (3) years. All fuel delivered to the airport or airpark
and fuel delivered to fixed base operator fuel facilities required in this
title shall be deemed to be sold or dispensed on the airport or airpark at the
time of delivery. However, the fueler may provide signed and dated receipts or
other documentation acceptable to the City proving that the fuel was sold or
dispensed off airport and airpark. The fueler shall then be entitled to credit
for the fuel flowage fee paid on fuel sold or dispensed off airport and
airpark.
   B.   Required Documents: Any person selling or dispensing fuel on the
airport or airpark shall, on or before the fifth day of each month, submit to
the City: 1) a detailed statement including delivery receipts from the fueling
transport company showing all fuel delivered to, or for use upon, the airport
or airpark during the preceding calendar month; and 2) the required Utah State
Division of Aeronautics report. The City shall then bill such person.
   C.   Right To Audit: The City shall have the right to audit fuel flowage
records at any time. If a discrepancy is identified, the person selling or
dispensing the fuel shall pay the City the cost of conducting the audit, in
addition to any amount owed to the City.
(Ord. 2018-14, 6-26-2018)
8-5-5: GENERAL AIRPORT FEES:
   A.   Security Badge Fees:
 
Type                                                          Fee
TSA badge application fee                                     $ 10.00
Biennial air operations area (AOA) access                     36.00 for 2 years
                                                              10.00 renewal fee
Biennial secure identification display area (SIDA) access     50.00 for 2 years
                                                              10.00 renewal fee
Badge replacement (original expiration date remains the same) 100.00
 
   B.   Overnight Parking Fees: Overnight parking fees at the airport are four
dollars ($4.00) per day.
(Ord. 2018-14, 6-26-2018)
8-5-6: CONCESSIONAIRES:
Any person operating a concession at the airport shall pay the City a
percentage of gross revenue and/or a flat fee as provided by contract.
(Ord. 2018-14, 6-26-2018)
8-5-7: OTHER COMMERCIAL ACTIVITIES:
Any person conducting a commercial activity not specifically listed in this
chapter or covered by a written contract with the City, at or from the airport,
shall pay the City a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or five percent (5%)
of gross revenue from the activity per year, whichever is the greater amount.
(Ord. 2018-14, 6-26-2018)
8-5-8: ESCALATION:
   A.   Review; Change: All fees and charges fixed in this chapter are subject
to periodic review and change by the City Council.
   B.   Automatic Adjustments: Unless the City Council takes an alternate
action, land rental rates, as determined by section
8-5-2 of this chapter, shall automatically be adjusted on January 1 of each
year in accordance with corresponding changes in the Consumer Price Index
published by the U.S. government for the preceding fiscal year ending September
30. Any automatic rental rate change shall apply to all rents due and payable
during the calendar year when the change became effective. The "Consumer Price
Index" shall mean those cost of living statistics published by the Bureau of
Labor Statistics of the United States government for the area in which the City
is included. In the event the Bureau of Labor Statistics ceases to publish a
Consumer Price Index, those statistics provided by any successor governmental
agency which are furnished for the same purpose shall be employed to determine
the adjustment.
(Ord. 2018-14, 6-26-2018)
8-5-9: BILLING PROCEDURES AND LATE CHARGES:
Unless more restrictive provisions are imposed by written agreement, all
amounts payable shall be paid within thirty (30) days of the due date, and late
charges in the amount of five percent (5%) per month, or a minimum of twenty
five dollars ($25.00), shall accrue if the amount is not paid within thirty
(30) days of the due date. If legal action is required to collect any amount,
the City shall also be entitled to attorney fees and collection costs incurred.
(Ord. 2018-14, 6-26-2018)
8-5-10: AUTHORIZATION TO WAIVE FEES:
The Airport Manager is authorized to waive landing and/or aircraft parking fees
in the event of any emergency or in conjunction with any civic event or
activity.
(Ord. 2018-14, 6-26-2018)
CHAPTER 6
PENALTY CLAUSES
SECTION:
8-6-1: Prohibitive Nature Of Title
8-6-2: Penalty
8-6-3: Violators
8-6-4: Impounding
8-6-5: Lien
8-6-6: Reimbursement
8-6-1: PROHIBITIVE NATURE OF TITLE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to do any act prohibited by this title, to
fail or refuse to do any act required by this title, to operate a vehicle or
aircraft in violation of any provisions of this title or to operate any vehicle
or aircraft unless that vehicle or aircraft is equipped and maintained as
required in this title.
(Ord. 2005-45, 7-19-2005)
8-6-2: PENALTY:
Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this title shall
be deemed guilty of a class B misdemeanor and subject to penalty as provided in
title 1, chapter 4 of this code.
(Ord. 2005-45, 7-19-2005)
8-6-3: VIOLATORS:
In addition to any criminal penalties imposed, the following actions may be
taken:
   A.   Removal From Airport: Any person who violates any provision of this
title, creating a serious risk of injury to himself, others or property may be
immediately removed or ejected from the airport, and/or denied landing or
takeoff permission.
   B.   Two Violations Within Twelve Months: Any person who has violated the
provisions of this title twice within any twelve (12) month period may be
immediately removed or ejected from the airport, and/or denied the right to
take off from or land at the airport, regardless of whether any of the
violations created risk or injury.
   C.   Deprived Of Airport Use: Any person described in subsections A and B of
this section may also be deprived of further use of the airport and its
facilities for such length of time as is necessary to safeguard the airport,
its facilities, its interests and the public, after a hearing before the chief
administrative officer or his or her designated representative and an
opportunity to explain any mitigating circumstances.
(Ord. 2005-45, 7-19-2005)
8-6-4: IMPOUNDING:
   A.   Aircraft: Any aircraft parked or being operated in violation of this
title may be impounded by the city or relocated to a proper area at the
airport. Such aircraft shall be released upon payment by the aircraft owner,
operator, or pilot of a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for the cost of the
impound, together with the parking fee then due and all storage and towing
charges reasonably resulting from the impound. The airport manager or the city
shall not be liable for any damage or property loss resulting from the impound.
The city shall attempt to identify the aircraft owner or operator and notify
him or her of the impound/relocation within seventy two (72) hours.
   B.   Vehicles: Any vehicle parked or being operated in violation of this
title may be impounded by the city or relocated to a proper area at the
airport. The vehicle owner or operator may recover the vehicle upon payment of
a fifty dollar ($50.00) impound fee and any towing and storage charge. The
airport manager or the city shall not be liable for any damage or property loss
resulting from the impound or relocation. The airport manager shall attempt to
identify the vehicle owner or operator and advise him or her of the impoundment
or relocation within seventy two (72) hours.
(Ord. 2005-45, 7-19-2005)
8-6-5: LIEN:
The city may claim a lien against and hold any aircraft involved in an
accident, impound or relocation until all fees and charges for materials, labor
or damage to airport property have been paid.
(Ord. 2005-45, 7-19-2005)
8-6-6: REIMBURSEMENT:
If the city is required to expend funds for whatever reason arising out of the
actions of any person, that person shall make immediate reimbursement with
interest and costs of collection, including attorney fees, to the city.
(Ord. 2005-45, 7-19-2005)
CHAPTER 7
AIRPARK RULES AND REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8-7-1: Definitions
8-7-2: General Use Of The Airpark
8-7-3: Aircraft Operation Regulations
8-7-4: Vehicles, Pedestrians, Etc.
8-7-5: Fueling, Flammable Fluids, And Safety
8-7-6: Fees
8-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases, in addition to definitions contained in
section
8-1-1 of this title, whenever used in these airpark rules and regulations,
shall be construed as defined in this chapter unless from the context a
different meaning is intended, or unless a different meaning is specifically
defined and more particularly ascribed to the use of such words or phrases. All
definitions contained in 49 USC section 40101 et seq. (previously known as the
federal aviation act of 1958, hereinafter cited as "FAA act") and all
amendments thereto shall be considered as included herein; and all definitions
shall be interpreted on the basis and intention of the FAA act and amendments
thereto unless from the context a different meaning is intended, or unless a
different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly ascribed to the
use of such word or phrase.
ABANDON: As applied to property left in an airpark taxilane safety area,
abandon means that it has been left without consent of the city for forty eight
(48) hours without the owner moving or claiming it. Such property will be
impounded with the local police department.
ACCIDENT: A collision or other contact between any part of an aircraft or a
vehicle, person, stationary object or other thing which results in property
damage, personal injury, or death; or any entry into or emerging from a moving
aircraft or vehicle by a person which results in personal injury or death to
such person or some other person or which results in property damage.
AIRCRAFT FUEL: All flammable liquids composed of a mixture of selected
hydrocarbons expressly manufactured and blended for the purpose of effectively
and efficiently operating: a) an internal combustion engine; or b) a jet or
turbine engine.
AIRCRAFT GATE ACCESS DEVICE: A device issued by the city which operates an
airport access gate to allow access between the airpark and the airport; the
cost and expense of the initial procurement and subsequent maintenance of such
devices shall be borne by the airpark manager.
AIRPARK AVIATION OPERATOR: A person owning or leasing at least one aircraft
based in the airpark who accesses the airport from the airpark.
AIRPARK MANAGER: The individual designated by the airpark owner/developer as
airpark manager.
AIRPORT/AIRPARK ACCESS: The movement of an aircraft to the airpark from the
airport and vice versa.
AUTHORIZED FBO: A person qualified as a fixed base operator pursuant to chapter
4 of this title that has also been granted authority or permission by the
airpark manager or airpark owner/developer to access private property within
the airpark for the purposes of conducting FBO services.
BASED IN THE AIRPARK: An aircraft: a) which the owner physically locates at the
airpark with no present intention of definite and early removal and with the
purpose to remain for an undetermined period; b) which, whenever absent from
the airpark, its owner intends to return to the airpark for permanent
hangaring; and c) whose presence in the airpark is something other than merely
transitory in nature.
BASED LOCATION: The location on the airport or in the airpark which is listed
as the specific aircraft hangar, shade or tie down location as registered with
the city for a particular aircraft.
CITY: Ogden City, a Utah municipal corporation, owner and operator of the
Ogden-Hinckley airport.
FUEL HANDLING: The transportation, delivery, fueling, and draining of fuel or
fuel waste products and the fueling of aircraft.
FUEL STORAGE AREA: Any portion of the airport or airpark designated temporarily
or permanently by the city as an area in which gasoline or any other type of
fuel may be stored or loaded.
OWNER: A person who holds legal title to an aircraft, or any person having
exclusive possession of an aircraft pursuant to a written lease for a term of
twelve (12) months or more.
PEDESTRIAN: Any person traveling on foot.
PERMISSION (OR PERMIT): Permission granted by the city.
PERSON: The state, county, a political subdivision of the state, other
governmental entity, a corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual.
"Person" includes a trustee, receiver, assignee or similar representative.
REGISTERED AIRCRAFT: An aircraft owned or leased by an airpark aviation
operator and is listed on the airpark aviation operator's approved airpark
access permit.
SMOKING: Burning or carrying any lighted cigarette, tobacco or any other weed
or plant, or placing any burning tobacco, weed or plant in an ashtray or other
receptacle and allowing smoke to diffuse into the air.
STAGING AREA: Open space immediately adjacent to a hangar of sufficient size
that aircraft traffic on the taxilane will not be impeded by staging aircraft.
TAXILANE: The portion of the airport apron area, or any other area, used for
access between taxiways and aircraft parking and storage areas.
TAXILANE SAFETY AND OBJECT FREE AREA: An airpark taxilane one hundred fifteen
feet (115') wide which is free of all objects.
TECHNICAL SPECIALIST: A technical representative of an aircraft manufacturer,
aircraft engine manufacturer, aircraft appliance manufacturer, or a
nondestructive inspection specialist.
(Ord. 2005-45, 7-19-2005)
8-7-2: GENERAL USE OF THE AIRPARK:
   A.   Purpose Of Rules And Regulations: Rules and regulations provided in
this document and any amendments thereto (hereinafter referred to as
"regulations") are intended for the safe, orderly and efficient operation of
the airpark and apply to all persons using the airpark for any reason.
   B.   Conflicting Laws, Ordinances, Regulations And Contracts:
      1.   In any case where a provision of these rules and regulations is
found to be in conflict with any other provision of the regulations adopted
hereunder or in conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire,
safety, health or other ordinance or code of the city, the provision which
establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health
and safety of the people shall prevail.
      2.   In cases where two (2) or more provisions of these regulations are
in conflict, the most stringent or restrictive shall prevail.
      3.   It is not intended by these regulations to repeal, abrogate, annul,
or in any way impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or
ordinances, except those specifically repealed by these regulations, or to
excuse any person from performing obligations to the city under any existing
lease or other contract.
      4.   No existing or future city contract, access agreement, permit, lease
agreement or other contractual arrangement, nor any payment or performance
thereunder, shall be construed to excuse full and complete compliance with
these regulations. Compliance with these regulations shall excuse full and
complete compliance with any obligations to the city under any existing or
future city contract, access agreement, permit, lease agreement or other
contractual arrangement in conflict therewith.
      5.   Compliance with these regulations does not excuse failure to comply
with any other law.
   C.   Compliance With FAA Regulations And The Law:
      1.   Prior to commencement of any construction in the airpark the general
airpark plan must be submitted by the developer and be approved by Ogden City
planning, the planning commission, and airport management. A general plan for
the entire airpark is also necessary to ensure full compliance with federal
aviation administration regulations governing uses, elevations and proximity to
airport airspace and movement areas. These general plans must be submitted well
in advance of construction in order to be included in an update to the airport
master plan and airport layout plan, which is a prerequisite for FAA approval
of individual "notice of the proposed construction or alteration (form 7460)"
for each construction project in the development. Approval for each project in
the development by Ogden City planning and airport management will precede
submission of form 7460 notices to FAA for a safety determination and approval
to proceed.
      2.   Layout and construction of airpark, taxilanes, ramps and access to
the airport must meet the standards for group II aircraft as set forth in FAA
advisory circular (AC) 150/5300.13, "Airport Design". In addition, all
taxilanes will project an object free area (OFA) width of one hundred fifteen
feet (115') rather than a one hundred foot (100') taxilane safety area.
      3.   Prior to commencing any aeronautical activities in the airpark, all
persons shall comply with all applicable requirements concerning such
activities as are set forth in this title as amended to include these airpark
rules and regulations.
   D.   Registration And Licensing Of Airpark Aircraft: As a condition to
initial and continued authorized airport/airpark access, each person owning,
operating, leasing or otherwise controlling aircraft based in the airpark
shall:
      1.   Prior to conducting airport/airpark access, register each such
aircraft with the city and obtain an airpark access permit approved by the city
for each aircraft and submit evidence satisfactory to the city of aircraft
registration and/or leasehold interest in such aircraft.
      2.   Convey in writing any changes to information contained within the
airpark access permit to the city within fifteen (15) calendar days of any
change to aircraft ownership/leasehold interest.
      3.   If conducting storage of aircraft primarily used in conjunction with
commercial aeronautical uses, provide evidence reasonably satisfactory to the
city that:
         a.   The operator has been granted an approved aeronautical business
permit to conduct aviation related activity in the airpark and the aircraft is
primarily used in conjunction with the approved commercial aeronautical
activity.
         b.   The permitted aeronautical business occupies the minimum amount
of enclosed nonhangar gross floor area at the location required by the airpark
minimum standards (500 square feet).
   E.   Limitations On Access Permit:
      1.   An airpark access permit shall remain in effect as long as all of
the terms, conditions, and covenants of the permit are being kept and observed,
and the airpark aviation operator is in compliance with all applicable airport/
airpark and FAA regulations.
      2.   An airpark access permit shall not be assigned or transferred.
      3.   An airpark access permit shall not authorize the airpark aviation
operator to engage in any commercial aeronautical services or activities.
   F.   Taxilane Wingspan Restrictions And Indemnification: The city recommends
that aircraft operators only operate aircraft in areas of the airpark taxilanes
consistent with their respective wingspan requirements. Taxilane safety and
object free areas extend to 57.5 feet from taxilane centerlines. It is the
pilot's responsibility to ensure wingtip clearances. The city assumes no
liability for damage or loss, including aircraft operation in areas where
aircraft wingspan exceeds the recommended maximum wingspan. Any such operation
or resulting damage is solely at the risk of the aircraft operator, and said
aircraft operator, as a condition of the issuance of an airpark access permit,
shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city from any damage or losses
resulting from said operation.
   G.   Self-Services:
      1.   Persons are permitted to fuel, wash, repair, paint, or otherwise
service their own airpark based aircraft, provided there is no attempt to
perform such services for others and further provided that such right is
conditioned upon compliance with these regulations and all other applicable
laws, rules, regulations and ordinances.
      2.   Airpark aviation operators may hire an individual to provide
services only and solely on their own based aircraft. Such services may only be
provided by a direct employee of an authorized FBO or specialized service
operator, technical specialist or commercial aeronautical activities permit
holder.
      3.   Self-service maintenance of aircraft in the airpark may only be
performed on airpark based aircraft parked at their respective based locations.
   H.   Aircraft Maintenance: Maintenance of aircraft in the airpark shall only
be conducted by one of the following: 1) the airpark aviation operator or its
employee under the provisions of these regulations; 2) by a person employed by
and under the control of an authorized FBO or aircraft accessory services
operator; 3) a commercial aeronautical activities permit holder; or 4) an
approved technical specialist.
   I.   Scheduled Passenger Service: Scheduled passenger service shall operate
from the airport terminal building at 3909 Airport Road.
   J.   Smoking Areas: No smoking shall be permitted:
      1.   Within fifty feet (50') of any aircraft, fuel truck, and/or fuel
storage areas on the airpark;
      2.   In other areas where specifically prohibited by the city.
   K.   Firearms, Explosives, Etc.:
      1.   No person, except an authorized law enforcement officer or member of
the armed forces of the United States on official duty, shall possess any
firearms in an airpark taxilane safety area, except firearms that do not
contain live ammunition, are in an enclosed case, and are intended for
immediate transport out of the airpark taxilane safety area.
      2.   No person, except an authorized law enforcement officer or member of
the armed forces of the United States on official duty, shall possess any
explosives in an airpark taxilane safety area.
      3.   No person, other than those in the above excepted classes, shall
store, keep, handle, use, dispense or transport, at, in, or upon an airpark
taxilane safety area any class A or class B explosives, any radioactive
substance or material (except for minimum amounts of radioactive substances,
such as radioactive paint illuminating instrument dials) without prior written
authorization from the city.
   L.   Waste Containers And Disposal: Airpark property owners, airpark
aviation operators, employees, tenants, users, or visitors in the airpark shall
dispose of all waste in the appropriate waste containers. No petroleum
products, industrial waste matter or other hazardous material shall be dumped
or otherwise disposed of except in accordance with local, county, state and
federal environmental law.
   M.   Maintenance Of Property:
      1.   Persons owning, occupying, leasing, managing, or otherwise
controlling airpark property shall maintain that portion of said property or
any portion thereof which is contained in an airpark taxilane safety area in a
condition of repair, cleanliness and general maintenance equal to or greater
than the level of maintenance maintained by the city in comparable areas; at a
minimum free of pavement lips or obstacles, vehicle ruts, standing water, trees
and other vegetation exceeding twelve inches (12") in height, and free from any
and all conditions hazardous or potentially hazardous to aircraft. Any person
desiring to perform routine property maintenance in an airpark taxilane safety
area shall notify the airport manager at least two (2) hours prior to
commencing any work. Any person desiring to perform new construction,
demolition or excavation in an airpark taxilane safety area shall notify the
airport manager and coordinate safety related items at least forty eight (48)
hours prior to commencing any work.
      2.   Except in accordance with subsection M1 of this section, no person
shall make any alterations to any airpark taxilane safety area or other
property located in, on, under or about any airpark taxilane safety area
without prior notification to the city and obtaining any other required city
permits.
   N.   Storage, Transfer And Cleanup Charges: Pursuant to other sections of
this title, the city may remove and impose storage, removal and transfer
charges upon any property unlawfully spilled, placed or otherwise deposited in
an airpark taxilane safety area and may charge the responsible person(s) for
the cost of the cleanup, any required environmental remediation, and expenses
incurred by, or fines or damages imposed on, the city as a result thereof.
   O.   Property Damage; Injurious Or Detrimental Activities: No person shall
destroy, deface, injure or disturb in any way airpark taxilane safety areas or
conduct in the airpark activities that are injurious, detrimental or damaging
to an airpark taxilane safety area or to activities and business of the
airpark. Any person causing or liable for any damage shall be required to pay
the city, on demand, the full cost of repairs. Any person failing to comply
with this section shall be in violation of these regulations and may be refused
the use of an airpark taxilane safety area until the city has been fully
reimbursed for damage done.
   P.   Disorderly Conduct, Intoxicating Liquors, Etc.:
      1.   No person shall:
         a.   Commit any disorderly, obscene or unlawful act or commit any
nuisance in an airpark taxilane safety area.
         b.   Drink any intoxicating liquor in any portion of an airpark
taxilane safety area.
         c.   Become intoxicated on any portion of an airpark taxilane safety
area.
      2.   No intoxicated person shall enter upon or loiter on or about airpark
taxilane safety areas.
   Q.   Commercial Photography: No person shall take still, motion or sound
pictures of or on an airpark taxilane safety area for commercial purposes
without first receiving written approval from the city.
   R.   Advertisements: No person shall post, distribute or display signs,
advertisements, circulars, printed or written matter on an airpark taxilane
safety area without written permission from the city.
   S.   Animals: No person shall enter an airpark taxilane safety area with a
dog or other animal unless restrained by a leash or properly confined as
determined by the airport manager.
   T.   Obstacles:
      1.   With the exception of subsection T3 of this section, no vehicles,
aircraft or other objects may be parked, temporarily stored or left standing on
any airpark taxilane safety area.
      2.   Pursuant to this title the city may cause to be removed and
impounded from any airpark taxilane safety area any vehicle or aircraft which
is disabled, abandoned, parked in violation of applicable regulations, or any
and all objects or other obstacles which present a hazard to aircraft, at the
owner's or operator's expense and without liability for damage which may result
in the course of such moving.
      3.   For properties with no staging area other than that which is located
within the airpark taxilane safety area, aircraft or vehicles may be
temporarily stopped in the airpark taxilane safety area for no more than thirty
(30) minutes (unless otherwise approved in writing by the city), if located as
close to the building as safely as possible, attended continuously without
interruption at all times and able to be immediately moved, and are removed if
necessary to allow aircraft to safely pass.
   U.   Airport Security:
      1.   Persons owning, operating or otherwise responsible for airpark
property which contains any portion of the airport security perimeter (as
defined by the city) shall at all times operate and maintain all access points
and airport security perimeter on their property in a manner, acceptable to the
city, which limits access from their property to the airport to only those
persons authorized by this title as amended.
      2.   Airpark aviation operators and/or persons conducting approved
airport/airpark access through an aircraft access gate shall immediately report
to the airport traffic control tower or the airport manager any operational
failure of the access gate, or failure of the gate to fully close.
      3.   Any person who accesses an airpark taxilane safety area shall be
responsible for their actions and all actions of any person to whom they
provide access, whether directly or indirectly, and shall defend, indemnify and
hold harmless the city from any damages or losses resulting therefrom,
including any fines levied against the city by the FAA.
      4.   The city may require and direct the installation, location and
specifications of any airport/airpark access gate within the airpark that the
city deems necessary or appropriate to meet the security and safety
requirements of the airport or airpark.
   V.   Access Codes/Devices:
      1.   Only those persons who have been provided either a code or aircraft
gate access device for the purpose of obtaining access to the airport shall use
said airport issued code/device and shall not divulge, duplicate or otherwise
distribute the same to any other person, unless said persons are authorized by
the aircraft owner to operate the registered aircraft, or are visitors
operating aircraft in compliance with these regulations. Violations of the
aforementioned regulation may result in the loss of airport access privileges
pursuant to this title.
      2.   An airport issued aircraft gate access device shall be assigned to
an individual aircraft by registration number or approved service vehicle, and
may not be used by any other aircraft or vehicle other than that registered
aircraft or vehicle, unless used to provide access for visiting aircraft with
prior notice to the airport manager. Only airport issued access devices may be
used to activate an airport access gate, unless otherwise approved in writing
by the city.
      3.   The city may deny the issuance of, or demand the return of, any
aircraft gate access device for any violation of this title, the airport rules
and regulations, or applicable FAA rules and regulations.
      4.   Each aircraft gate access device remains the property of the city.
The city reserves the right to inspect aircraft gate access devices in aircraft
or vehicles in the airpark and/or conducting airport/airpark access.
   W.   Airpark Security: Persons owning, operating or otherwise responsible
for airpark property shall at all times keep vehicular access points to the
taxilane safety area closed when not in immediate use, and limit access from
their property to the airpark taxilane safety area to registered aircraft,
visiting aircraft and approved service vehicles.
(Ord. 2005-45, 7-19-2005)
8-7-3: AIRCRAFT OPERATION REGULATIONS:
   A.   Landing And Takeoff Of Helicopters: No helicopter landing or taking off
in the airpark shall obstruct the taxilane safety area at any location where
the exhaust or rotor downwash may cause injury to persons or do damage to
property or spread debris on an airpark taxilane safety area, aircraft parking
and/or staging area.
   B.   Qualifications To Operate Aircraft: No person other than airpark
aviation operators and visitors operating aircraft in compliance with these
regulations shall operate any aircraft upon an airpark taxilane safety area,
and/or conduct airport/airpark access.
   C.   Disabled Aircraft: Airpark aviation operators and pilots shall be
responsible for the prompt removal of disabled aircraft and parts thereof from
an airpark taxilane safety area, unless required or directed by the city or the
FAA to delay such action pending an investigation of an accident. In the event
of failure to promptly remove such disabled aircraft, the city may cause the
aircraft to be removed and impounded and bill the owners thereof for all
charges incurred in the removal of same. The city shall not be responsible for
damage to disabled aircraft removed by the owner, the pilot, the city or other
persons.
   D.   Running Of Aircraft Engines: Aircraft engines shall only be run at idle
except as may be necessary for safe taxiing operations or minimal preflight
testing. All engine run ups for maintenance testing purposes shall be performed
in accordance with all airport ordinances, rules and regulations including,
without limitation, this title, as amended.
   E.   Exhaust And Propeller Blast: No aircraft engine shall be started or
aircraft taxied in an airpark taxilane safety area or at any location where the
exhaust or propeller blast may cause injury to persons or do damage to property
or spread debris on an airpark taxilane safety area, aircraft parking and/or
staging area.
   F.   Taxiing Of Aircraft: No person shall taxi an aircraft without first
taking all necessary precautions to prevent a collision with other aircraft,
persons or object. Aircraft shall not be taxied into or out of any hangar,
shade, or other covered area. No person shall taxi an aircraft except on areas
designated for taxiing and all taxiing shall be done in a safe manner. If it is
impossible to taxi aircraft in compliance with this section, then the engine
shall be shut off and the aircraft towed to a new location.
   G.   Advisory Prior To Taxiing: Prior to aircraft taxiing in an airpark
taxilane safety area, during hours when the airport traffic control tower is in
operation, aircraft operators shall utilize ground control frequency, 121.7
MHz, to broadcast to the airport traffic control tower their intentions to
access the airport. Prior to aircraft taxiing in an airpark taxilane safety
area, during hours when the airport traffic control tower is not in operation,
aircraft operators shall utilize the common air traffic advisory frequency,
122.95 MHz (UNICOM).
   H.   Accident Reports: Any person involved in an aircraft accident occurring
in an airpark taxilane safety area shall make a full written report thereof to
the airport manager as soon after the accident as possible but in no event
later than the time required for reporting the accident to the FAA or to any
other governmental agency, or within forty eight (48) hours of the accident,
whichever is sooner. The report shall include the names and addresses of the
persons involved, and a description of the accident and its cause. When an
additional written report of an accident is required by federal or state law,
regulation, or agency, a copy of such written report shall also be submitted to
the airport manager.
   I.   Visiting Aircraft: Nonbased (i.e., visiting/transient) aircraft may
only conduct airport/airpark access to receive services from an airpark
operator under circumstances permitted by the airpark manager or upon
authorization by an airpark aviation operator or other person owning, leasing
or otherwise controlling airpark property, and in accordance with the
following:
      1.   Only airpark facilities with aircraft staging area located outside
of the taxilane safety area may receive visiting aircraft, and the visiting
aircraft must be parked at that location.
      2.   Visiting aircraft may only be fueled upon the airpark by an
authorized FBO.
      3.   Visiting aircraft may not remain overnight in the airpark more than
thirty (30) consecutive calendar days, without approval by the city.
      4.   If the visitor is unfamiliar with the access route to the airpark
destination, the airpark aviation operator shall provide an escort to the
airpark destination.
      5.   There is compliance by the visiting aircraft and the airpark
aviation operator with these regulations.
   J.   Based Aircraft Storage: Airpark based aircraft shall only be parked at
their based location. The number of aircraft which may be based at an airpark
hangar/shade shall not exceed the number of aircraft that can fit into the
hangar/shade at any one time if all based aircraft were present, and in
addition shall be limited by the following:
      1.   The number of aircraft permitted to be based shall be limited by the
number of aircraft "slots" available at the hangar location;
      2.   The number of "slots" shall be calculated by the amount of enclosed
hangar floor area at the hangar storage location, with each one thousand
(1,000) square feet of enclosed hangar floor area being equivalent to one slot;
      3.   A slot shall be considered to be occupied by a based aircraft for a
minimum of six (6) months or as long as the aircraft is based at the location
if in excess of six (6) months;
      4.   Replacement aircraft may be substituted for a slot aircraft only if
the slot aircraft's hangar or operating lease terminates (but in no event prior
to 30 days from the commencement of said lease), or the slot aircraft is sold
and the replacement aircraft is based at the airpark hangar/shade location. In
such case, a new six (6) month time period for the slot begins with the
replacement aircraft;
      5.   Except as provided in subsection J4 of this section, replacement
aircraft shall not be substituted for aircraft no longer based in the hangar/
shade location.
(Ord. 2005-45, 7-19-2005)
8-7-4: VEHICLES, PEDESTRIANS, ETC.:
   A.   General Requirements: No person shall operate a vehicle in an airpark
taxilane safety area except in accordance with the rules prescribed by the city
and all federal, state and local laws.
   B.   Licensing And Insurance: No person shall operate a vehicle of any kind
in an airpark taxilane safety area without a valid state operator's license.
All vehicles authorized to operate in an airpark taxilane safety area shall at
all times maintain at least the minimum coverages and amounts of vehicle
liability insurance required by Utah state law.
   C.   Control Of Vehicles: No person shall operate or park a vehicle in an
airpark taxilane safety area in a manner prohibited by signs, pavement markings
or other signals posted by the city or by regulations or rules established
under this chapter. The airport manager has plenary power to regulate or
prohibit any class or type of vehicle or any other type or class of wheeled
vehicle or other form of transport that operates in an airpark taxilane safety
area.
   D.   Travel In Airpark Taxilane Safety Areas: Travel through an aircraft
access gate by a vehicle or pedestrian not authorized by the airport manager
shall be prohibited. All vehicles, pedestrians and any other person in an
airpark taxilane safety area shall yield the right of way to aircraft and will
immediately exit the taxilane safety area to allow aircraft to pass unimpeded.
No person shall enter any city owned airpark area posted as being closed to the
public, except with the consent of the city. Airpark taxilane safety areas
shall only be used by authorized vehicles, which include all airport
administration vehicles, authorized FBO fuel trucks, and other vehicles as
authorized by the city.
   E.   Speed Limit: All vehicles in an airpark taxilane safety area shall be
operated in strict compliance with all posted speed limits. The maximum speed
limit for all vehicles in an airpark taxilane safety area is ten (10) miles per
hour, or less if required to ensure safe operation.
   F.   Scooter And Miscellaneous Vehicles: No person shall use in any airpark
taxilane safety area any go-cart, go-ped, moped, skateboard, rollerblades, all-
terrain vehicle or other vehicle not licensed, or otherwise permitted by Utah
state law, for operation on a public street or highway. This subsection does
not pertain to city vehicles or vehicles used solely for tugging, marshaling or
refueling of aircraft.
   G.   Accidents: The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident in an
airport taxilane safety area which results in injury or death to any person, or
damage to any property, shall immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of the
accident, render reasonable assistance to a person injured in the accident,
including making arrangements for the caring of the person to a physician,
surgeon or hospital for medical or surgical treatment if it is apparent that
treatment is necessary or if the caring is requested by the injured person; and
give his name, address and operator's license and registration number to the
person injured, the airport manager and to any police officer or witnesses of
the accident. The operator of such vehicle shall make a written report of such
accident in accordance with state law and provide a copy of same to the airport
manager.
   H.   Careless Operation, Driving While Intoxicated, Etc.: No vehicle shall
be operated in any airpark taxilane safety area:
      1.   In a careless, negligent, or reckless manner;
      2.   In disregard of the rights and safety of others;
      3.   Without due caution or circumspection;
      4.   At a speed or in a manner which endangers or is likely to endanger
persons or property;
      5.   While the driver would be prohibited by law from operating an
automobile upon the public streets of the city due to drug or alcohol
impairment or influence;
      6.   If the vehicle is so constructed, equipped or loaded as to endanger
or be likely to endanger persons or property, or to result in the load or other
materials becoming separated from the vehicle;
      7.   If the vehicle is so equipped, without operating headlights,
taillights, turn signals, and brake lights during hours of darkness or during
inclement weather; or
      8.   In a manner that does not allow the vehicle to be immediately driven
or towed away from any nearby aircraft in case of emergency.
(Ord. 2005-45, 7-19-2005)
8-7-5: FUELING, FLAMMABLE FLUIDS, AND SAFETY:
   A.   Fuel Safety: All transportation, storage and other handling of aircraft
and vehicle fuel within the airpark shall comply with the current fire code, as
adopted by title 16, chapter 2 of this code, or its successor provisions, the
National Fire Protection Association's codes and standards, as amended, FAA
advisory circular 150/5230.4, as amended, all requirements of these
regulations, and all other applicable laws.
   B.   Aircraft Fueling: All aircraft fueling shall be performed outdoors and
no closer than twenty five feet (25') to a structure. Aircraft fueling in the
airpark may only be conducted by: 1) an authorized FBO; or 2) an airpark
aviation operator fueling its airpark based aircraft at its based location and
pursuant to a city issued self-fueling permit. Fueling of nonbased aircraft or
aircraft not at its based location by other than an authorized FBO is
prohibited.
   C.   Removal Of Gas, Oil, Grease, Aircraft Washing Effluent, Etc.: In the
event of spillage or dripping of gasoline, oil, grease, aircraft washing
effluent or any material which may be unsightly or detrimental to an airpark
taxilane safety area, the same shall be removed immediately. The responsibility
for the immediate removal of such gasoline, oil, grease, aircraft washing
effluent or other material shall be assumed by the operator or owner of the
equipment causing the same or the property owner responsible for the deposit.
In the event of such spillage, and the failure of the operator or owner to
restore the area to its original safe and environmentally sound status, the
city may clean up any material unlawfully spilled, placed or otherwise
deposited in an airpark taxilane safety area and may charge the responsible
person(s) for the cost of the cleanup, any required environmental remediation,
and expenses incurred by, or fines or damages imposed on, the city as result
thereof. Such an event may constitute grounds for denying access to the airport
in accordance with the provisions of this title, as amended.
   D.   Fire Extinguishers:
      1.   All airpark aviation operators shall supply and maintain such
adequate and readily accessible fire extinguishers as may be required by the
city or fire department. Each fire extinguisher shall carry a suitable tag
showing the date of most recent inspection.
      2.   At least two (2) fire extinguishers, each having a rating of at
least 20-BC, shall be available for use in connection with the aircraft fuel
handling operations.
   E.   Unauthorized Fuel Possession And Storage: Except as expressly permitted
by these regulations, no person shall possess aircraft fuel in the airpark.
   F.   Fuel Facility Permit: Any airpark aviation operator shall meet, and at
all times maintain compliance with, the following conditions before the city
will issue a self-fueling permit and consider any such operator in good
standing:
      1.   The fuel storage area from which the aircraft is to be fueled shall
be on the same building site as the based location of the based aircraft owned
or leased by the operator, except in the case of an authorized FBO.
      2.   The fuel storage area shall be equipped with a fuel flowage meter of
a type approved by the city.
      3.   If the hangar facility at which the fuel storage area is located is
approved to conduct hangar/shade leasing and fuel is dispensed into based
aircraft, the fuel flowage meter shall be regularly calibrated and copies of
such test results regularly provided to the city upon request; and
      4.   The identification number ("N" number) of the aircraft based in the
airpark and applying for an airpark access permit shall be affixed to the fuel
storage area in a form and manner approved by the city as well as displayed in
a location that is visible at the pump, or the identification numbers shall be
reported monthly to the airport in a written form and manner acceptable to the
city.
      5.   Aircraft fuel dispensed from an approved airpark fuel storage area
shall only be supplied an airpark based aircraft at its based location pursuant
to a self-fueling permit, except fueling performed by an authorized FBO. No
retail aircraft fuel sales shall take place in the airpark except those
provided by an authorized FBO.
   G.   Movable Aircraft Fuel Storage Tanks: Unless otherwise approved by the
airport manager and city fire marshal, movable aircraft fuel storage tanks are
prohibited in the airpark except for:
      1.   Aircraft fueling/defueling trucks and trailers constructed, operated
and maintained in all respects as required by law. Such aircraft fueling/
defueling trucks and trailers shall be operated in the airpark solely by an
authorized FBO, or in the case of defueling equipment only, by an aircraft
accessory services operator, aircraft airframe and engine repair operator or
technical specialist.
      2.   Permanent fuel tanks in an operable aircraft.
      3.   Tanks not exceeding one gallon capacity used solely for sampling and
testing fuel, engines and fuel handling apparatus.
      4.   No more than one tank with a capacity of not more than fifty five
(55) gallons used by a person to fuel his own aircraft pursuant to a self-
fueling permit. Said tank must be stored outside and no closer than fifty feet
(50') to any structure.
      5.   Tanks in transit for the purpose of lawfully transporting fuel for
immediate dispensing into a fuel storage area permitted by the city.
   H.   Aircraft Owner Self-Fueling: Except as may be prohibited by other
provisions of these regulations and any other applicable law, airpark aviation
operators who desire to self-fuel their airpark based aircraft, shall apply for
and receive a self- fueling permit from the city prior to conducting self-
fueling.
   I.   Inspection Of Fuel Facilities And Records, Meter Readings And
Reporting:
      1.   The city and its officials, representatives, and agents shall have a
continuous right of access onto private property in the airpark for the purpose
of inspecting fuel facilities and equipment. Fuel storage and dispensing
records shall be regularly subject to inspection by the city upon reasonable
notice. Such inspection may include, but not be limited to, taking meter
readings, reviewing and inspecting fuel storage records, fueling apparatus,
training records, emergency equipment, and any and all material for safe fuel
handling.
      2.   Airpark aviation operators who conduct self-fueling shall submit to
the airport in a manner acceptable to the city not later than the tenth day of
the following month a written monthly fuel inventory reconciliation report. The
reconciliation report shall include:
         a.   The type and amount of fuel dispensed into all aircraft, fixed
wing and helicopters.
         b.   The type and amount of fuel received, spilled, leaked, defueled
from aircraft or otherwise accounted for.
      3.   If required by state law, airpark aviation operators shall submit
annual tightness testing reports to the city fire department no later than
twenty (20) calendar days after such testing is performed.
   J.   General Insurance Requirements: Any person owning, operating or
otherwise responsible for an airpark aircraft fuel storage facility shall at
all times comply with federal, state and local law concerning insurance,
liability and financial responsibility for fuel storage facilities including,
but not limited to, 49 USC 100 1ff and 40 CFR 280 et seq.
(Ord. 2005-45, 7-19-2005; amd. Ord. 2011-39, 6-28-2011)
8-7-6: FEES:
   A.   Airport/Airpark Access Fee: Any person conducting any commercial
aeronautical activity upon the airpark shall be subject to an airport access
fee to be paid to the city in compliance with a current airport access
agreement entered into between the airpark property owner and the city, as
required by this title.
   B.   Airport/Airpark Fuel Flowage Fee: If aircraft are fueled on the
airpark, whether by an authorized FBO or pursuant to a self- fueling permit, a
person owning, operating or otherwise responsible for the fueled aircraft shall
pay fuel flowage fees, in addition to any other fee, as established in the
airport fees schedule (see chapter 5 of this title), with such fees subject to
change.
   C.   Airpark Gate Access Device Deposit:
      1.   Upon payment of a deposit as listed in the airport/airpark rates and
fees schedule and the prior satisfying of all applicable airpark rules and
regulations, and having been granted an approved airpark access permit, an
aircraft gate access device may be issued to:
         a.   An airpark aviation operator only for use in conjunction with the
registered aircraft for which the airpark gate access device was issued, or
visiting aircraft as noted in subsection 8-7-2V2 of this chapter.
         b.   An operator of an approved government owned vehicle with a bona
fide official need to access the airpark through the airpark aircraft access
gates.
         c.   An authorized FBO for use to provide approved fueling or other
aircraft service vehicle.
      2.   The deposit shall be refundable only after cancellation of the
approved airpark access permit and upon return of the aircraft gate access
device in good working order.
   D.   Collection Of Fees:
      1.   An authorized FBO that provides fueling services within the airpark
shall collect, pay, and account for applicable fuel flowage fees and landing
fees in the same manner that such fees are collected, paid, and accounted for
in conjunction with FBO services provided within the airport pursuant to
chapter 5 of this title.
      2.   All other fees due and payable to Ogden City Corporation for airpark
operations will be collected by the airpark manager and forwarded to the
airport manager for submission to the city treasurer. It shall be the
responsibility of the airpark manager to maintain appropriate records of these
fees for a period of at least two (2) years and to be prepared for an audit of
these records as requested by the city.
(Ord. 2005-45, 7-19-2005)
CHAPTER 8
AIRPARK MINIMUM STANDARDS
SECTION:
8-8-1: Definitions; Application; Waiver
8-8-2: Application Process
8-8-3: General Provisions
8-8-4: Insurance
8-8-5: General Operational Requirements
8-8-6: General Aviation Specialty Services
8-8-7: Airport Access Agreement
8-8-1: DEFINITIONS; APPLICATION; WAIVER:
   A.   Definitions: All definitions contained in this title, airport rules and
regulations and airpark rules and regulations, are incorporated by reference
into these airpark minimum operating standards. For purposes of these airpark
minimum operating standards, all references to the "rules and regulations" are
to either the airport rules and regulations and/or the airpark rules and
regulations.
   DIRECT ACCESS: The direct access area of the airpark property is that
certain property that: 1) has aircraft access to the airside airport property
via an existing taxilane or taxiway and is contiguous to airside airport
property; 2) can provide aircraft access to the airport directly from the
aircraft staging area to an airport taxiway (excluding taxilanes and aircraft
parking aprons); and 3) has an aircraft staging area that is not located within
a taxiway safety area or taxilane safety area, is located on the same lot as
the aircraft storage location and is of sufficient size that aircraft traffic
on the taxilane will not be impeded by aircraft staging.
   SELF-STAGED REMOTE AREA: Airpark property that: 1) has aircraft access to
remote area: the airside airport property via an existing taxilane; 2) can
provide aircraft access directly from the aircraft storage area to the aircraft
staging area located on the same lot without traversing the airpark taxilane
safety area; 3) has an aircraft staging area that is not located within a
taxiway safety area or taxilane safety area; and 4) the square footage of the
aircraft staging area is equal to or greater than the square footage of the
largest hangar on the same lot and is of sufficient size that aircraft traffic
on the taxilane will not be impeded by aircraft staging.
   B.   Application Of Minimum Operating Standards: Minimum standards for
airpark operations shall meet the airport minimum standards of chapter 4 of
this title, as amended.
In addition, a person conducting commercial aeronautical activities in approved
areas of the airpark (hereinafter referred to as "operator"), shall, as a
condition of conducting such activities, comply with all applicable
requirements concerning such activities as set forth in these airpark minimum
operating standards and any amendments thereto. The requirements set forth in
chapter 4 of this title and herein are the minimum standards which are
applicable to persons conducting commercial aeronautical activities in approved
areas of the airpark, and all persons are encouraged to exceed such minimum
standards in conducting their activities. Chapter 4 of this title and these
airpark minimum operating standards shall be deemed to be a part of each
operator's commercial aeronautical activities permit unless any such provisions
are waived or modified by the city pursuant to chapter 4 of this title. The
mere omission of any particular standard from an operator's written commercial
aeronautical activities permit shall not constitute a waiver or modification of
such standard in the absence of clear and convincing evidence that the city
intended to waive or modify such standard.
   C.   Multiple Activities By One Operator: Whenever an operator conducts
multiple activities pursuant to one commercial aeronautical activities permit
with the city, such operator must comply with the minimum standards set forth
herein for each separate activity being conducted. If the minimum standards for
one of the operator's activities are inconsistent with the minimum standards
for another of the operator's activities, then the minimum standards which are
most restrictive and beneficial to the city, and/or which are most protective
of the public's health, safety and welfare, shall apply.
   D.   Activities Not Covered By Airpark Minimum Operating Standards: Any
person conducting a commercial aeronautical activity for which no specific
minimum standards are expressly set forth in chapter 4 of this title or herein
shall comply with all requirements set forth in the operator's commercial
aeronautical activities permit, any requirements promulgated by the city and
all applicable zoning ordinances and federal aviation regulations.
   E.   Waiver Or Modification Of Standards: The city may waive or modify any
portion of these airpark minimum operating standards for the benefit of any
governmental agency performing nonprofit public services, fire protection or
firefighting operations, provided such waiver is in the best interest of the
city and will not result in any unjust economic discrimination among commercial
operators at the airport.
(Ord. 2005-45, 7-19-2005)
8-8-2: APPLICATION PROCESS:
   A.   Applications: Any person who desires to conduct commercial aeronautical
activities in the airpark covered by these airpark minimum operating standards
shall, prior to conducting such activities, submit in writing a proposal which
sets forth the scope of operations proposed, to include at a minimum the
specific information delineated in subsection 8-3-3B of this title and the
documentation listed below. In addition, the city may require the applicant to
provide additional information which is necessary to ensure compliance with
this code, rules and regulations, and/or these airpark minimum operating
standards. The applicant shall, at minimum, submit the following documentation
with the above referenced application:
      1.   A detailed description of the scope of the intended operations,
including all services to be offered;
      2.   The proposed hours of operation;
      3.   A detailed description and/or evidence of the applicant's technical
abilities and experience in conducting the proposed activities, including
personal references;
      4.   The commencement date for the applicant's activities and the term of
the lease, license, permit or agreement sought, including all option periods;
      5.   One of the following:
         a.   If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of the articles of
incorporation as filed with the Utah state division of corporations;
         b.   If the applicant is a limited liability company, a copy of the
articles of organization filed with the Utah state division of corporations;
         c.   If the applicant is a limited partnership, a copy of the
certificate of limited partnership filed with the Utah state division of
corporations; or
         d.   If the applicant is a general partnership, a copy of the written
partnership agreement, if any;
      6.   An original copy of a certificate of insurance, in the amounts
outlined hereunder, naming the city as an additional insured;
      7.   A copy of a lease/sublease agreement for the property where the
commercial aeronautical activity will be conducted and a diagram showing the
location on the same site where the commercial aeronautical activity will be
conducted, where all aircraft used in the commercial aeronautical activities
will be stored, and the location and square footage of any on site office
space;
      8.   A copy of the applicant's Ogden City business license;
      9.   A rates and charges schedule for all services to be conducted; and
      10.   Copies of applicable federal aviation administration (FAA)
certificates.
   B.   Processing; Denial: The airport manager, in accordance with this title,
as amended, shall be responsible for processing an application for a commercial
aeronautical activities permit to conduct commercial aeronautical activities at
the airpark and shall process an application within a reasonable time not to
exceed thirty (30) business days from actual receipt of a fully completed
application form. The city may deny any application if it is determined that:
      1.   The applicant does not meet the qualifications and standards set
forth in the applicable zoning ordinance, this title, including the airport and
airpark rules and regulations, and minimum operating standards;
      2.   The proposed commercial aeronautical activities are likely to create
a safety hazard at the airport or in the airpark taxilane safety areas;
      3.   The commercial aeronautical activities will require the city to
expend funds, or to supply labor or materials as a result of the applicant's
activities, or will result in a financial loss to the airport;
      4.   The proposed commercial aeronautical activities are not consistent
with the airport master plan and/or airport layout plan;
      5.   The proposed commercial aeronautical activities are likely to result
in a congestion of aircraft or buildings, a reduction in airport capacity, or
an undue interference with airport or airpark operations or the operations of
any existing operators;
      6.   The applicant or any of its principals has knowingly made any false
or misleading statements in the course of applying for a lease, license permit
or agreement;
      7.   The applicant or any of its principals has a record of violating any
provision of this title, as amended, federal aviation regulations, or any other
applicable laws, ordinances, rules or regulations;
      8.   The applicant has not submitted appropriate documentation supporting
the proposed activity as outlined in subsection A of this section.
   C.   Appeal Process:
      1.   The applicant shall have the ability to appeal the denial of an
application by the airport manager subject to the following provisions:
         a.   The applicant must provide written notice of appeal to the Ogden
City chief administrative officer within ten (10) days of said denial.
         b.   The request for a hearing will follow procedures set forth in
section
8-1-5 of this title, as amended.
(Ord. 2005-45, 7-19-2005)
8-8-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   General Provisions: Except as otherwise provided in this title, all
licenses or permits issued by the city which affect the airport or relate to
commercial aeronautical activity in the airpark are subject to the following
provisions:
      1.   Rights to engage in commercial aeronautical activities in the
airpark are nonexclusive.
      2.   A termination clause allowing the city to terminate the operator's
license or permit no later than thirty (30) days after notice of default is
given to the operator if the operator fails to cure its default within the
thirty (30) day period, and allowing the city to terminate the license or
permit immediately if the operator fails to maintain the required insurance.
      3.   No license, permit, or any rights thereunder, shall be assigned.
(Ord. 2005-45, 7-19-2005)
8-8-4: INSURANCE:
   A.   General Insurance Requirements: Any person conducting commercial
aeronautical activities upon the airpark, including airpark general aviation
specialty services, shall at all times comply with the minimum insurance
requirements for conducting such activities on the airport, as set forth in
section
8-3-2 of this title.
   B.   Additional Insurance Required By City's Risk Management Director: In
addition to the types and amounts of insurance required by section
8-3-2 of this title, operator shall at all times maintain such other insurance
as the city's risk management director may reasonably determine to be necessary
for such operator's activities.
(Ord. 2005-45, 7-19-2005)
8-8-5: GENERAL OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Airpark Rules And Regulations: Each operator shall comply with this
title, as amended, and any other documents established by the city for the
safe, orderly and efficient operation of the airpark.
   B.   Personnel, Subtenants And Invitees; Control And Demeanor: Each operator
shall employ a sufficient number of trained, on duty personnel to provide for
the efficient, safe, orderly and proper compliance with its obligations under
its commercial activities permit. Each operator shall control the conduct and
demeanor of its personnel, subtenants, licensees and invitees and, upon
objection by the city concerning the conduct or demeanor of any such person,
the operator shall immediately take all lawful steps necessary to remove the
cause of the objection. Each operator shall conduct its operations in a safe,
orderly, efficient and proper manner so as not to unreasonably disturb,
endanger or offend others.
   C.   Interference With Utilities And Systems: No operator shall do or permit
to be done anything that may interfere with the effectiveness or accessibility
of any public utility system, drainage system, sewer system, fire protection
system, sprinkler system, alarm system or fire hydrant and hoses.
   D.   Fire Equipment: Each operator shall supply and maintain such adequate
and readily accessible fire extinguishers and equipment as may be required by
law and/or the city's fire department.
   E.   Vehicle Identification: If approved for use on an airpark taxilane by
the city, a vehicle used in the airpark in conjunction with any approved
commercial aeronautical activity must bear identification designating the
operator to whom the vehicle is assigned. Letters shall be a minimum of three
inches (3") in height on a contrasting background and displayed in a manner
that is acceptable to the city.
   F.   Indemnification: To the fullest extent permitted by law, any person
accessing or using the airport or any of its facilities, or any airpark
taxilanes, and the person's successors, assigns and guarantors, shall
indemnify, defend, pay and hold the city, its agents, employees, officials,
directors, officers, and representatives harmless from and against all claims,
demands, charges, penalties, obligations, fines, administrative and judicial
actions or proceedings, suits, liabilities, judgments, damages, losses, costs
and expenses of any kind or nature (including, but not limited to, attorney
fees and expenses, expert witness and consultant fees and expenses, arbitration
fees, court costs and the cost of appellate proceedings) arising from said
access or use, or from any other act or omission of said person (and its
employees, agents or anyone for whose acts or omissions said person may be
liable) including, without limitation, the discharge of any duties or the
exercise of any rights or privileges pursuant to this chapter or any
regulations or minimum operating standards promulgated hereunder. This section
applies, without limitation, to claims of personal injury, bodily injury,
sickness, disease or death, and to claims of property damage (including city
property), destruction or other impairment of every description (including,
without limitation, loss of use), and to claims of environmental property
damage (including, without limitation, cleanup, response, removal and
remediation costs).
(Ord. 2005-45, 7-19-2005)
8-8-6: GENERAL AVIATION SPECIALTY SERVICES:
In addition to permitting commercial aeronautical activities described in
chapter 4 of this title, the city may grant a commercial aeronautical
activities permit to conduct the following general aviation specialty services
upon the airpark, provided the person complies with applicable minimum
standards:
   A.   Hangar/Shade Leasing Services: "Hangar/shade leasing services operator"
means a person engaged in the business of leasing, renting or licensing
hangars/shades in the airpark or space in a hangar in the airpark to aircraft
owners or operators for aircraft storage purposes. A hangar/shade leasing
services operator may engage in the business of construction and/or operating
hangars/shades to be leased in the airpark. A hangar/shade leasing services
operator shall:
      1.   Prior to conducting any commercial hangar/shade leasing services in
the airpark, obtain a commercial aeronautical activities permit from the city
for aircraft storage and commercial hangar/shade leasing, and lease or own
sufficient land to accommodate the proposed operations.
      2.   Maintain the types and minimum amounts of insurance required by
section
8-8-4 of this chapter as to any of its activities which may be covered by such
insurance.
      3.   Comply with all applicable federal aviation regulations and city
zoning ordinances.
   B.   Aircraft Sales Services: An "aircraft sales services operator" means a
person engaged in the sale of new and/or used aircraft based on the airport or
in the airpark. An aircraft sales services operator shall:
      1.   Prior to conducting any aircraft sales services in the city airpark,
obtain a use permit from the city for aircraft sales, and lease or own
sufficient land to accommodate the proposed operations and if displaying
aircraft for sale at least five hundred (500) square feet of office space at
the aircraft storage location, and obtain a commercial aeronautical activities
permit from the city.
      2.   Display aircraft for sale only in direct access areas.
      3.   Maintain any required aircraft dealer's certificate from the state.
      4.   Maintain the types and minimum amounts of insurance required by
section
8-8-4 of this chapter, for any of its activities which may be covered by such
insurance.
      5.   Comply with all applicable federal aviation regulations and city
zoning ordinances.
   C.   Aircraft Charter Services: An "aircraft charter services operator"
means a person engaged in the business of providing air transportation of
persons or property to the general public for hire, either on a charter basis
or as defined by the FAR under part 135. Storage of aircraft primarily used to
provide aircraft charter service and any loading of passengers may only occur
in direct access areas or self-staged remote areas. An aircraft charter
services operator shall, prior to conducting any aircraft charter services in
the airpark, obtain a commercial aeronautical activities permit from the
airport and:
      1.   Lease or own sufficient land to accommodate the proposed operations,
including at least five hundred (500) square feet of enclosed nonhangar gross
floor area (office space) at the same location that is primarily used for the
permitted charter service operations.
      2.   If operating helicopters, provide a paved helicopter landing/takeoff
area meeting FAA standards located outside of the taxilane safety area and a
helicopter parking apron located outside of the taxilane safety area.
      3.   Maintain and provide the city a copy of a current FAR part 135
certificate or provisional FAR part 135 certificate, as well as the aircraft
identification page from the operating specifications, and a current listing of
registration numbers of all aircraft used to provide charter service.
      4.   At all times maintain in effect the types and minimum amounts of
insurance specified in section
8-8-4 of this chapter for any of its activities which may be covered by such
insurance.
      5.   Comply with all applicable federal aviation regulations and city
zoning ordinances.
   D.   Aircraft Management Services: An "aircraft management services
operator" means a person performing one or more of the following services in
the management of another person's aircraft based on the airport or in the
airpark: pilot staffing, record management, and other aircraft related services
not including services detailed in any other section contained herein. Aircraft
management also encompasses the exercise of the privilege of FAR part 91.501
and the brokerage of aircraft through a FAR part 135 operator to the general
public. Aircraft management does not include the control of or operation of
aircraft under FAR part 135. An aircraft management services operator shall:
      1.   Prior to conducting any aircraft management services on another
person's aircraft based on the airport or in the airpark, lease or own
sufficient land to accommodate the proposed operations and obtain a commercial
aeronautical activities permit from the city.
      2.   If conducting aircraft management under FAR part 91.150, occupy at
least five hundred (500) square feet of enclosed nonhangar gross floor area at
the same location.
      3.   At all times maintain in effect the types and minimum amounts of
insurance specified in section
8-8-4 of this chapter, for any of its activities which may be covered by such
insurance.
      4.   Comply with all applicable federal aviation regulations and city
zoning ordinances.
   E.   Aircraft Manufacturing Services: An "aircraft manufacturing services
operator" means a person engaged in the manufacture, fabrication, or assembly
of aircraft or aircraft/aerospace parts, systems and components. An aircraft
manufacturing services operator shall:
      1.   Prior to conducting any aircraft manufacturing services in the
airpark, lease or own sufficient land to accommodate the proposed operations
and obtain an aeronautical business permit from Ogden City.
      2.   At all times maintain in effect the types and minimum amounts of
insurance specified in section
8-8-4 of this chapter, for any of its activities which may be covered by such
insurance.
      3.   Comply with all applicable federal aviation regulations and city
zoning ordinances.
(Ord. 2005-45, 7-19-2005)
8-8-7: AIRPORT ACCESS AGREEMENT:
No person engaged in aeronautical activities on the airpark may access the
airport from any portion of the airpark, unless: a) a valid and current airport
access agreement is entered into between the city and the owner of airpark
property upon which the person conducts such activities; b) all access fees due
and owing pursuant to the airport access agreement are current and paid in
full, and the agreement is not otherwise in breach; c) the owner of the airpark
property, and the owner's tenants, licensees, heirs and assigns are in
compliance with all applicable requirements of the airport access agreement and
this title; d) the person obtains and maintains a valid commercial aeronautical
activities permit for any commercial aeronautical activity engaged in by the
person that benefits from, relies upon, or utilizes airport/airpark access. An
airport access agreement shall be subject to the following:
   A.   Access Fee: An airport access agreement shall require the airpark
property owner to pay an airport access fee in an amount determined by the
city. The access fee shall be no less than an amount which in the sole
discretion of the city, upon consultation with the FAA, is determined to be
sufficient to prevent economic discrimination to on airport aeronautical
businesses and to make the airport as self-sustaining as possible under the
circumstances.
      1.   The amount of the airport access fee may be tied to or be dependent
upon one or more on airport fees, and thus may fluctuate in proportion to
changes in airport fees.
      2.   If during the term of the airport access agreement, a new fee is
imposed by city ordinance applicable to any commercial aeronautical activity
upon the airport, the person who entered into the airport access agreement
shall be required to pay the same fee for similar activities carried on upon
airpark property, which shall constitute an additional airport access fee.
      3.   An airport access fee shall not be imposed for that portion of
airpark property that is not developed in support of aeronautical activities,
nor shall an airport access fee be imposed for undeveloped airpark property or
airpark property developed for nonaeronautical uses, or for use as roadways,
walkways, or green space. An airport access fee shall apply to any automobile
parking used in support of aeronautical activities.
   B.   Term: An airport access agreement shall have a fixed term not to exceed
twenty (20) years, and shall be renewed for an additional ten (10) year renewal
term unless either party to the agreement gives written notice prior to the end
of term of its intent not to renew. However, the airport access fee amount
provided for in the agreement, including any formula from which the airport
access fee is derived, shall be subject to revision and amendment by the city
every ten (10) years during the term of the agreement.
   C.   Restrictive Covenants: An airpark property owner entering into an
airport access agreement may be required to record restrictive covenants
against the title of the property imposing essential elements and requirements
for airport/airpark access consistent with the airport access agreement and
this title to ensure that subsequent interest holders in the property,
including tenants, are bound by and have record notice of the airport access
agreement and the airport/airpark access requirements of this title.
   D.   Tenants: A tenant of an airpark property owner shall not be required to
pay an additional airport access fee for airport/airpark access, provided the
property owner has paid such airport access fee pursuant to an airport access
agreement. Although an owner may contractually obligate a tenant to pay airport
access fees due and owing on the owner's behalf, the owner shall remain
primarily liable to the city for payment of all airport access fees.
   E.   Grant Assurances: An airport access agreement shall be subordinate and
subject to any and all past and future grant assurances accepted by the city
under the federal airport improvement program or similar grant program.
   F.   Assignment: An airport access agreement shall not be assigned without
the prior written approval of the city.
   G.   Off Airpark Access: An airport access agreement shall not grant or
permit airport access to off airpark property via the airpark.
   H.   Mandatory Provisions: An airport access agreement shall be subject to
and shall contain the following provisions, or similar substitute provisions
approved by the city attorney:
      1.   The agreement shall be subordinate to the provisions of any existing
or future agreement between the city and the United States, relative to the
operation or maintenance of the airport, the execution of which has been or may
be required as a condition precedent to the expenditures of federal funds for
the development of the airport.
      2.   The airpark property owner shall protect, defend and hold the city
and its officials, employees, agents and volunteers completely harmless from
and against any and all liabilities, losses, suits, claims, judgments, fines or
demands arising by reason of injury or death of any person or damage to any
property, including all reasonable costs for investigation and defense thereof
(including, but not limited to, attorney fees, court costs and expert fees), of
any nature whatsoever arising out of or incident to this agreement and/or the
use or occupancy of the owner's property or the acts or omissions of city's
officers, agents, employees, contractors, subcontractors, licensees or
invitees, regardless of where the injury, death or damage may occur, unless
such injury, death or damage is caused by the sole negligence of the city. The
city shall give the owner reasonable notice of any such claims or actions. The
owner shall also use counsel reasonably acceptable to city in carrying out its
obligations hereunder. The provisions of this subsection shall survive the
expiration or early termination of this agreement. In carrying out any of the
provisions herein, or in exercising any power or authority granted to owner,
there shall be no liability upon any official of the city, its authorized
assistants, consultants or employees, either personally or as officials of the
city, it being understood that in such matters they act as agents and
representatives of Ogden City Corporation. It is further understood and agreed
that the city assumes no responsibility for any damages or losses that may
occur to the owner's property, except the obligation that the city will not
wilfully, intentionally or negligently damage the property of the owner.
      3.   The owner agrees to comply with provisions of this title, and as it
may hereafter be amended, and with implementing administrative orders as they
may hereafter be adopted or amended. The owner further agrees that more than
three (3) violations of this title during any three (3) month period by owner
or tenants, and their agents or employees; or any other pattern of violations
that manifests reckless disregard for the health, safety and general welfare of
the public and/or airport users shall be a material breach which may terminate
the agreement at the option of the city. The city shall not exercise this
option until it has notified the owner and given the owner a reasonable
opportunity to retrain employees, notify tenants or otherwise demonstrate that
owner and tenants, and their employees and agents can and will conform to this
title. In addition to the above penalties, this agreement may be canceled by
the city if the owner fails to pay, when due, the whole or any part of the
amounts agreed upon for fees and charges and such default continues for thirty
(30) days after the city has demanded payment in writing.
      4.   It is understood and agreed that the owner is an independent
contractor and not an agent or employee of the city, and the city is an
independent contractor and not an agent or employee of the owner with regard to
its acts or omissions hereunder.
      5.   The city or a designated representative may enter the owner's
facility or property on the airpark at reasonable times and for reasonable
purposes without prior notice.
      6.   There is hereby reserved to the city, its successors and assigns,
for the use and benefit of the public a right of flight for the passage of
aircraft in the airspace above the surface of the owner's property subject to
this agreement, together with the right to cause in said airspace such noise as
may be inherent in the operation of aircraft, not known or hereafter used for
navigation of or flight in the air, using said airspace or landing at, taking
off from or operating on the airport.
      7.   The owner expressly agrees for itself, its successors and assigns
that it will not erect nor permit the erection of any structure or object nor
permit the growth of any tree on the owner's property subject to this agreement
exceeding the obstacle identification surfaces as specified by FAR part 77. In
the event the aforesaid covenant is breached, the city reserves the right to
enter upon the land leased hereunder and to remove the offending structure or
object and cut the offending tree, all of which shall be at the expense of the
owner.
      8.   To the extent owner or its tenant operates any commercial
aeronautical activities on airpark property, the owner agrees to operate the
property for the use and benefit of the public and to furnish such activities
and services on a fair, equal and not unjustly discriminatory basis to all
users thereof, and to charge fair, reasonable and not unjustly discriminatory
prices for each unit or service; provided, however, that the owner may be
allowed to make reasonable and nondiscriminatory discounts, rebates or other
similar types of price reductions to volume purchasers.
      9.   The owner, for himself, his heirs, personal representatives,
successors in interest and assigns, as part of the consideration hereof, does
hereby covenant and agree, as a covenant running with the land, that in the
event facilities are constructed, maintained or otherwise operated on the said
property described in this agreement for a purpose for which a department of
transportation program or activity is extended, or for any other purpose
involving the provision of a similar service or benefit, the owner shall
maintain and operate such facilities and services in compliance with all other
requirements imposed pursuant to title 49, code of federal regulations,
department of transportation, subtitle A, office of the secretary, part 21,
nondiscrimination in federally assisted programs of the department of
transportation - effectuation of title VI of the civil rights act of 1964 and
any provisions of said regulations as may in the future be amended.
      10.   The owner, for himself, his personal representatives, successors in
interest and assigns, as part of the consideration hereof, does hereby covenant
and agree, as a covenant running with the land, that no person on the grounds
of sex, race, color, creed, national origin or disability shall be excluded
from participation in, denied the benefits of, or otherwise be subjected to
discrimination in the use of said facilities, that in the construction of any
improvements on, over or under such land and the furnishings of services
thereof, no person on the grounds of sex, race, color, creed, national origin
or disability shall be excluded from participation in, denied the benefits of,
or otherwise be subject to discrimination; that the owner shall use the
premises in compliance with all other requirements imposed by, or pursuant to,
title 49, code of federal regulations, department of transportation, subtitle
A, office of the secretary, part 21, nondiscrimination in federally assisted
programs of the department of transportation - effectuation of title VI of the
civil rights act of 1964, and such provisions of said regulations as may in the
future be amended.
      11.   That in the event of a breach of any of the nondiscrimination
covenants pursuant to part 21 of the regulations of the office of the secretary
of transportation, the city shall have the right to terminate this agreement.
      12.   It is clearly understood and agreed by the owner that no right or
privilege has been granted which would operate to prevent any person, firm or
corporation operating aircraft on the airpark from performing services on its
own aircraft with its own regular employees (including, but not limited to,
maintenance and repair) that it may choose to perform.
      13.   It is understood and agreed that nothing herein contained shall be
construed to grant or authorize the granting of an exclusive right.
      14.   The city reserves the right to further develop or improve the
airport as it sees fit, regardless of the desires or views of the owner and
without interference or hindrance from owner.
      15.   The city reserves the right, but without obligation to owner, to
maintain and keep in repair the landing areas of the airport and all publicly
owned facilities of the airport, together with the right to direct and control
all activities of owner in this regard.
      16.   During the time of war or national emergency, city shall have the
right to lease the landing area of the airport or any part thereof to the
United States government for military or naval use and if such lease is
executed, the provisions of this instrument, insofar as they are inconsistent
with the provisions of the lease to the government, shall be suspended.
      17.   The city reserves the right to take any action it considers
necessary to protect the aerial approaches of the airport against obstruction,
together with the right to prevent lessee from erecting, or permitting to be
erected, any building or other structure on or adjacent to the airport or
airpark which, in the opinion of the city, would limit the usefulness of the
airport or constitute a hazard to aircraft.
      18.   The city reserves the right to temporarily close the airport or any
of the facilities thereon for maintenance, improvement or for the safety of the
public.
(Ord. 2005-45, 7-19-2005)
TITLE 9
WATER AND SEWER
CHAPTER 1
WATER USE AND SERVICE 1
SECTION:
9-1-1: Definitions
9-1-2: Applicability
9-1-3: Water Manager; Duties
9-1-4: Application For Service
9-1-5: Lots Fronting On Streets Without Existing Main
9-1-6: Rates And Billing
9-1-7: Water Meters
9-1-8: Rights And Authority Of City
9-1-9: Rules And Regulations
9-1-10: Prohibited Acts
9-1-11: Service Restoration; Fees; Penalties
9-1-12: Fire Hydrants
9-1-13: Pine View Reservoir; Pollution Control
9-1-14: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. UCA §§
  10-7-12 through 10-7-14, 10-8-14, 10-8-15 and 10-8-71.
9-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
DIVISION OR WATER DIVISION: The water division of the Ogden City public
services department, which division is responsible for the operation of the
city's water utility system.
MANAGER OR WATER MANAGER: The division manager, duly appointed in accordance
with section
2-4-8 of this code, to supervise and manage the division of the public services
department responsible for the operation of the water utility system of the
city.
UTILITY OR WATER UTILITY: The water utility system of the city as operated by
the water division.
(1999 Code; amd. Ord. 2004-39, 6-15-2004, eff. 7-1-2004)
9-1-2: APPLICABILITY:
The rules and regulations contained in this chapter shall apply to all water
supplied by the water utility and are made a part of all contracts for water or
services as if they were fully set forth in each of such contracts.
(1979 Code § 14.08.010; amd. 1999 Code)
9-1-3: WATER MANAGER; DUTIES:
The manager of the water division shall be responsible for the operation of the
water utility system of the city and for all matters relating to said water
utility system. The manager shall:
   A.   Be responsible for all water supply sources, structures, pumps,
treatment equipment and pipe holding areas;
   B.   Maintain and operate all reservoirs, standpipes, water tanks, pump
plants, treatment facilities, distribution pipe mains, service lines, fire
hydrants, valves, regulators and all other facilities required to deliver
culinary water to water users through the city water utility system;
   C.   Direct the location, construction, installation and replacement of all
service lines, distribution mains, fire protection systems and fire hydrants;
   D.   Approve standards for water requirements in annexed areas and in new
developments and subdivisions, all in accordance with the applicable
ordinances, rules and regulations; and
   E.   Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by law.
(1979 Code §§ 14.04.010, 14.04.020; amd. 1999 Code)
9-1-4: APPLICATION FOR SERVICE:
   A.   Required: No water shall be furnished to any house, tenement,
apartment, building, place, premises or lot, whether such water is for the use
of the owner or tenant, unless:
      1.   The application for water is made in writing, signed by such owner
or the owner's duly authorized agent, wherein the owner agrees to pay for all
water furnished thereto according to city ordinance, rules and regulations; and
      2.   The application is accompanied by the deposit required under
subsection F of this section, if applicable.
   B.   Contents: The application shall state fully and truly the purpose for
which water is required and shall agree to conform to, and be governed by, such
ordinance, rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the city for the
control of the water supply. The applicant agrees to be responsible for and pay
all bills due the city on account of materials or labor furnished and provided
in this chapter as well as for all water delivered to the premises.
   C.   Tenants: In case an application to furnish water shall be made by a
tenant of the owner, as a condition of granting the same, such owner or the
owner's duly authorized agent must either cosign the application or sign a
separate agreement which provides that, in consideration of the granting of
such application, the owner will pay for all water furnished such tenant or any
other occupant of the place named in the application, in case such tenant or
occupant shall fail to pay the same in accordance with the city's ordinances,
rules and regulations.
   D.   Consumption Without Application: If water is consumed on any premises
for which an application has not been made, the water supply will be turned off
and will not be turned on again until an application for water has been filed
and approved, any required deposits provided, and applicable fees for turning
off and on have been paid.
   E.   Temporary Service; Circumstances:
      1.   The water manager may authorize temporary service without the
property owner's signature or guarantee under the following circumstances:
         a.   An application is made by person residing at or occupying the
premises in question;
         b.   The account for the premises in question is not delinquent or is
paid in full by applicant;
         c.   A deposit is made equal to the reasonably anticipated cost of
three (3) months' storm and sanitary sewer, water and refuse service;
         d.   The manager is satisfied that the utility will not suffer any
unreasonable financial risk intended to be mitigated by the owner's signature
or guarantee; and
         e.   The manager reasonably believes that the owner is either
unavailable or is refusing to provide a guarantee in order to constructively
evict a tenant without due process of law.
      2.   The required deposit will be refunded only upon receipt of an
application, in compliance with subsection A or D of this section, or upon
closing of the account after payment of all outstanding charges and fees.
   F.   Deposits:
      1.   A deposit shall be required for all metered services from any
applicant or customer who has not maintained good credit with the utility. At
the end of two (2) years, if the customer's credit is satisfactory and without
further delinquencies, the deposit will be credited to the customer's future
utility bills.
An applicant or customer will be considered to have not maintained good credit
if service to the customer either has been shut off, or could be shut off, for
nonpayment or consumption without application.
      2.   The required deposits shall be based on the size of the meter and in
the following amounts:
 
Meter Size (Inches) Deposit Amount
5/8 - 1             $150.00
11/2 - 2            275.00
3 and larger        500.00
 
   G.   Appeals: Denial of service, termination of service, or billing
disputes, including disputes over payments due for storm or sanitary sewer
services or refuse services, may be appealed to the water manager within ten
(10) days of the denial, date of billing, or notice of the city's intent to
disconnect, unless a shorter period of time is indicated in a final notice for
disconnection and the city has previously notified the customer of the city's
intent to disconnect if payment is not received. Disconnection shall be stayed
pending such appeal.
   H.   Relocation Companies: The water manager may authorize service to a
relocation company, who is not the owner of the property, if there are no
delinquencies attributable to the existing owner of record and the applicant
provides a deposit equal to the reasonably anticipated cost of three (3)
months' storm and sanitary sewer, water and refuse service. For purposes of
this subsection, "relocation company" refers to a business managing and
marketing the sale of a home on behalf of an employer that has assumed
responsibility for an employee's home in order to effect a relocation.
(1979 Code §§ 14.08.012, 14.08.070; amd. Ord. 85-1, 1-3-1985; Ord. 90-44, 8-9-
1990; Ord. 91-47, 12-5-1991; 1999 Code; Ord. 2004-44, 6-15-2004, eff. 7-1-2004;
Ord. 2005-42, 6-14-2005)
9-1-5: LOTS FRONTING ON STREETS WITHOUT EXISTING MAIN:
Applications for service to lots or premises that do not front on a street
containing an existing water main shall be approved by the manager, subject to
the following conditions:
   A.   Cost; Owner Participation: If a water main is subsequently installed by
the city, the owner of the property will participate in the cost of the
installation of a water main in accordance with rules and regulations in effect
at the time.
   B.   Disconnect Private Line: The property owner will, at his own expense,
disconnect the private line from the old main and make the connections to the
new main in accordance with rules and regulations in effect at the time.
   C.   Use Of Private Line By Other Persons: No other persons will be
permitted to use the private line without the written consent of the manager.
   D.   Meter Placement: The water meter and its appurtenances shall be placed
as directed by the manager.
   E.   Maintenance: The owner will maintain the private line from the main to
the house at his own expense, with the exception of the water meter, which will
be maintained by the division.
(1979 Code § 14.04.080; amd. 1999 Code)
9-1-6: RATES AND BILLING:
   A.   Designated:
      1.   Metered Water Service: All water service except the delivery of
water which does not meet the requirement for domestic and culinary use, and
sales negotiated by contract shall be metered by water meters of a design and
size approved by the division. Monthly service and usage charges for metered
water service are as follows:
         a.   The service charge, or base rate, shall be charged each customer
to whom water service is available regardless of whether any water is used.
This charge is based on the meter size.
         b.   The applicable meter size and corresponding charge is as follows:
 
Monthly        Begin July 1,   Begin July 1, Begin July 1, Begin July 1, 2015
Service Charge 2012            2013          2014
Meter Size     (Including 2012 Rate Increase Rate Increase Rate Increase
               CPI Increase)
3/4" or smaller $  17.50$  0.88$  0.64-
1"              28.96    1.45    1.06    -
11/2"           40.43    2.02    1.48    -
2"              64.87    3.25    2.38    -
3"              181.08   9.06    6.65    -
4"              227.80   11.39   8.37    -
6"              506.98   25.34   18.64   -
8" or larger    929.11   46.45   34.15   -
Current year rate = (previous year rate + current year rate increase) x (1
+ current year CPI)
Sample calculation: 2013 rate calculation for 3/4" meter assuming 2013 CPI
= 2%: $18.75 = ($17.50 + $0.88) x (1 + .02)
 
         c.   In addition to the above meter size base rate, the following
rates shall be assessed per one thousand (1,000) gallons of water used, based
upon the meter size, the availability of secondary water on the property and
the number of gallons of water used per month:
            (1)   One inch (1") and smaller; except that connections without
secondary water service shall be billed according to the schedule in subsection
A1c(2) of this section between May 1 and October 31:
 
                Begin July 1,        Begin July 1, Begin July 1, Begin July 1,
Gallons Of      2012                 2013          2014          2015
Water Used      2012 Rate (Including
Per Month       2012                 Rate Increase Rate Increase Rate Increase
                CPI Increase)
0 to 6,000      $1.50                $0.08         $0.05         -
6,001 to 12,000 2.30                 0.12          0.08          -
Above 12,000    3.00                 0.15          0.11          -
Current year rate = (previous year rate + current year rate increase) x (1 +
current year CPI)
Sample calculation: 2013 1st tier rate calculation assuming 2013 CPI = 2%:
$1.61 = ($1.50 + $0.08) x (1 + .02)
 
            (2)   One inch (1") and smaller without secondary service between
May 1 and October 31:
 
Gallons Of Begin July 1,             Begin July 1, Begin July 1, Begin July 1,
Water Used 2012                      2013          2014          2015
Per Month  2012 Rate (Including 2012 Rate Increase Rate Increase Rate Increase
           CPI Increase)
0 to 6,000       $1.50 $0.08 $0.05 -
6,001 to 42,000  2.30  0.12  0.08  -
42,001 to 84,000 2.65  0.13  0.10  -
Above 84,000     3.00  0.15  0.11  -
Current year rate = (previous year rate + current year rate increase) x (1
+ current year CPI)
Sample calculation: 2013 1st tier rate calculation assuming 2013 CPI = 2%:
$1.61 = ($1.50 + $0.08) x (1 + .02)
 
            (3)   Larger than one inch (1"):
 
                 Begin July 1,        Begin July 1, Begin July 1, Begin July 1,
Gallons Of       2012                 2013          2014          2015
Water Used       2012 Rate (Including
Per Month        2012                 Rate Increase Rate Increase Rate Increase
                 CPI Increase)
Charge per 1,000 $2.30                $0.12         $0.08         -
gallons
Current year rate = (previous year rate + current year rate increase) x (1 +
current year CPI)
Sample calculation: 2013 rate assuming 2013 CPI = 2%: $2.47 = ($2.30 + $0.12) x
(1 + .02)
 
         d.   In addition, the specified monthly culinary water service and
usage charges shall be increased annually on July 1 in perpetuity by the
percentage change in the west region consumer price index for all items derived
for urban consumers (west region CPI-U), without any seasonal adjustment, for
the prior calendar year and produced by the United States bureau of labor
statistics (CPI). If the CPI falls below zero for the prior calendar year, no
CPI adjustment will be made.
      2.   Discount: A fifty percent (50%) discount on the minimum monthly
service charge, or base rate, described in subsection A1b of this section, will
be given to the following:
         a.   Any user in a single- or two-family dwelling who as an owner of
the property is, each year, granted abatement for taxes on their dwelling in
Weber County under Utah Code Annotated sections 59-2-1106 through 59-2-1108, or
their successors; or
         b.   Any residential user who is the account owner, or who is
described in subsection 9-1-4C of this chapter, and who is currently deployed,
or whose spouse is currently deployed, to a combat zone designated by the
president of the United States and who provides satisfactory proof of
deployment to the utility manager. The reduction shall be limited to the period
of deployment and shall apply to all members of the U.S. military, including
active duty, reserve and national guard troops.
      3.   Increase For Severe Drought Conditions:
         a.   Whenever the mayor determines that severe drought conditions or
other emergency conditions exist affecting the quantity of available water, the
mayor, under an administrative order adopted pursuant to subsection 9-1-8A of
this chapter and after seven (7) days' advance written notice to the city
council, is authorized to increase by twenty percent (20%) the water rates
assessed on the basis of usage (subsection A1c of this section) for all amounts
of water used over:
            (1)   Ten thousand (10,000) gallons per month for meters one inch
(1") and smaller in size;
            (2)   Fifty thousand (50,000) gallons per month for meters one and
one-half to two inches (11/2 - 2") in size; or
            (3)   Two hundred thousand (200,000) gallons per month for meters
over two inches (2") in size.
         b.   For purposes of this subsection "severe drought conditions" shall
be considered to exist whenever the annual rate of precipitation affecting the
Weber River watershed areas drops to a level of seventy percent (70%) or less
than normal. The above determination shall be based on precipitation rates
existing on or after April 1 of the year in which such increase commences. Any
such increase in water rates due to severe drought conditions shall terminate
on November 1 of the applicable year.
         c.   For purposes of this subsection "other emergency conditions"
shall be considered to exist whenever insufficient water resources exist to
meet customer demand over a foreseeable period of time exceeding thirty (30)
days due to: 1) a reduction of available water sources for reasons other than
drought; or 2) a failure of, or damage to, the city's water storage or
treatment facilities. Any such increase in water rates shall terminate at least
thirty (30) days after water resources return to normal levels.
         d.   It is not the intention of this section to restrict or limit
emergency powers of the mayor under a local emergency declared pursuant to
section
12-15-3 of this code that threatens or affects the water resources available to
the city.
   B.   Bills Due; Service Restoration:
      1.   Upon Receipt:
         a.   All water bills shall be due and payable upon receipt.
         b.   As an alternative to payment of actual water usage each month,
the water manager may implement an equal pay program that allows owners with at
least twelve (12) months of billing history at their current address to pay an
equal amount from month to month subject to the terms and conditions adopted by
the mayor in an administrative order.
         c.   Water bills not paid within seventeen (17) days after the billing
date, as shown in the bill, shall be delinquent and service may be
discontinued.
      2.   Delinquent Charges Paid; Hardship Cases: Water service that has been
discontinued because of delinquent bills will not be restored again until all
delinquent charges, together with fees for turning water off and on, have been
paid in full and the required deposit made; provided, that in cases of
hardship, water service may be restored prior to payment in full on conditions
approved by the manager.
      3.   Account Transferred: Uncollected amounts on any delinquent account
may be transferred to any active account under the owner's or applicant's name,
and upon failure to pay said bill after at least five (5) days' prior written
notice, water being served to that account shall be turned off.
   C.   Bills Delivered; Payment Responsibility: Unless otherwise requested,
all water bills and notices relative to water bills will be addressed and
mailed or delivered to the customer at the address receiving water service. On
written request, water bills will be mailed to a different address designated
by the customer. The customer must assume the responsibility of notifying the
division of any change of address or change of person responsible for payment.
Failure to give such notice will constitute sufficient cause for the withdrawal
of billing service to the address designated in the request, and subsequent
bills and notices will be sent to the premises served. Failure to receive a
water bill will not relieve any person of the responsibility of the payment of
said bill within the prescribed period, nor exempt any person from penalties
imposed for delinquency in the payment thereof.
   D.   Unpaid Charges; Deemed Debt To City: Water service charges are levied
and assessed against the person liable under law, ordinance or contract for
water services rendered at the premises receiving water service through the
city and are a debt due the city from and after the end of the accounting
period for which a statement for water services is to be rendered under the
ordinances and regulations governing the sale and distribution of water by the
water utility.
   E.   Unpaid Charges A Lien: All unpaid charges for water service are a lien
against the premises to which water service is rendered or for which such
service is procured from the city, except to the extent limited by Utah law.
Such lien may be foreclosed in any court of competent jurisdiction; or, by
written direction of the water manager, the lien may be waived and an action in
person may be maintained for the collection of such charges.
   F.   Meters:
      1.   Reading; Interpretation: The public services director shall, by
regulation or effective order, prescribe the frequency with which meters of the
various sizes for each type or class of service rendered shall be read, giving
due consideration to the efficiency and economy of the operation of the utility
as well as to the reasonable accuracy and justice to the consumer of the
readings obtained. When meters are read less frequently than once a month, the
measured water service determined by such readings shall be allocated to each
month included in the period of time covered by the reading upon the assumption
that water was consumed at an equal and unvarying rate throughout the period of
time covered, and the rate shall be computed for the service allocated to each
month on that basis.
      2.   Rates; Applicable When: The rates and minimums specified in
subsection A of this section shall apply to consumers using secondary or rented
meters. In cases where more than one meter is required to supply a building or
premises, the water service measured by each of said meters shall be charged
and billed separately at the regular rate for all water measured by each meter,
except that in the case of a compound meter such billing may be combined.
   G.   Temporary Service:
      1.   For Temporary Service Using A Fire Hydrant 1 : Where temporary water
service is provided for temporary purposes from fire hydrants, the consumer
served shall pay, in addition to the regular water rates, the reasonable
charges of the utility for the rental of the fire hydrant meter and the other
equipment incidental to the meter. Such charges shall be fixed by order of the
public services director from time to time on the basis of one hundred fifteen
percent (115%) of the average cost of such special service as determined by the
water manager.
      2.   Temporary Service; New Construction: Water during the construction
of a new building may be paid for at a flat, onetime fee depending on the size
of tap that will be placed in service for permanent water, which fee is payable
at the time of building permit issuance. The general contractor for such new
building will be allowed to use a filler (unmetered connection) during
construction which will need to be the same length as the meter that will be
placed after construction; provided, that a backflow device is installed to
avoid contamination of the public water system, and an automatic shutoff device
is installed to avoid wasting of water. Upon completion of the building,
whether occupied or not, the filler shall be removed and the water, sewer and
refuse signed for on a permanent basis, including installation of a permanent
meter set. Construction water shall not be left running when not in use for
construction purposes. A charge of one hundred dollars ($100.00) will be
assessed each time city personnel find water running without a contractor using
it, and water service may be shut off, and not restored again until payment of
all such assessed charges. The general contractor for the project shall be
responsible for the payment of any assessments, and is responsible to control
the wasting of water by any subcontractor on the construction project. It shall
be unlawful for any person to install, use, or maintain a filler, and to fail
to install and maintain the required meter, except as provided above for new
construction. A charge of one hundred dollars ($100.00) will be assessed
against the owner of any premises, if a filler is used on the premises for any
purpose other than new construction as provided above, which amount shall be
due and payable prior to the provision or restoration of permanent water
service.
   H.   Sale Of Surplus Water:
      1.   Domestic And Culinary: The mayor is authorized, at his or her
discretion, to furnish domestic and culinary water service to consumers outside
the corporate limits of the city when and only when he determines that such
service may be rendered out of culinary and domestic water which is surplus and
not required for the ordinary use, provided service to consumers outside the
city limits may be discontinued at any time. The monthly rates charged for such
water service outside the corporate limits shall be twice the monthly rate
charged to consumers within the city, and the monthly minimum charges to be
charged to and paid by consumers outside the city limits shall be double those
specified for consumers within the city.
      2.   Other: The mayor is further authorized, in his or her discretion,
from time to time, to furnish and sell to consumers or water users inside or
outside the corporate limits of the city such quantities of water not meeting
standards for domestic and culinary use as he determines to be surplus and not
required for the ordinary uses of consumers of domestic and culinary water
served by the utility. The price to be charged for such water shall be such
price as the mayor shall determine to be fair and reasonable under all of the
facts and circumstances existing. Contracts for the furnishing of such water
shall all be subject to termination at any time. At any time, the mayor may
declare that the water subject thereto is necessary for the ordinary uses of
consumers of water for culinary or domestic purposes or for the municipal
purposes of the city, including reservation thereof for future distribution.
Nothing contained in this subsection shall be construed to authorize the sale,
transfer or encumbrance of any water rights owned or held by the city.
   I.   Supplying Free Water Service; Prohibited: The utility shall not supply
free water or service to the city, departments or divisions thereof, or to any
person, firm, public or private corporation, or to any public agency or
instrumentality. All use, whenever practical, shall be metered. When metering
is not feasible, the water use shall be estimated using standard formulas to
determine water requirements and agencies or organizations in accordance with
the rates in subsection A of this section.
   J.   Monies; Depositing In Water Utility Fund: All monies received by the
utility from the sale of water or the sale of bonds, facilities or equipment or
from any other source shall be paid to the city treasurer, who shall deposit
such monies in a separate water utility fund which shall be maintained separate
from other public funds.
      1.   Separate records and accounts shall be kept for the fund and all
costs of maintenance, operation, bonded indebtedness and capital improvement
for the utility shall be paid from the fund.
      2.   Charges for water service are intended to provide sufficient revenue
for the costs of all water services and a fair return to the city as payment in
lieu of property and franchise taxes.
   K.   Charitable Contributions: The water manager may establish a program
whereby utility customers may make charitable contributions over and above
their monthly utility bill for the purpose of providing assistance to low
income customers in paying their city utility bill, including those portions of
the bill as may be related to the provision of sanitary sewer services and
refuse services. Any such program shall be implemented in such a manner so as
to ensure proper use of any donated funds. Program administration may be
contracted to a nonprofit, charitable organization; provided, that
administrative costs shall not be excessive.
   L.   New Owners: The utility may not require an applicant to pay for water
that was furnished to the premises before the applicant became the owner of the
property, nor may it deny service to a property based on delinquencies of a
prior owner.
(1979 Code §§ 14.32.010, 14.32.020, 14.32.030, 14.32.040, 14.32.050, 14.32.090,
14.32.100, 14.32.110, 14.32.120, 14.32.130, 14.32.131; amd. Ord. 80-31, 6-26-
1980; Ord. 81-28, 6-25-1981; Ord. 82-13, 3-18-1982; Ord. 83-10, 3-3-1983; Ord.
85-1, 1-3-1985; Ord. 90-44, 8-9-1990; Ord. 91-47, 12-5-1991; Ord. 96-28, 7-19-
1996; 1999 Code; Ord. 2001-3, 1-2-2001; Ord. 2001-38, 6-12-2001, eff. 1-1-2002;
Ord. 2001-42, 7-3-2001, eff. retroactive to 7-1-2001; Ord. 2002-38, 6-18-2002,
eff. 7-1-2002; Ord. 2003-28, 6-17-2003, eff. 7-1-2003; Ord. 2004-30, 5-25-2004;
Ord. 2004-39, 6-15-2004, eff. 7-1-2004; Ord. 2004-44, 6-15-2004, eff. 7-1-2004;
Ord. 2004-45, 6-15-2004, eff. 7-1-2004; Ord. 2005-39, 6-14-2005, eff. 7-1-2005;
Ord. 2006-33, 6-13-2006; Ord. 2007-41, 6-12-2007; Ord. 2007-79, 12-18-2007;
Ord. 2008-28, 6-10-2008, eff. 11-1-2008; Ord. 2008-47, 10-7-2008; Ord. 2009-32,
4-28-2009; Ord. 2010-22, 6-22-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; Ord. 2011-32, 6-21-2011,
eff. 7-1-2011; Ord. 2012-23, 5-22-2012; Ord. 2014-29, 6-24-2014; Ord. 2015-28,
6-16-2015; Ord. 2016-23, 4-12-2016; Ord. 2019-23, 6-11-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  9-1-12 of this chapter.
9-1-7: WATER METERS:
   A.   Installation; Tampering Prohibited: All water meters shall be installed
by authorized employees of the division. It shall be unlawful for any person
other than authorized employees of the division to remove any water meter or to
interfere with, damage, deface or in any way tamper with or alter the
functioning of any meter or to permit any other person to do the same.
   B.   Consumer Liability: Every consumer shall be liable for all damage to
water meters caused by hot water back pressure, accident, water hammer caused
by equipment on the premises, other conditions or equipment on the premises or
by his negligence or that of his family, servant or agents. A consumer shall
also be liable for all water consumed while a meter is missing or inoperative
and for the costs of repainting or replacing the meter on his premises,
including a reasonable service charge.
(1979 Code § 14.08.100; amd. 1999 Code)
9-1-8: RIGHTS AND AUTHORITY OF CITY:
   A.   Restriction Of Water Use:
      1.   Generally: Whenever the mayor, after investigating the various needs
for water in the city and the supply of water available to meet such needs,
determines that it is in the best interests of the city to place restrictions
on the use of water distributed in the city, he shall have the authority, by
administrative order, to place reasonable restrictions, as to time, manner and
place, on the use of water for any purpose whatsoever within the limits of the
city. All such orders shall take effect when filed with the city recorder and
published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city.
      2.   Emergency: Whenever any immediate threat arises to the quantity or
quality of the city water supply, or any part thereof, that creates an
emergency necessitating immediate remedial action, the mayor shall have the
authority to promulgate such temporary rules as are reasonably necessary in
effect when published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city
or, if such publication is not immediately available, when such rules are
announced through other means of communication calculated to give the public
reasonable notice.
   B.   Water Shutoff; Nonliability: The division may shut off the water in its
mains at any time and without notice to make repairs and/or extensions or for
any other reasonable purpose. Neither the city nor the utility shall be liable
for any breakage, damage or injury whatsoever that may result from the shutting
off of water for any such purpose.
   C.   Right Of Entry: Any inspector or other authorized agent of the division
shall have access at reasonable hours to all premises supplied with water by
the city for the purpose of ensuring that applicable ordinances, orders, rules
and regulations are complied with and to make any examination of the plumbing
or water fixtures that may be reasonably necessary.
(1979 Code §§ 14.08.030, 14.08.040, 14.08.050, 14.08.060; amd. 1999 Code; Ord.
2004-30, 5-25-2004)
9-1-9: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   Unauthorized Water Use: It is unlawful for the owner or occupant of any
premises to supply water to others or to permit others to secure water through
their service line by hose or other devices without written permission from the
manager. If such unauthorized use of water or services is permitted to continue
after a five (5) day written notice from the utility to discontinue such use,
the water supply shall be turned off and shall not be restored until the person
authorized to use the service line has deposited with the division the sum of
fifty dollars ($50.00) to be forfeited in the event of any future violation and
has paid the applicable charge for turning the water off and on again.
   B.   Defective Fixtures: Water service will be discontinued to any premises
where there are defective or leaking closets, faucets or other plumbing
fixtures that are not repaired or replaced after notice from the division. All
fixtures must be closed when not in use.
   C.   Equipment Maintenance:
      1.   a. Consumers shall keep their sprinklers, hydrants, faucets, valves,
hose, curb stop, angle stops, meter box, meter box ring and cover and all other
fixtures and service pipes in good condition at their own expense.
         b.   Within public rights of way inside of the city, the water utility
shall maintain service pipes serving retail consumers and running from the main
to the closer of:
            (1)   The curb stop if a curb stop has been installed;
            (2)   Twelve inches (12") behind the curb if no curb stop has been
installed; or
            (3)   Five feet (5') behind the street pavement if no curb stop has
been installed and there is no curb.
         c.   Notwithstanding subsection C1b of this section, the water utility
is not responsible to maintain, repair or pay any cost of maintaining or
repairing service pipes:
            (1)   At any point on the consumer's side of the water meter;
            (2)   Located underneath a driveway;
            (3)   At any point beyond the water main or transmission line for
service to consumers whose property is not inside the corporate limits of Ogden
City or who are not retail consumers of the water utility; or
            (4)   At any point beyond the water main or transmission line in
other locations where water service is provided in a nonstandard way, such as
subdivisions with private water infrastructure or on a combined fire line and
service line.
         d.   Whenever it is found that service pipes, other than service pipes
maintained by the water utility as described in subsection C1b of this section
and limited by subsection C1c of this section, or any fixture on consumer's
premises is broken or not in serviceable condition, the consumer shall, upon
notice, make the necessary repairs or replacements at the consumer's expense.
Should a consumer fail to do so, the water shall be turned off or service
limited and not turned on again until said repairs or replacements have been
made.
      2.   At the discretion of the manager, the utility may make repairs to
the angle valve, if determined to be necessary for adequate control of water.
In such event, the manager is authorized to charge the owner for the actual
cost of materials incurred in such repair.
      3.   If the meter box is not in an allowed location as provided in
section
9-2-6 of this title, the city will install a new meter box at the proper
location at city expense when either the property owner finds it necessary to
replace their service line or when repair is required to a service pipe running
from the main to a meter box not located within the public right of way. The
property owner or the owner's plumber shall be responsible for removal and
disposal of the old meter box and the installation or restoration of
improvements associated with the relocation of the service line.
   D.   Separate Fixtures; Required When: Except where there is a house or
houses situated in the rear of a house fronting on a street and on the same
building lots and owned by the same person, firm or corporation, service pipes
must be so arranged that each separate house or premises is supplied from a
separate tap on the water main and controlled by a separate stopcock placed
within or near the line of the street curb.
   E.   Multiple Fixtures:
      1.   Actions Designated: Where water is being supplied to one or more
houses or buildings or families through one service pipe, the manager may, at
the manager's discretion:
         a.   Discontinue water service to the single line until separate
service lines are provided for each house or building;
         b.   Require each house or building to be metered from the common
service line; or
         c.   Continue to supply water service on the condition that one party
or person assumes full liability for all water supplied to all parties
concerned through the common service line.
      2.   Common Service Line; Maintenance: In the event the manager elects to
permit the continued use of a common service line under one of the provisions
of subsection E1 of this section, it shall be the responsibility of all persons
receiving water therefrom to maintain the common service line from the relevant
location described in subsection C1 of this section to the house or buildings
serviced by the line. In the event of the failure of such persons to make any
necessary repairs to such line after ten (10) days' written notice, the supply
of water to such line may be turned off until such repairs are made.
(Ord. 2015-43, 9-22-2015)
9-1-10: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   Misuse Of Facilities; Liability: No person shall use either the water
or the facilities of the utility without prior written permission, nor shall
any water facilities be used in any manner nor by any person except in
accordance with such written permission. Any person using such water or
facilities contrary to the provisions of this subsection shall be liable for
the reasonable value thereof, for any damages resulting therefrom and for the
cost of preventing or terminating such unauthorized use of water or facilities.
   B.   Misuse Of Water: It is unlawful for any person to misuse, waste, or in
any way fail to conserve water distributed in the city for either culinary,
commercial or irrigating purposes.
   C.   Diversion Or Damage: It is unlawful to maliciously or wilfully divert
any portion of the water supply of the utility or to corrupt the same or render
it impure, or to damage or to destroy any canal, aqueduct, pipe, conduit,
equipment or other property used or required for the procurement or
distribution of water.
   D.   Interference: It shall be unlawful to remove, damage, destroy or deface
any property of the utility or in any way interfere, disturb or interrupt the
operations, work or activities of the utility.
   E.   Contamination: It is unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any
buildings, pens, stalls or fenced enclosures in which horses, cattle, sheep or
other animals are kept, or to permit any such animals to be corralled, to be
bedded or to run at large in that area that extends three hundred feet (300')
on each side of every stream from which water is taken for the city water
utility system and fifteen (15) miles upstream from the point of diversion, or
in any area within three hundred feet (300') from the maximum high water line
storage elevation of any reservoir from which water is taken for the city water
utility system. It shall also be unlawful to carry on any other activities in
said areas that may in any way contaminate any water or water source used by
the city water utility system. All closets, privies, toilets or outhouses in
said area must be provided with effective septic tanks or other suitable
sanitary facilities to prevent the contamination of such water or water sources
and may be constructed only after written approval by the manager and by the
county health department.
   F.   Time Restrictions: No outside use of water shall be allowed between ten
o'clock (10:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. for the watering of lawns or
other landscaping from June 1 through September 30 of each year, unless a
written permit has been granted by the manager for the watering of new
landscaping planted during the water season then in effect. The adoption of
this regulation is not intended to restrict the mayor's power to adopt stricter
or more extensive regulations under subsection 9-1-8A of this chapter.
(1979 Code §§ 14.08.020, 14.08.120, 14.08.140, 14.12.010, 14.16.010; amd. 1999
Code; Ord. 2004-30, 5-25-2004)
9-1-11: SERVICE RESTORATION; FEES; PENALTIES:
   A.   Payment In Full; Required: Whenever water has been turned off or water
service limited in accordance with this chapter or any other ordinance, rule or
regulation of the city, the water shall not be turned on again nor shall
service be restored to normal, unless and until all sums due the city with
respect to such water service or with respect to storm and sanitary sewer and
refuse services to the premises and the service fee for turning off or limiting
service or turning on or restoring service to normal have all been paid in
full, and the required deposits provided.
   B.   Enumerated:
      1.   There is hereby established a service fee of fifteen dollars
($15.00) for delivery to the customer of the written notice of intent to
disconnect water service after the delinquency.
      2.   There is established a service fee in the sum of twenty dollars
($20.00) for turning off or limiting water service and a further service fee of
twenty dollars ($20.00) for turning on or restoring to normal water service in
any such case, to be assessed only in the event water is turned off or on under
the provisions of this title.
      3.   If a city employee goes to the premises in order to turn off service
based on any delinquency and collects the delinquent amount without having to
actually turn off service, a service fee of ten dollars ($10.00) for the trip
to the premises shall be charged.
   C.   Meter Removal; Charge: In the event a water customer turns the water
back on after it has been turned off by the city and the city removes the water
meter to enforce this turnoff and later replaces the water meter, a charge of
fifty dollars ($50.00) in addition to all other fees and charges shall be
assessed and be collected for such additional service.
   D.   Illegal Hookup: In the event an owner or occupant makes an unauthorized
connection by bypassing a meter box from which the water meter has been removed
by the division, a charge of fifty dollars ($50.00) in addition to all other
fees and charges shall be assessed, which charge shall be collected prior to
reinstatement of water services.
   E.   Penalty For Illegal Watering:
      1.   In the event of water usage in violation of the time restrictions
imposed under subsection 9-1-10F of this chapter or administrative order
adopted by the mayor pursuant to subsection 9-1-8A of this chapter:
         a.   For the first offense, a written warning will be issued to the
customer either personally or by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the
address listed on the application for service applicable to the location of the
violation.
         b.   For the second offense in the same year, a civil penalty in the
amount of twenty five dollars ($25.00) shall be imposed, in addition to all
other fees and charges assessed herein, which penalty shall be collected in the
same manner as other fees and charges assessed under this chapter.
         c.   For subsequent offenses in the same calendar year, an additional
civil penalty shall be imposed in the same manner, but each subsequent civil
penalty shall be double the amount of the penalty previously imposed on the
same customer; provided that no penalty shall exceed an amount of eight hundred
dollars ($800.00).
      2.   No more than one civil penalty may be imposed on any one day.
      3.   If such penalties are not paid when due, water will be shut off and
not reinstated again as provided herein, until all such penalties are paid in
full.
(1979 Code § 14.08.180; amd. Ord. 81-28, 6-25-1981; Ord. 84-9, 4-5-1984; Ord.
85-1, 1-3-1985; Ord. 92-8, 1-9-1992; Ord. 2001-3, 1-2-2001; Ord. 2004-30, 5-25-
2004; Ord. 2004-44, 6-15-2004, eff. 7-1-2004)
9-1-12: FIRE HYDRANTS 1 :
   A.   Installation, Maintenance And Removal: Fire hydrants may be installed
on private property only with the written approval of the water manager. All
fire hydrants, whether on private or public property, must meet the
requirements of the city's subdivision title. Hydrants on private property will
be maintained by the utility at the cost of the property owner and will be used
only in case of fire, except as provided in subsection B of this section. If
the property owner fails to pay the cost of maintaining any such fire hydrant,
or if it is used for an unauthorized purpose, the water to the hydrant will be
shut off. It will not be turned on again until all costs, including a
reasonable fee for turning the water off and on, have been paid. In the event
the water is shut off because of unauthorized use, the manager may, in the
manager's discretion, remove the fire hydrant or require that the water to the
fire hydrant be metered at the expense of the property owner.
(1979 Code § 14.20.010; amd. 1999 Code)
   B.   Temporary Private Water Service:
      1.   Authorized When: Water service may be supplied to a private person
through a public or private fire hydrant, or through other connections designed
primarily for the use of the city, only upon issuance of a special written
permit by the manager, after a determination by him that it is impractical to
render the desired service through any other means. Nothing except temporary
service for a period of not more than sixty (60) days may be rendered through
such facilities, but such permits may be renewed by the manager for successive
periods upon a showing that the necessity for such service continues without
the fault or neglect of the consumer. Permits may be revoked for failure to
comply with the rules and regulations of the utility or the ordinances of the
city. Such service may be rendered only through facilities and connections
approved and connected by the division. Such facilities and connections shall
be so designed and installed as to permit the use of the fire hydrant or other
connection for public use for its primary purpose with a minimum of delay in
making required adjustments.
(1979 Code § 14.20.020; amd. 1999 Code)
      2.   Application: Application for the use of water from fire hydrants or
other connections shall be made upon forms furnished by the division, stating
the purpose for which the water is to be used and the justification for
issuance of a permit. The division will furnish equipment to place the hydrant
in use, including hydrant gate valves, hydrant water meters, hose and hydrant
wrench. A deposit in the amount of the value of any equipment provided by the
division must accompany the application and will be refunded upon return of the
equipment. The hydrant must be operated in accordance with the instructions and
the rules and regulations of the division. Only hydrant wrenches approved by
the division shall be used in operating the hydrant. Any damage to the fire
hydrant or the equipment of the utility will be charged to the applicant and
may be deducted from his deposit.
(1979 Code § 14.20.030; amd. 1999 Code)
   C.   Prohibited Acts:
      1.   Unauthorized Possession Of Keys: It is unlawful for any person,
without authority, to have in his possession any wrench for a fire hydrant or a
gate key for a water gate valve.
(1979 Code § 14.20.040)
      2.   Obstruction; Parking: It is unlawful for any person to park any
vehicle within fifteen feet (15') of any fire hydrant, or to place any goods or
materials or to plant any trees, plants, flowers or shrubs within ten feet
(10') of any fire hydrant, or to in any way interfere with or impede the free
access of the fire department to any fire hydrant.
(1979 Code § 14.20.050; amd. Ord. 2005-26, 4-19-2005)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection 9-1-6G of this chapter.
9-1-13: PINE VIEW RESERVOIR; POLLUTION CONTROL:
   A.   Findings; Jurisdiction: The city draws a portion of its domestic and
culinary water from waters impounded in Pine View Reservoir and the city has a
duty to its water users to protect the reservoir from pollution and
contamination. The city has jurisdiction, pursuant to Utah Code Annotated
section 10-8-15, to protect said waters and all other water from which it draws
its city water supply and to penalize persons polluting or contaminating the
same.
(1979 Code § 14.24.010; amd. Ord. 83-36, 12-22-1983; 1999 Code)
   B.   Enforcement: All peace officers of the state, including regular and
special officers of the city police department and authorized personnel of the
division, are authorized and charged with the duty to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
(1979 Code § 14.24.060; amd. Ord. 83-36, 12-22-1983; 1999 Code)
   C.   Pollution Prohibited: No person shall do any act whatsoever which tends
to make impure or unwholesome the water in Pine View Reservoir; nor cast or
drop into or allow to float in or fall into the water of said reservoir any
filth, sewage, carrion, garbage or any excretion, clothing, paper, rags or
other extraneous substance; nor do any act or thing that would pollute or tend
to pollute the water of said reservoir.
(1979 Code § 14.24.050; amd. Ord. 83-36, 12-22-1983)
9-1-14: PENALTY:
   A.   In the event of the violation of any of the provisions of chapters 1
through 4 of this title or any administrative order, rule, or regulation
promulgated under the authority thereof or any amendments thereof, the water
division may turn off the water supply to the premises where such violation
occurred, and such water supply need not be turned on again until the violation
has ceased; any damage resulting therefrom has been paid; all expenses incurred
by the city, including the expenses of turning such water supply off and on,
have been paid; all service fees and civil penalties have been paid; and the
division has been given reasonable assurance that such violation will not be
repeated.
   B.   Any person violating any provision of this title shall be deemed guilty
of a class B misdemeanor, punishable as set forth in title 1, chapter 4 of this
code.
   C.   The provisions of this title may also be enforced by injunction,
mandamus, abatement, or any other appropriate judicial action in law or equity.
   D.   All remedies provided in this section for such violation shall be
cumulative and shall be in addition to all other remedies that may be available
to the city, its departments and employees and any other party injured by such
violation.
(1979 Code § 14.36.010; amd. 1999 Code; Ord. 2004-30, 5-25-2004; Ord. 2005-29,
5-24-2005)
CHAPTER 2
INSTALLATION OF PLUMBING FACILITIES
SECTION:
9-2-1: Connections
9-2-2: Permits
9-2-3: Corporation Stops And Taps
9-2-4: Hookup Fees
9-2-5: Water Main Pipes And Service Laterals; Standards
9-2-6: Meters And Meter Boxes; Standards
9-2-7: Stop Boxes; Standards And Regulations
9-2-8: Private Fire Protection Systems
9-2-9: Plumbers; Generally
9-2-10: Regulations; Generally
9-2-11: Mandatory Connection; Annexation; Secondary Water
9-2-1: CONNECTIONS:
All connections with the water mains or facilities of the utility and all work
on any service pipe between the curb line and the main line of the water
utility shall be performed by a licensed plumber. All connections or work shall
comply with the provisions of this chapter and the plumbing code as adopted
under title 16 of this code.
(1979 Code § 14.10.010; amd. 1999 Code)
9-2-2: PERMITS:
   A.   Required: It shall be unlawful for any plumber to make any
installation, alteration or extension of any water pipe or fixture or to move
or relocate any meter or meter box, or to change the location of pipe entry
into any building without a permit issued by the utility. The permit shall
describe the extent to which the alterations or extensions are to be made. When
the work involves the replacing of an old service line with a new service line,
all pipes, curb stops, angle stops, meters, meter boxes and other facilities
shall be adjusted to conform to existing rules and regulations. All extensions
of water pipes and fixtures must be made by a licensed plumber.
   B.   Tap Permits: All taps shall be made by the utility upon application
therefor by the plumber. Applications for taps for service lines two inches
(2") or larger must be accompanied by two (2) copies of a plat plan showing the
location of the tap, the building or structure to be served, the service line
and the meter box, and also by two (2) copies of a plan and section of the
meter box showing the dimensions and design of the cover and the steel manhole.
Both drawings shall be submitted for the approval of the water manager, who
shall return one copy of each drawing showing any changes that must be made
prior to installation. The application and required drawings must be filed at
least forty eight (48) hours before a permit for tapping shall be issued. After
a permit is issued, twenty four (24) hours' notice must be given for the making
of any tap. A separate service line and tap shall be required for each
customer.
(1979 Code §§ 14.10.020, 14.10.030; amd. 1999 Code)
9-2-3: CORPORATION STOPS AND TAPS:
   A.   Installation; Charges: The utility will furnish the corporation stops
and insert them in the water mains in all cases. It is unlawful for any person
whomsoever, except a duly authorized agent or employee of the water division,
to insert any corporation stop or make any tap in the water mains or pipes of
the city. The charges for the materials, labor and other costs incident to the
tapping of any water main as aforesaid shall be in accordance with section
9-2-4 of this chapter. Taps may be made free of charge or at a reduced amount
by the water division when the system will be improved thereby. All fees must
be paid at the time of application for such services.
(1979 Code § 14.10.040; amd. 1999 Code)
   B.   Sizes: The size of the corporation stop and the service pipe connected
therewith must be submitted to the utility for its approval at the time the
application for permit is made. If in the opinion of the water manager the line
and tap are not adequate to deliver water to the premises, the plumber shall be
notified of the required size.
      1.   No tap or water service piping for culinary water to any premises
from the main meter box shall be smaller than one inch (1").
      2.   All taps one and one-half inches (11/2") and two inches (2") on
ductile iron and steel mains up to and including twelve inch (12") diameter
will be made with service clamps unless in the opinion of the water manager a
steel line is in such a condition as to warrant a tapping sleeve.
      3.   All taps three inches (3") and larger will be made with a tapping
sleeve and vale on both ductile iron and steel.
(1979 Code § 14.10.050; amd. 1999 Code)
9-2-4: HOOKUP FEES:
   A.   Fees; Designated: All connections to the city waterworks water mains,
or those water mains that are to be installed and will become part of the
city's water system, or any other line to be connected to the city's water
main, including culinary meters of all size and major non-culinary water users
shall be charged a fee as necessary to account for the cost of labor,
equipment, fifteen percent (15%) overhead, parts and materials, including the
cost incurred by the city for the water meter installed as part of the
connection. Costs for labor and equipment shall be billed in accordance with
the following table:
   OGDEN CITY WATER UTILITY HOOKUP FEES
 
Main Size Tap Size Labor Costs Equipment Costs
Any size 1"  $ 150.07 $ 49.68
Any size 2"  189.40   56.92
Any size 4"  312.57   197.68
Any size 6"  312.57   228.73
Any size 8"  312.57   254.61
Any size 10" 375.70   405.72
Any size 12" 375.70   440.91
 
   B.   Effect On Existing Contracts: Existing contracts concerning water
connection fees will be complied with, and, in the event an existing contract
is applicable, the connection fee will be the sum provided in the applicable
contract or the sum provided in the foregoing schedules, whichever sum is
greater.
   C.   Hydrant Flow And Fire System Testing Fees: A fee of seventy five
dollars ($75.00) is required to cover the cost of manpower, equipment and water
usage for hydrant and fire system flow tests.
   D.   Bacteriological Testing Fee:  A fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) is
required to cover the cost of labor, equipment, and testing equipment for
bacteriological testing. After hours testing will include an additional thirty
dollars ($30.00) for added labor costs.
(Ord. 2011-33, 6-21-2011, eff. 7-1-2011; amd. Ord. 2019-29, 7-16-2019)
9-2-5: WATER MAIN PIPES AND SERVICE LATERALS; STANDARDS:
The following standards shall be applicable to the installation, repairs or
replacement of all main water pipes and service laterals:
   A.   Installation, Repairs Or Replacement: All main water pipes three inches
(3") and larger shall be of ductile iron pipe, class 51. All service laterals
two inches (2") and smaller shall be of type K copper from the connection at
the main to the water meter or control valve. Service laterals three inches
(3") and larger shall be of ductile iron, class 51, except in certain or
private developments under the following conditions:
      1.   Ownership of all water pipes and service laterals extending from the
owner's side of the meter, together with all maintenance and repair
responsibilities, shall be retained by the developer or association governing
the operation and maintenance of the development;
      2.   Main water pipes and service laterals located solely within the
private development that feed fire hydrants shall be either ductile iron pipe,
class 51, or C-19900 PVC pipe, class 150, D.R. 18 or D.R. 14;
      3.   The private development shall be supplied by a single service
lateral and a single master meter. If there are fire hydrants located within
the development, the master meter shall be a detector type to allow full flow
of water for firefighting purposes;
      4.   Service laterals supplying the development sizes three inches (3")
and larger shall be of ductile iron, class 51, from the connection at the main
to the water meter;
      5.   All water pipe regulated by this chapter shall be installed
according to specifications and requirements of the public services department;
      6.   "Main water pipes" are defined as those water pipes that provide
water service to customer service connections and fire hydrant service
connections by means of service laterals;
      7.   "Service laterals" are defined as those water pipes that are
connected to the main water pipe and provide customer service to a fire hydrant
or a single customer that consists of one or more buildings or dwellings.
   B.   Grade And Class: Both copper and ductile iron class 51 or higher shall
be of a grade and class sufficient to stand working pressures of one hundred
fifty (150) pounds per square inch. The pipe shall be laid not less than forty
eight inches (48") below the surface of the ground. In running the service pipe
underneath a curb and gutter, the forty eight inches (48") of cover shall be
mandatory.
   C.   Copper; Placement: In placing copper service pipe, the pipe at the
connection to the corporation stop at the main must bend in "S" form approved
by the water manager to allow for movement of pipe and/or to prevent rupture
due to settlement. Where it is necessary for copper pipe to be connected to
copper pipe, the connection must be made with a forty five degree (45°) flared
three (3) part union or a compression coupling. No union of this type shall be
permitted in any one inch (1") copper service line extending less than one
hundred feet (100') in length, or in any larger copper service extending less
than forty feet (40') in length.
   D.   Ductile Iron; Placement: In placing ductile iron service pipe, a
compression type coupling with metal tipped gaskets shall be placed in the line
not more than thirty six inches (36") or less than twelve inches (12") from the
face of the tapping valve. Sizes larger than three inches (3") shall be
connected directly to the tapping valve.
   E.   Stop And Drain Valves: A stop and drain valve must be relocated inside
the foundation wall of every building connected to a service lateral. If it is
necessary for the utility to shut off the service lateral at the curb for
repairs within the building because there is not a shutoff valve, a reasonable
charge as approved by the water manager will be made for the service and the
line will not be turned on again until a shutoff valve inside the building wall
is in operation.
   F.   Angle Valves: When service pipe is run only at a point back of the curb
for future use, meter box, ring and cover and an angle valve shall be placed
not further than twelve inches (12") from the inside face of the curb.
   G.   Fixtures: Fixtures for general use must not be attached to elevator,
standpipe or motor connections, but must be entirely separate from other
connections. Service pipes to houses which are built out to the street line and
which include an area extending under the sidewalk must be run down the outside
of the curb and under the wall around such area so as to be securely protected
from frost. The stop and drain valve shall be located inside the building wall.
   H.   Inspections: All runs of pipe outside of buildings, whether of original
or extension work, and all disconnected services must be inspected and approved
by the city before being covered up. Where a tap is to be made, pipes must be
connected up on the trench ready for immediate attachment to the main, so that
the pipes may be properly tested while connected.
   I.   Nonconforming Pipe:
      1.   In putting in a service, no plumber will be permitted to make use of
pipe previously run to curb which does not conform to the rules existing at the
time such service is to be used. Before making such connections, the existing
pipe must first be approved by the utility. If the existing pipe is not
approved, the owner will be required to have it changed at his expense and if
an entirely new service shall be put in, the old one shall be disconnected at
the expense of the owner before the water is turned on to the new service.
      2.   This rule shall also apply to premises for which plumbing has
already been installed, and if the plumbing does not conform with existing
rules it must be overhauled at the owner's expense and approved by the utility
before it is connected with the main.
   J.   Existing Services; Disconnection: In all cases where one or more
service pipes are connected, the main and new service is installed to replace
the existing service or services, the existing service or services shall be
disconnected at the main at the expense of the owner or consumer, before tap is
made for the new service.
   K.   Approval: All work upon and alterations or extension of water pipes and
size of pipes shall be approved by the utility.
(1979 Code § 14.10.060; amd. Ord. 86-49, 12-11-1986; 1999 Code; Ord. 2004-39,
6-15-2004, eff. 7-1-2004)
9-2-6: METERS AND METER BOXES; STANDARDS:
All meters and meter boxes will meet the standards and specifications
established by this section. Prior to the installation of any such meters or
meter boxes, two (2) prints of drawings thereof showing fittings and dimensions
must be submitted to the utility to ensure compliance with the standards
prescribed herein. One print showing the approval of the utility will be
returned to the applicant.
   A.   One Inch Line: All necessary meters and meter boxes for lines one inch
(1") in size or less shall be furnished by the utility and the cost thereof
included with the hookup fee.
   B.   Over One Inch Line: Where meters over one inch (1") in size are
required, the meter shall be furnished by the utility and the meter box will be
provided by the owner; provided, however, that all such meter boxes shall
comply with standards and specifications of the city.
   C.   Bypass Line: All meters one and one-half inches (11/2") and over must
be provided with a bypass line. The meter must be placed on the direct water
line.
   D.   Size Restriction: No meter larger in size than the tap on the water
main will be installed on any service.
   E.   Placement: All meter boxes must be placed in the frontage of the public
right of way for the lot or parcel being served, and within ten (10) to fifteen
feet (15') of the property line of said lot, so that the street side of the box
is within twelve inches (12") of the back of the street curb. If there is no
curb, the street side of the meter box shall be placed in the public right of
way within five feet (5') of the back edge of pavement.
   F.   Location Restrictions: No meter will be installed in the following
locations:
      1.   Any place that is, or may be, unclean, hazardous or not easily
accessible to employees of the utility.
      2.   In any pit or well, below any plumbing fixtures or in the proximity
of any plumbing fixtures in a toilet room.
      3.   Below stairways, landing, show windows, platforms or similar
structures.
      4.   In the driveway leading to a garage.
   G.   Correction For Violation: In the event the location of any meter is in
violation of the preceding subsection or comes to be in violation because of
subsequent construction or other acts by the owner or consumer and the
violation is not corrected after ten (10) days' written notice by the utility,
the water supply to the premises will be shut off and will not be restored
until the violation is corrected by the owner or consumer and fees for turning
the water off and on are paid.
   H.   Subject To Vehicle Traffic: Whenever water service must be installed in
any premises at such a location that the meter box may be subjected to vehicle
traffic, it shall be the responsibility of the owner or the occupant of the
premises to install at the owner's or occupant's expense a standard heavy
concrete box with a heavy cast iron ring and cover, as approved by the water
manager, of sufficient strength to withstand the weight of vehicular traffic.
If the owner or occupant of any such premises shall fail to make such
installation, the utility, in addition to any and all other remedies provided
by law, may remove any meter that may have already been installed and terminate
all water service to such premises until a meter box has been installed as
provided herein.
   I.   Number Restricted: Not more than one service line shall be installed in
any one trench and only one meter shall be permitted in a box. Only the valves
and fittings needed to control the service line to the premises will be
permitted in the meter box.
   J.   Curb Stop And Box: If the plans of the street call for the sidewalk to
be adjacent to and in contact with the curb, a curb stop and curb box must be
installed in the sidewalk adjacent to the curb and the top of the curb box and
concrete of said sidewalk shall be at the same level. The meter box shall be
set on the owner's side of the sidewalk adjacent thereto.
   K.   Concrete; Approval Required: No concrete shall be placed over a meter
box or curb box without the approval of the water manager, who will provide
upon request, drawings and specifications to be followed in placing the
concrete. In case concrete is placed over a meter box or curb box and the
utility finds it necessary to dig down to the facility for maintenance, a
charge will be made against the owner for replacing the concrete and repairing
any damage to the meter or meter box.
(Ord. 2015-43, 9-22-2015)
9-2-7: STOP BOXES; STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS:
The following standards and regulations shall apply to all stop boxes:
   A.   Placement: A suitable brass curb stop with round waterways must be
placed in the service pipe inside the curb line and as near thereto as
practicable, but in no case further than twelve inches (12") so that the "tee
head" will stand parallel with the curb when the water is off to allow the
utility to control the flow of water through the pipe. It shall be enclosed in
an adequate curb box. Round way curb stops with "tee heads" must be used in all
pipes up to and including two inches (2"). Larger pipes require a gate valve
operated by a wheel. On the streets where areas extend out to the curb line,
roadway stop boxes must be placed at least four feet (4') outside of curb to
secure them from inflow of surface wash. Stop boxes must always be set directly
in front of the place supplied and not on side streets or alleys when there is
a main in front of premises, unless on a corner with mains on both streets when
choice of streets may be taken.
   B.   Angle Valve: Where the water meter box is placed within twelve inches
(12") of the curb, as required by subsection 9-2-6E of this chapter, an angle
valve with locking wing may be placed on the city, or street side of the water
meter. If the meter is placed at any other location with the approval of the
utility as provided in said subsection, a brass curb stop must be placed at the
curb line.
   C.   Grading Street: When the grading of a street makes it necessary to
raise a stop box beyond its limit of extension, a rod must be securely riveted
to the "tee head" of the curb stop with a collar to hold the rod firmly in the
center of box. This rod shall be at least five-eighths inch (5/8") round iron
and of sufficient strength to withstand the strain imposed upon it without
twisting and its head shall be similar to that of a curb stop.
   D.   Maintenance; Failure: If the owner or occupant fails to maintain the
curb stop or angle valve as required in subsection 9-1-9C of this title, or if
the utility finds that such valves will not effectively shut off the water
supply through the service line, the owner or occupant will be given ten (10)
days' written notice to either make the necessary repairs or request the
utility to make the repairs at his cost. If any such notice is not complied
with, the utility may make any repairs that are reasonably necessary and charge
the expense thereof, including fifteen percent (15%) for overhead costs, to the
owner or occupant. The utility may withhold water service from the premises
until all such expenses are paid.
(1979 Code § 14.10.080)
9-2-8: PRIVATE FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS:
For the purpose of this chapter, a private fire protection system includes a
private fire service main and appurtenances, an automatic sprinkler system or a
water spray system designed or intended to protect the premises in case of
fire. All private fire protection systems shall be subject to the following
regulations:
   A.   Permit Required: No private fire protection systems connected to a City
water line will be installed without a written permit from the utility.
Applications for such permits shall be accompanied by two (2) sets of plans for
the proposed system, including all service lines and the maximum estimated
flow. The plans must be approved by the utility before a permit may be issued
or construction on the system commenced. Service lines for a fire protection
system shall be no larger than the main to which it is connected, and in no
case larger than eight inches (8") in diameter.
   B.   Conditions: A permit for a private fire protection system, as approved
by the Water Manager for the type of installation, shall provide that the
applicant will:
      1.   Maintain and use the private fire protection system and service
solely for firefighting purposes, except where the Water Manager has approved
plans for a combined fire protection system and culinary supply system. A
combined system is typically only allowed on commercial projects or in
subdivisions with private water infrastructure.
      2.   Comply with all rules and regulations of the utility.
      3.   Pay all damages of any nature which the utility may sustain due to
the installation or operation of the private fire protection system.
      4.   Save the utility and any officer, agent or employee thereof harmless
from any and all claims by any person whatsoever, including the applicant for
damages suffered because of the installation, maintenance or operation of the
private fire protection system, or by reason of the inadequacy or failure of
the water supply.
      5.   Reimburse the utility for all damage suffered by it because of any
violation of the rules and regulations of the utility or because of improper
use of the fire protection service by the customer.
      6.   Maintain the private fire protection system in its entirety from its
connection to the water main, including service lines and related valves, free
from leakage, improper operation or improper connection.
      7.   Report to the utility immediately any leakage, breakage, improper
connection or improper use of the private fire protection system or service. If
after ten (10) days' written notice from the utility, the owner or occupant
fails to correct any leaks or terminate any improper use by himself or others,
the utility may shut off water from the system until the owner or occupant
complies with the notice. The utility may require the installation of detector-
checks in line in the event of frequent leakage or improper use.
   C.   Testing And Record Keeping: The Fire Marshal may require contractors
who service, test, install and/or maintain fire protection systems within Ogden
City, including systems that do not require approval from the utility, to
enroll with and utilize an approved single-point repository service to file
records of all system inspections, tests, and maintenance required by the
referenced standards. If a single-point repository service is utilized:
      1.   Reporting information shall be filed with the single-point
repository service within ten (10) working days of the completion of an
inspection, test or maintenance.
      2.   The repository service may be maintained and provided to the Fire
Code official through a third party inspection reporting system.
      3.   If a third party inspection reporting system is utilized, fees, not
to exceed twelve dollars ($12.00) per inspection, will be paid directly from
the contractor to the approved single-point repository service vendor.
(Ord. 2017-17, 4-18-2017)
9-2-9: PLUMBERS; GENERALLY:
   A.   Unlicensed; Obtaining Services: Should any plumber or plumbing company
in good standing procure, or attempt to procure, taps or permits for the
benefit of an unlicensed or suspended plumber or plumber whose license has been
revoked, the license of such plumber will also be revoked.
   B.   Water Left On; Charges: In all cases where water is left on by the
plumber in violation of the rules and regulations, the plumber shall be
required to pay the water rate on the premises for such time as the water was
turned on.
   C.   Improper Installations; Correction: Where an extension or alteration to
a service line, meter box, curb stop or meter setting are made by a plumber
without first securing approval and a permit, and the work does not meet the
requirements of the rules and regulations, or where a cross connection has been
made, the plumber shall correct the same at his cost.
(1979 Code §§ 14.10.110, 14.10.130, 14.10.140; amd. 1999 Code)
9-2-10: REGULATIONS; GENERALLY:
   A.   Turning On Water: The water must not be turned on to any premises
except by the inspector or authorized agent of the utility. It may be turned on
to test plumbing work but must be turned off immediately after the test has
been made.
   B.   Separate Trenches: No water pipe shall be roughed out closer than three
feet (3') from the sewer pipe at the foundation of any building and shall not
be laid in the same trench with the sewer line or be so constructed as to cross
the sewer line, and no water pipes shall be laid in the same trench as sewer,
gas or any other pipe, but a separate trench must be provided for such water
pipe at least three feet (3') horizontally from all other pipelines.
   C.   Repair Of Private Lines: Whenever it shall become necessary to repair
or alter any private water line, the size of the line, the size of the tap onto
the utility water system and the sizes, types and locations of meter boxes,
angle stops and other facilities must conform to standards established in this
title. If there is a water main of the utility that is accessible to the
residences served by such private line, the users of such private line may make
connections directly to the utility water system rather than repair the private
line and bring it into conformity with current standards. All repairs or
alterations made to such private water lines shall be made at the expense of
the property owner.
   D.   Abandoned Service Lines; Disconnection: In the event any service line
that is or has been delivering water to any building, house or area is
abandoned for any reason whatsoever, it shall be the responsibility of the
owner thereof to disconnect the service line from the water main and to cap the
corporation stop at his expense. The work may be performed by employees of the
utility upon written request and payment of the cost of the service plus a
charge of fifteen percent (15%) for overhead.
(1979 Code §§ 14.10.100, 14.10.120, 14.10.160, 14.10.170)
9-2-11: MANDATORY CONNECTION; ANNEXATION; SECONDARY WATER:
   A.   Culinary Water Connection: Except as provided in subsection E of this
section, all dwellings, buildings or properties within the City and used for
human occupancy or employment shall be provided with culinary water therein and
shall be connected to the City's culinary water system if any part of such
dwelling, building or property is within three hundred feet (300') of a City
culinary water line.
   B.   Connection Of Private Mains: Except as provided in subsection E of this
section, a private water line or common service line providing culinary water
to a dwelling, building or property within the City that is used for human
occupancy or employment and that lies within three hundred feet (300') of a
City culinary water line shall be connected to the City's culinary water system
by the owner or owners of the private water line or common service line.
   C.   Annexation: The owner of a dwelling, building or property annexed into
the City that uses culinary water shall apply for water service and make the
connection required by subsection A or B of this section within ninety (90)
days after:
      1.   Annexation, regardless of the source of culinary water relied upon
prior to the annexation; or
      2.   Installation of a new culinary water line within three hundred feet
(300') of the dwelling, building or property or a common service line or
private lateral if the dwelling, building or property was previously not
subject to subsection A or B of this section.
   D.   Secondary Water: Unless authorized by the Water Manager, an owner of
property having reasonable access to a pressurized secondary water system is
prohibited from using culinary water to supply an outdoor watering system on
the property.
   E.   Exemptions From Section: A dwelling, building, or property is exempt
from the connection requirements of subsections A and B of this section if, on
July 1, 2016, the property is:
      1.   Located within the City; and
      2.   Receiving culinary water from a private well.
   F.   Termination Of Exemption: The exemption provided in subsection E of
this section no longer applies, and the owner of the property shall connect to
the City's culinary water system as provided in subsections A and B of this
section if, at any time, the property is connected to the City's culinary water
system or the well is no longer used as the source of culinary water for the
property.
(Ord. 2016-44, 8-26-2016)
CHAPTER 3
SEWER REGULATIONS 1
SECTION:
9-3-1: Wastewater Control Regulations
9-3-2: Sewer Or Septic Tank Connection
9-3-3: Septic Tank Standards
9-3-4: Privies
9-3-5: Failure To Provide Facilities
9-3-6: Sewer Line Maintenance
9-3-7: Noncomplying Facilities; Nuisance; Abatement
9-3-8: Enforcement Authority
9-3-9: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. UCA §§ 10-8-14 and 10-8-38.
9-3-1: WASTEWATER CONTROL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Enactment: The Wastewater Control Rules and Regulations for the Central
Weber Sewer Improvement District, dated June 1, 1991, together with any
addendums or attachments thereto, three (3) copies of such rules and
regulations are on file in the City Recorder's Office, is hereby adopted and
enacted as part of the ordinances of the City.
   B.   Penalty; Abatement: Any user who violates any of the provisions of the
Wastewater Control Rules and Regulations, as adopted herein, shall be guilty of
a Class B misdemeanor, punishable as set forth in title 1, chapter 4 of this
Code. Each day in which such violations shall continue shall be deemed a
separate offense. In addition, any violation of the above rules and regulations
shall be and is declared a public nuisance and shall subject the user to
discontinuance of sewage collection and treatment service either through
capping of the sewer collection or through the shut off of the water supply to
the premises where such violation occurred. The sewage collection and treatment
service or such water supply need not be reconnected or turned on again until
the violation has ceased; any damage resulting therefrom has been paid; all
expenses incurred by the City, including the expenses of terminating the
service of water supply, have been paid; and the City has been given reasonable
assurance that such violation will not be repeated. The nuisance may also be
abated as otherwise provided by law. All remedies provided in this subsection
for such violation shall be cumulative and shall be in addition to all other
remedies that may be available to the City and the Central Weber Sewer
Improvement District.
(1979 Code §§ 14.41.010, 14.41.030; amd. Ord. 91-45, 12-5-1991; 1999 Code)
9-3-2: SEWER OR SEPTIC TANK CONNECTION:
   A.   1. All dwellings, buildings or properties within the City used for
human occupancy, employment, or recreation shall be provided with suitable
toilet facilities therein.
      2.   Unless an extension of time is provided pursuant to subsection D of
this section, if any part of a dwelling, building or property described in
subsection A1 of this section is within three hundred feet (300') of a sewer
system, all toilet facilities shall be connected to the City's sewer system or
other approved sewage system connecting to the Central Weber Sewer Improvement
District.
   B.   Toilet facilities may be temporarily connected to a septic tank
disposal system meeting the requirements of section
9-3-3 of this chapter, if no part of the dwelling, building or property is
located within three hundred feet (300') of a sanitary sewer system.
   C.   It is unlawful:
      1.   For the owner of any dwelling, building or property located within
the City to use or allow the use of such dwelling, building or property for
human occupancy without providing the toilet facilities as required herein;
      2.   Unless an extension of time is provided pursuant to subsection D of
this section, for the owner of any dwelling, building or property within the
City which is located within three hundred feet (300') of a sanitary sewer
system to use or allow the use of such dwelling, building or property for human
occupancy without connecting to the sanitary sewer system; or
      3.   Unless an extension of time is provided pursuant to subsection D of
this section, for any person to occupy for human habitation any building within
the City which is located within three hundred feet (300') of a sanitary sewer
unless the building is connected to that sanitary sewer system.
   D.   Except as provided in this subsection, the owner of any dwelling,
building or property within the City, which is connected to a septic tank
disposal system and any part of such dwelling, building or property is now
located or may in the future be located within three hundred feet (300') of a
sanitary sewer system, shall, when required in writing by the City, at owner's
expense, connect to the sanitary sewer system within ninety (90) days of such
notice.
      1.   The Public Works Director may allow an extension of time not to
exceed an additional ninety (90) days, in the case of inclement weather that
prevents completion.
      2.   If a dwelling, building or property is annexed into the City under
the provisions of section 10-2-418, Utah Code Annotated, or its successor
provision, an extension of time is allowed until the earlier of:
         a.   The time the septic system fails or is replaced;
         b.   The time additional sewer demand is generated in the dwelling or
building or on the property, such as through a change of use or through new
development, including by seeking a subdivision or building permit approval; or
         c.   Ninety (90) days after a sewer connection is available within
five feet (5') of the property line.
(Ord. 2018-23, 7-10-2018)
9-3-3: SEPTIC TANK STANDARDS:
A septic tank disposal system serving a dwelling, building or property within
the City which is not within three hundred feet (300') of a sewer system shall
be approved by the County Health Department and shall be installed in
accordance with the Plumbing Code as adopted under title 16 of this Code and
Utah Code Annotated section 58-56-6, as amended.
(1979 Code § 14.40.030; amd. 1999 Code)
9-3-4: PRIVIES:
   A.   Prohibited: Except as provided in subsection B of this section, it is
unlawful for the owner or occupant of any premises within the City to have or
maintain an open toilet, privy or outhouse, or permit any premises used for
human habitation to be used or occupied until the house or premises thus used
for human habitation shall either be connected to a sanitary sewer system or
shall have been supplied or equipped with a septic tank that complies with the
standards prescribed in this chapter.
   B.   Exception: It is unlawful for any person to erect or maintain a privy
or outhouse within the City, except as provided in this section. Privies
complying with this section may be erected at the site of any construction or
building project; provided, however, that it shall be mandatory for the
contractor or other person in charge of any such project where five (5) or more
persons are employed to provide at least one such privy for each twenty five
(25) employees or fraction thereof. All such privies shall be flyproof in every
respect. The roof shall be watertight and the door shall fit closely and shall
be kept closed. The vault, whether a pit, box, tank or other receptacle, shall
be securely protected against flies, birds and small animals, and all openings
for ventilation shall be screened with wire netting. Such facilities shall be
made available only to the personnel involved in or associated with such
construction or building project.
(1979 Code §§ 14.40.040, 14.40.050; amd. 1999 Code)
9-3-5: FAILURE TO PROVIDE FACILITIES:
If the landlord of any house, dwelling or apartment fails to supply the same
with sanitary sewer facilities as provided in this chapter, it shall be the
duty of the tenant or tenants therein to supply such facilities, and such
tenant or tenants may deduct the cost thereof from any sum due to the landlord
for rent.
(1979 Code § 14.40.060)
9-3-6: SEWER LINE MAINTENANCE:
It shall be the responsibility of the individual property owners to maintain
all sewer facilities on their premises and the sewer connection lines or
laterals that connect the sewer facilities on said premises with the main sewer
lines in the adjacent streets. It shall be the responsibility of the Operations
Division of the Public Works Department to maintain, repair and keep free from
obstructions the main sewer lines in the various City streets and also all
outfall or trunk sewer lines in the City.
(1979 Code § 14.40.070; amd. 1999 Code)
9-3-7: NONCOMPLYING FACILITIES; NUISANCE; ABATEMENT:
Any privy, private sewer or sewer facilities existing or being maintained
contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and are declared a
nuisance, dangerous and a menace to the public health. The City shall have the
power and the authority to abate any and all such nuisances in accordance with
the law.
(1979 Code § 14.40.080)
9-3-8: ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY:
   A.   Health Department Authority: The County Health Department is authorized
to enforce the provisions of this chapter, and, in the performance of this
duty, the Director of the County Health Department or his or her duly
authorized agents are authorized at any reasonable hour to enter any premises
that may be necessary in the enforcement of said provisions.
   B.   City Authority: The officers and agents of the City, upon presenting
suitable identification and stating the purpose thereof, shall have the right,
at all reasonable times and hours, to enter upon any and all premises in the
City receiving sewage service from the City for the purpose of inspecting,
sampling and testing the sanitary sewer system on said premises and the sewage
contained or discharged through the same. In the event a duly authorized
officer or agent of the City is refused admission for any such purpose, the
Water Manager may, at his or her discretion, cause water service to the
premises in question to be limited or discontinued until the City's officers
and agents have been afforded reasonable access to the premises and sewer
system to accomplish the purposes aforesaid.
(1979 Code §§ 14.40.090, 14.44.080; amd. 1999 Code)
9-3-9: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation who violates or refuses or fails to comply with
any provision of chapters 4 through 6 of this title shall be guilty of a Class
B misdemeanor and upon conviction, shall be punished as set forth in title 1,
chapter 4 of this Code.
(1979 Code §§14.40.090, 14.52.010; amd. 1999 Code)
CHAPTER 4
BACKFLOW AND CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL
SECTION:
9-4-1: Purpose
9-4-2: Definitions
9-4-3: Cross Connections
9-4-4: Duties And Responsibilities
9-4-5: Requirements
9-4-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   Protection: To protect the public potable water supply of the city from
the possibility of contamination or pollution by isolating within the
customer's internal distribution system such contaminants or pollutants which
could backflow into the public water systems; and
   B.   Elimination: To promote the elimination or control of existing cross
connections, actual or potential, between the customer's in house potable water
system and nonpotable water system, plumbing fixtures, industrial piping
system; and
   C.   Maintenance: To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of
cross connection control which will systematically and effectively prevent the
contamination or pollution of all potable water systems.
(1979 Code § 14.08.161; Ord. 91-5, 2-21-1991)
9-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
APPROVED BACKFLOW ASSEMBLY: The backflow assembly accepted by the Utah
department of health as meeting an applicable specification or as suitable for
the proposed use.
AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY: Any water supply on or available to the premises other
than the city public water supply will be considered as an auxiliary water
supply. These auxiliary waters may include water from another city/
municipality's public potable water supply or any natural source such as a
well, spring, river, stream, harbor, etc., or "used waters" or "industrial
fluids".
BACK PRESSURE: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances under
pressure into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any
source, other than the intended source.
BACK SIPHONAGE: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into
the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source, other
than the intended source, caused by the reduction of pressure in the potable
water supply system.
BACKFLOW: The reversal of the normal flow of water caused by either back
pressure or back siphonage.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY: An assembly or means designed to prevent
backflow. Specifications for backflow prevention assemblies are contained
within the plumbing code as adopted in title 16 of this code and by the state
of Utah pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 58-56-6, as amended. All
backflow prevention assemblies must be approved by the Utah department of
health prior to installation. A listing of these approved backflow prevention
assemblies is available from the Utah department of health.
CONTAMINATION: An impairment of the quality of the potable water supply by
sewage, industrial fluids, waste liquids, compounds or other materials to a
degree which creates an actual or potential hazard to the public health through
poisoning or through the spread of disease.
CROSS-CONNECTION: Any physical connection or arrangement of piping or fixtures
between two (2) otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains
potable water and the other nonpotable water or industrial fluids of
questionable safety, through which, or because of which, backflow may occur
into the potable water system. This would include any temporary connections,
such as swing connections, removable sections, four-way plug valves, spools,
dummy sections of pipe, swivel or change-over devices or sliding multiport
tubes.
CROSS-CONNECTION; CONTAINMENT: The installation of an approved backflow
prevention assembly at the water service connection to any customer's premises
where it is physically and economically infeasible to find and permanently
eliminate or control all actual or potential cross-connections within the
customer's water system; or, it shall mean the line leading to and supplying a
portion of a customer's water system where there are actual or potential cross-
connections which cannot be effectively eliminated or controlled at the point
of the cross-connection (isolation).
CROSS-CONNECTIONS; CONTROLLED: A connection between a potable water supply
system and a nonpotable water system with an approved backflow prevention
assembly properly installed and maintained so that it will continuously afford
the protection commensurate with the degree of hazard.
(1979 Code § 14.08.161; Ord. 91-5, 2-21-1991; amd. 1999 Code)
9-4-3: CROSS-CONNECTIONS:
   A.   Prohibited: It is unlawful for the owner or occupant of any premises
using water supplied by the Water Utility to cross-connect such water supply
with a foreign source of water that does not meet the purification standards
maintained for the City supply or with any appliance, appurtenance, hose, pipe
or other fixture in such a manner that there is a possibility that water from
such foreign source may flow, be siphoned or be pumped into the City water
system.
(1979 Code § 14.08.160; amd. 1999 Code)
   B.   Purification Of Fixtures: It is unlawful for any owner or occupant of
any premises using water supplied by the Water Utility to make any connection,
whether temporary or permanent, between the City water system and any
appliance, appurtenance, hose, pipe or other fixture that was previously
supplied with water from a foreign source as described in subsection A of this
Section, unless the property owner or occupant first purifies, in a manner
satisfactory to the Water Utility Division, any such appliance, appurtenance,
pipe, hose or other fixture and, in addition, agrees in writing that the water
from such foreign source will not again be used in such appliance,
appurtenance, hose, pipe or other fixture.
(1979 Code § 14.08.170; amd. 1999 Code)
9-4-4: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
   A.   City; Water Manager: The City shall be responsible for the protection
of the public potable water distribution system from contamination or pollution
due to the backflow of contaminants or pollutants through the water service
connection. The Water Manager is vested with the authority and responsibility
for the implementation of an effective cross- connection control program and
for the enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter. If, in the judgment of
the Water Manager, an approved backflow prevention assembly is required (at the
customer's water service connection or within the customer's private water
system) for the safety of the water system, the Water Manager shall give notice
in writing to said customer to install such an approved backflow prevention
assembly at a specific location on his premises. The customer shall immediately
install such approved assembly at the customer's own expense. Failure, refusal
or inability on the part of the customer to install, have tested and maintain
said assembly shall constitute grounds for discontinuing water service to the
premises until such requirements have been satisfactorily met.
   B.   Inspection Services Division: The Inspection Services Division has the
responsibility to review building plans and inspect plumbing installations to
ensure compliance with the current edition of the plumbing code, as adopted by
the city and the state with respect to cross connections and back siphonages.
The inspection services division's responsibility begins at the point of
service (the downstream side of the meter) and carries throughout the entire
length of the customer's water system.
   C.   Certified Backflow Assembly Technician: Certified backflow assembly
technicians only shall do the testing, maintenance and/or repair of backflow
prevention assemblies. The certified technician must tag each double check
valve, pressure vacuum breaker, reduced pressure backflow assembly and air gap,
showing the serial number of the assembly, date tested and by whom. The
technician's license number must also be on this tag.
(1979 Code § 14.08.161; Ord. 91-5, 2-21-1991; amd. 1999 Code)
9-4-5: REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Conditions Or Defects Corrected: Service of water to any premises shall
be discontinued by the city if a backflow prevention assembly required by this
chapter for control of backflow and cross connections is not installed, tested
and maintained, or if it is found that a backflow prevention assembly has been
removed, bypassed or if an unprotected cross connection exists on the premises.
Service will not be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected.
   B.   Open For Inspection: The customer's system shall be open for inspection
at all reasonable times to authorized representatives of the city to determine
whether cross connections exist.
   C.   Assembly; Installation: An approved backflow prevention assembly shall
be installed on each service line to a nonresidential customer's water system,
at or near the property line or immediately inside the building being served,
when it is deemed necessary by the utility to conform to the safe drinking
water act of 1974, Utah Code Annotated section 19-4-101 et seq., the
occupational safety and health act, Utah Code Annotated section 35-9-1 et seq.,
and the plumbing code, as adopted in title 16 of this code, and by the state of
Utah pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 58-56-6. In all cases, the
assembly will be installed before the first branch line leading off the service
line, whenever the city deems the protection of the water supply to be in the
best interest of the water supply customers.
   D.   Assembly; Type: The type of protective assembly required under this
section shall depend upon the degree of hazard which exists at the point of
cross connection (whether direct or indirect), as stipulated in the plumbing
code as adopted in title 16 of this code, and by the state of Utah, pursuant to
Utah Code Annotated section 58-56-6.
   E.   Exclusions: All presently installed backflow prevention assemblies
which do not meet the requirements of this section but were approved assemblies
for the purpose described herein at the time of installation and which have
been properly maintained, shall, except for inspection and maintenance
requirements, be excluded from the requirements of these rules so long as the
city is assured that they will satisfactorily protect the public water system.
Whenever the existing assembly is moved from the present location or requires
more than minimum maintenance or when the city finds that the maintenance of
the assembly constitutes a hazard to health, the unit shall be replaced by an
approved backflow prevention assembly meeting the requirements of this chapter.
   F.   Certified Inspections: It shall be the duty and responsibility of the
customer at any premises where backflow prevention assemblies are installed to
have certified inspections and operational tests made at least once per year at
the customer's expense. In those instances where the city deems the hazard to
be great, it may require certified inspections and tests at a more frequent
interval. These inspections and tests shall be performed by a certified
backflow assembly technician.
   G.   Degree Of Protection: Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed
in water supply lines to provide at least the degree of protection stipulated
in the plumbing code as adopted in title 16 of this code, and by the state of
Utah pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 58-56-6. All backflow prevention
assemblies shall be exposed for easy observation and be readily accessible.
   H.   Maintenance: All backflow prevention assemblies installed in a potable
water supply system for protection against backflow shall be maintained in good
working condition by the person or persons having control of such assemblies.
Upon inspection, any assembly found to be defective or inoperative shall be
replaced or repaired. No assembly shall be removed from use, relocated or
another assembly substituted, without the approval of the City.
   I.   Testing: All backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested within ten
(10) working days of initial installation.
   J.   Safety Hazards: No backflow prevention assembly shall be installed so
as to create a safety hazard. Example: installed over an electrical panel,
steam pipe, boilers, pits or above ceiling level.
(1979 Code § 14.08.161; Ord. 91-5, 2-21-1991; amd. 1999 Code)
CHAPTER 5
SEWER FEES AND CHARGES
SECTION:
9-5-1: Findings; Purpose
9-5-2: Definitions
9-5-3: Rates And Charges
9-5-1: FINDINGS; PURPOSE:
The city council finds and declares that it is necessary and in the public
interest to raise additional funds for the purpose of defraying the cost of
procuring the central Weber sewer improvement district to take possession of
the sanitary sewage originating in the city at a suitable point or points on
the city sewage collection system, to transmit the same to the sewage treatment
plant owned and operated by said district; and therein to treat said sewage in
accordance with established practices in such manner that the same will not
constitute a hazard to the public health and welfare; and that it is further
necessary and in the public interest to raise funds to defray in part the
expense of the city in the maintenance and operation of its sanitary sewage
collection system together with the incidental expenses of administering the
city sanitary sewage system, including, but not limited to, the policing and
inspection thereof, the measuring, sampling and testing of sewage discharged
therein and the costs of collection of the service charges imposed pursuant to
this chapter; and that it is further necessary and in the public interest to
raise funds to defray the expense of the city in the maintenance and operation
of, and improvements to, its storm sewer collection system together with the
incidental expenses of administering the city storm sewer system, including,
but not limited to, the policing and inspection thereof, the implementation of
federal mandates under the clean water act, (part 2 - national pollutant
discharge elimination system) and the costs of collection of the service
charges imposed pursuant to this chapter. For the purpose of raising funds for
the purposes aforesaid, sanitary sewage and storm sewage service charges are
imposed, levied and assessed as provided herein.
(1979 Code § 14.44.010; amd. Ord. 2001-42, 7-3-2001, eff. retroactive to 7-1-
2001; Ord. 2002-38, 6-18-2002, eff. 7-1-2002)
9-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms shall be defined as indicated for purposes of this chapter:
DEVELOPED PARCEL: Any parcel that has been altered from its natural condition
by grading, filling, or the construction of improvements or other impervious
surfaces.
EQUIVALENT SERVICE UNIT (ESU): The average amount of impervious surface,
expressed in square feet, on developed single-family residential parcels in the
city.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: Any hard surface, other than natural surface, that prevents
or retards the absorption of water into the soil or that causes water to run
off the surface in greater quantities or at a greater rate of flow than a
natural, undisturbed surface. This includes, but is not limited to, roofs,
parking lots, sidewalks not in the right of way of a public street, etc.
(Ord. 2002-38, 6-18-2002, eff. 7-1-2002)
9-5-3: RATES AND CHARGES:
   A.   Imposition:
      1.   Sanitary sewer service charges are hereby imposed, levied and
assessed for the collection and disposal of sewage and the maintenance and
operation of the city's sewer system against all persons and premises receiving
sanitary and storm sewer collection or sewage treatment services either by
means of the public sewer system of the city or under any agreement of the city
with the central Weber sewer improvement district under which said district
may, from time to time, treat sanitary sewage originating in the city.
      2.   Effective January 1, 2003, storm sewer service charges are hereby
imposed, levied and assessed on each developed parcel of real property in the
city, which charges shall be determined as follows:
         a.   ESU: The fee shall be based on the number of equivalent service
units (ESUs) contained in the parcel. The city council finds that the ESU is
the most accurate measurement for determining the amount that each parcel
contributes to, benefits from, and otherwise uses the storm sewer system. Based
on engineering studies, the city council finds and determines that one ESU
equals two thousand six hundred (2,600) square feet of impervious surface area.
         b.   Calculation: The city council finds that each single-family
residential parcel contributes approximately the same amount of stormwater
runoff; therefore, each developed single-family residential parcel shall pay a
base rate of one ESU. All nonsingle-family residential parcels shall pay a
multiple of this base rate, expressed in ESUs, according to the measured
impervious area on the parcel, or if no actual measurement is available upon a
reasonable estimate of such impervious area. One additional ESU shall be
charged for any parcel in which the storm drains from the roof discharge
directly into any stormwater drain or gutter, rather than discharging onto a
landscaped area or other nonimpervious surface.
         c.   Charge Per ESU: The amount charged for each ESU shall be as
determined in subsection B of this section.
         d.   Credit: Parcels with a qualifying stormwater detention may
receive a reduction of the rate charged for that property. The percent of rate
reduction shall be proportional to the amount of water collected and diverted
from directly entering the storm drainage system, but may not exceed fifty
percent (50%) of the rate otherwise charged. A "qualifying stormwater detention
facility" is a facility that controls discharge of stormwater and melting snow
from the property at a speed or capacity in excess of the stormwater that would
have been discharged from the property in its natural state, and which is
established, operated and maintained in accordance with all city ordinances.
Any person requesting such credit shall: 1) provide, at no cost to the city,
plans and calculations prepared by a professional engineer or architect in
support of the credit; and 2) describe the maintenance program to be used in
order to ensure that the facility will operate as designed and be maintained in
accordance with city ordinances. Any credit may be revoked or suspended if it
is determined that the facility is not operating as designed or is not being
maintained in accordance with city ordinances.
         e.   Appeals: Any person that believes that the measured impervious
area on the parcel is inaccurate or that the provisions of this section have
been interpreted or applied erroneously may appeal to the manager of the
operations division of the public services department (the "operations
manager"). The appeal shall be in writing, shall state any facts supporting the
appeal, and shall be made within ten (10) days of the decision, action, or bill
being appealed. The operations manager shall decide the appeal within ten (10)
days of when the appeal is filed. If the person or entity is not satisfied with
the operations manager's decision, a further appeal may be made to the director
of the public services department (the "director"). The appeal to the director
shall follow the same procedure as the appeal to the operations manager. The
director's decision shall be final and binding on all parties. Any appeal based
on inaccurate calculations shall be accompanied by scaled or computer aided
design drawings and calculations that establish an amount of impervious surface
less than the amount calculated or estimated by the city. Appeals establishing
a credit or reducing the amount of impervious surface shall only be applied
prospectively; provided, that any appeal for a nonsingle-family residential
parcel for charges incurred prior to June 1, 2003, shall be applied
retroactively.
   B.   Rates: Charges for sanitary and storm sewer service shall be as
determined in subsections 4-6-1B19a and B19b of this code. Such charges are
intended to provide sufficient revenue for the costs of all sewer services and
a fair return to the city as payment in lieu of property and franchise taxes.
   C.   Charges Combined With Water Service Charges: Sanitary and storm sewer
charges are combined with and shall be billed and collected at the same time
as, and the payment thereof shall be enforced by the same procedures provided
by law, ordinance and regulation for the billing, collection and enforcing of
payments of charges for water service rendered by the water utility. In case
the sewer service charges are not paid when due, the water manager may cause
the water supply to the premises served to be shut off or limited.
   D.   Shutoff Or Restoration: In the event water service to any building or
premises in the city is shut off or limited under the provisions of this
chapter, or under the provisions of the rules and regulations relating to the
water utility and the rendering of water service, the service restoration fees
imposed under section
9-1-11 of this title shall be applicable. Water service shall not be turned on
or restored until all past due charges for water and storm and sanitary sewer
and refuse services and for turning off and restoring water service have been
paid in full, and the required deposits provided.
   E.   Debt To City: Sanitary and storm sewage charges are levied and assessed
against the person liable under law and/or ordinance and/or contract for water
services rendered at the premises receiving sewer service through the city and
are a debt due the city from and after the end of the accounting period for
which a statement for water services is to be rendered under the ordinances and
regulations governing the sale and distribution of water by the water utility.
In the event the property is not receiving water services from the city, the
property owner shall be responsible and liable for all charges for sanitary and
storm sewer charges.
   F.   Unpaid Charges A Lien: All unpaid charges for sanitary and storm sewer
service are a lien against the premises to which sewer service is rendered or
for which such service is procured from the city, except to the extent limited
by Utah law. Such lien may be foreclosed in any court of competent
jurisdiction; or, by written direction of the water manager, the lien may be
waived and an action in person may be maintained for the collection of such
charges.
   G.   Collection: The water division shall receive and collect the sanitary
and storm sewage service charges levied under the provisions of this chapter
and shall promptly after receipt thereof, account for and pay over the same to
the city treasurer. Periodically, under rules which shall be established by the
mayor, there shall be paid to the water utility out of the proceeds of such
charges the reasonable costs and expense of said utility incident to the
billing, receiving, collecting and accounting for said charges.
(1979 Code §§ 14.44.030, 14.44.040, 14.44.050, 14.44.060, 14.44.070; amd. 1999
Code; Ord. 2001-42, 7-3-2001, eff. retroactive to 7-1-2001; Ord. 2002-38, 6-18-
2002, eff. 7-1-2002; Ord. 2004-39, 6-15-2004, eff. 7-1-2004; Ord. 2004-44, 6-
15-2004, eff. 7-1-2004; Ord. 2016-23, 4-12-2016; Ord. 2019-23, 6-11-2019)
CHAPTER 6
STORM SEWER FACILITIES
SECTION:
9-6-1: Findings; Purpose
9-6-2: Chapter Applicability
9-6-3: Holding Basins Required
9-6-4: Maintenance; Developer Responsibility
9-6-5: Plans And Specifications
9-6-1: FINDINGS; PURPOSE:
   A.   The City Council finds and determines that the facilities now existing
within the City are inadequate to carry off the water resulting from heavy
rainfall or rapid snow melting which results in the flooding of some street
intersections and other flooding problems. It further finds that the likelihood
of an overall construction of storm sewer and other facilities to handle the
present surface water flows will be many years in the future, if at all,
because of the tremendous cost thereof.
   B.   It is further found and determined that it is for the best interests of
the health and general welfare of the citizens of the City that interim steps
be taken, to minimize surface water runoffs and the flooding created thereby
and that one way to achieve that goal is to require future developments within
the City which generate additional runoff water to make provisions therefor
within each development, thereby not aggravating or increasing the already
existing problem. The requirement for holding reservoirs to delay the surface
runoffs has already been required by the City for recent large construction
projects and this Chapter is to more clearly spell out the City's purpose and
intent and the requirements to comply therewith.
(1979 Code § 14.48.010)
9-6-2: CHAPTER APPLICABILITY:
Included within the requirement for storm drainage and drainage structures and
surface and storm drainage structures required by the Subdivision Title and
other ordinances applicable to residential, commercial, and industrial
development are the surface water control plans and structures provided for in
this Chapter. These surface water controls are also applicable to and required
of all school, church, residential, commercial and industrial constructions,
repairs and additions, including hard- surfaced parking lots or other
impervious areas in excess of ten thousand (10,000) square feet and which, in
the determination of the Public Works Director, will generate substantial
additional runoff water.
(1979 Code § 14.48.020; amd. 1999 Code)
9-6-3: HOLDING BASINS REQUIRED:
Each developer shall provide a holding basin or other suitable structure,
facility or land grading to delay the runoff of surface water from that
development so that runoff will extend over a longer period of time and thereby
reduce the amount of flooding which would otherwise result. The size of the
holding basin and the size of the outlet required and other engineering items
are to be determined by the developer and the Public Works Director, upon
recommendation of the City Engineer, using general engineering data applicable
to this area concerning runoff water generated by the type of development
proposed, so that the new construction will not discharge onto adjacent streets
or other land or into City storm sewer facilities surface water at a rate in
excess of that discharged from that land prior to when the construction was
made.
(1979 Code § 14.48.030; amd. 1999 Code)
9-6-4: MAINTENANCE; DEVELOPER RESPONSIBILITY:
   A.   Except in unusual circumstances and when agreed to by the Mayor, the
construction, operation, maintenance and liability concerning those holding
basins or reservoirs and other facilities constructed to control the surface
water as required by this Chapter shall be the expense and responsibility of
the developer and his or her successor in interest. In the event the Mayor
determines the City should own the facility and have the responsibility of the
operation, maintenance and control thereof, the facility shall be constructed
by the developer and be conveyed to the City by deed or easement acceptable to
the City.
   B.   In the case of a dedicated residential subdivision, the City shall
assume responsibility for operation, maintenance and control thereof when the
retention facility is constructed by the developer in a manner acceptable to
the City and conveyed to the City by warranty deed.
   C.   In the event adequate facilities are in existence, as determined by the
Public Works Director, the developer may contribute money in lieu of and equal
to the amount that would have been expended on such facilities and real
property as may be found acceptable to the City.
(1979 Code § 14.48.040; amd. 1999 Code)
9-6-5: PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
The plans and specifications for any development conveyed by this Chapter shall
show the details of the holding basin and other facilities and those structures
shall be completed on or about the time any additional runoff water is
generated by the construction involved.
(1979 Code § 14.48.050)
CHAPTER 7
STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION
ARTICLE A.  GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
9-7A-1: Title
9-7A-2: Purpose
9-7A-3: Minimum Standards
9-7A-4: Definitions
9-7A-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION ORDINANCE
OF OGDEN CITY.
(Ord. 2006-45, 7-25-2006)
9-7A-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety, and general
welfare of the inhabitants of the city through the regulation of nonstorm water
discharges to the city storm drainage system to the maximum extent practicable
as required by federal and state law. This chapter establishes methods for
controlling the introduction of pollutants into the city's storm sewer system
in order to comply with requirements of the Utah pollutant discharge
elimination system (UPDES) permit process, operating pursuant to the national
pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permitting process under the
clean water act. The objectives of this chapter are:
   A.   To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the city storm sewer
system and the waters of the state of Utah by storm water discharges by any
user.
   B.   To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the city storm sewer
system.
(Ord. 2006-45, 7-25-2006)
9-7A-3: MINIMUM STANDARDS:
The standards set forth in this chapter are minimum standards. The provisions
of this chapter do not intend nor imply that compliance by any person will
ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized
discharge of pollutants.
(Ord. 2006-45, 7-25-2006)
9-7A-4: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the indicated
meanings:
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: The employees of the city designated by the
mayor with the authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES ("BMPs"): Includes schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, design standards, and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly
or indirectly into the waters of the state of Utah. BMPs also include treatment
requirements, operating procedures, educational activities, and practices to
control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or
drainage from raw material storage.
CITY STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM: City owned facilities by which storm water is
collected and/or conveyed, including, but not limited to, any streets, gutters,
curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention
basins, natural and humanmade or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and
other drainage structures. The city storm drainage system is a municipal
separate storm sewer system (MS4) permitted and operating under a UPDES storm
water discharge permit.
CLEAN WATER ACT: Federal water pollution control act (33 USC section 1251 et
seq.).
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY: Activities occurring in furtherance of a construction
project, including, but not limited to, land disturbing activities; hauling of
soil and rock; explosive and abrasive blasting; implosion; handling of building
materials; concrete, stone and tile cutting; operation of motorized and
nonmotorized machinery; and operation of motor vehicles on the site, staging
areas, parking areas, storage areas, or any access routes to the construction
site.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any material, including any substance, waste, or
combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical,
chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute
to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety,
property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported,
disposed of, or otherwise managed.
ILLEGAL DISCHARGE: Any direct or indirect nonstorm water discharge to the storm
drain system, except as exempted in section
9-7B-2 of this chapter.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS: Either of the following: any drain or conveyance, whether
on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the
storm drain system including, but not limited to, any conveyances which allow
any nonstorm water discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash
water to enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain
system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or
connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by the
authorized enforcement officer, or any drain or conveyance connected from a
commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system which has not been
documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by the authorized
enforcement officer.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY: Activities subject to NPDES and UPDES industrial permits
as defined in 40 CFR, section 122.26 (b)(14).
LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY: A human induced change to improved or unimproved
land, including, but not limited to, new home or building construction,
expansion of an existing building or home, demolition activity, clearing,
grubbing, leveling, excavation, fill operations, clearing, trenching,
landscaping, grading, drainage, pipe installation, drilling, mining, dredging,
road construction or improvement, paving, construction of earthen berms, and
improvements for use as parking or storage.
MINOR LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY: Any construction activity where less than five
thousand (5,000) square feet is subject to land disturbing activity, unless
such land disturbing activity is within three hundred feet (300') of a
watercourse. "Minor land disturbing activity" shall not include initial grading
of, or construction of a main building on, a subdivided lot within a
subdivision plat for which an SWPP permit or a UPDES permit was previously
required.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4): A municipally owned and operated
storm water collection system that may consist of any or all of the following:
curb and gutter, drainage swales, piping, ditches, canals, detention basins,
inlet boxes, or any other system used to convey storm water that discharges
into canals, ditches, streams, rivers, or lakes not owned and operated by the
municipality.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORM WATER DISCHARGE
PERMIT: A storm water discharge permit issued by the United States
environmental protection agency (EPA), or the state of Utah (UPDES) under
authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC section 1342(b), in compliance with the
federal clean water act and its amendments.
NONSTORM WATER DISCHARGE: Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not
composed entirely of storm water.
NOTICE OF INTENT (NOI): The application for permit required to be filed with
the state of Utah to obtain coverage under the UPDES storm water discharge
permit.
POLLUTANT: Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may
include, but are not limited to, paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other
automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes;
refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects,
ordinances, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to
pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous
substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and
particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from
constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any
kind.
PREMISES: Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether
improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
STORM WATER: Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of
water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such
precipitation.
STORM WATER CONVEYANCE SYSTEM: Any channel or pipe for collecting and directing
storm water.
STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP): A document which describes the
best management practices and activities to be implemented by a person or
business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the
actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to storm water, storm water
conveyance systems, and/or waters of the state of Utah to the maximum extent
practicable.
UTAH POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (UPDES) STORM WATER DISCHARGE
PERMIT: A permit issued by the state of Utah, under authority delegated
pursuant to 33 USC section 1342(b), that authorizes the discharge of pollutants
to waters of the state of Utah, whether the permit is applicable on an
individual, group, or general areawide basis.
WASTEWATER: Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated storm water,
discharged from a facility.
WATERCOURSE: Any natural or improved stream, river, creek, ditch, channel,
canal, conduit, gutter, culvert, drain, gully, swale, or wash in which waters
flow either continuously or intermittently.
WATERS OF THE STATE OF UTAH: All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses,
waterways, wells, springs, irrigation systems, drainage system, and all other
bodies or accumulations of water, surface and underground, natural or
artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or
border upon the state of Utah or any portion thereof, except that bodies of
water confined to and retained within the limits of private property, and which
do not develop into or constitute a nuisance, or a public health hazard, or a
menace to fish and wildlife, shall not be considered to be "waters of the state
of Utah".
(Ord. 2006-45, 7-25-2006)
ARTICLE B.  CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY
SECTION:
9-7B-1: Applicability
9-7B-2: Permits
9-7B-3: Review And Approval
9-7B-4: Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plans
9-7B-5: SWPPP Design Requirements
9-7B-6: General Requirements
9-7B-7: Inspection
9-7B-8: Stop Work Orders
9-7B-1: APPLICABILITY:
This article shall apply to any construction activity and land disturbing
activity, directly or indirectly associated with construction projects, and all
persons engaged in such construction activity and land disturbing activity,
directly or indirectly associated with construction projects, within the
corporate limits of the city, unless specifically exempted herein.
(Ord. 2006-45, 7-25-2006)
9-7B-2: PERMITS:
   A.   Required: Every person shall obtain a storm water pollution prevention
permit (hereinafter "permit" or "SWPPP permit") before commencing any
construction activity in the city, unless exempt under the provisions of this
article.
   B.   Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan Required: No person shall be
granted a permit for land disturbing activity on sites greater than one acre
without submitting a storm water pollution prevention plan (hereinafter "plan"
or "SWPPP"), which plan must be approved by the authorized enforcement officer.
   C.   Permit Exempt Activities: No permit is required for the following
activities:
      1.   Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for the
protection of life, property, or natural resources;
      2.   Existing nursery and agricultural operations conducted as an allowed
main or accessory use under the zoning ordinances of the city; or
      3.   Minor land disturbing activity.
   D.   Application Contents: Each application for a permit shall include:
      1.   Date of application and the address of the site;
      2.   A description of the project;
      3.   Name, address and telephone number of the owner of the site;
      4.   Name, address and telephone number of the applicant, if different
from the owner;
      5.   Name, address, and telephone number of the general contractor, or if
none, the name(s), address(es), and telephone number(s) of the contractor(s),
subcontractor(s) or persons actually doing the land disturbing activities and
their respective tasks;
      6.   The date that construction activity will commence and the estimated
time frame for completion of the construction activity after the commencement
date, expressed in monthly increments;
      7.   The fee imposed in title 4, chapter 6 of this code, except that the
fee may be waived when the applicant is the city, or a contractor performing
work on behalf of the city;
      8.   For sites five (5) acres and larger, a copy of the NOI; and
      9.   Signature of the applicant.
   E.   Bond; Financial Guarantee: For sites one acre or larger, the applicant
will be required to file with the city a faithful performance bond or financial
guarantee meeting the requirements of section
14-3-7 or
15-13-23 of this code, in an amount deemed sufficient by the authorized
enforcement officer to cover all costs of improvements or maintenance of
improvements necessary for implementation of the SWPPP for such period as
specified by city, and engineering and inspection costs to cover the cost of
failure or repair of improvements installed on the site.
   F.   Grading; Construction: Initial grading of, or construction of a main
building on, a subdivided lot within a subdivision plat for which an SWPPP
permit or a UPDES permit is required, shall comply with the permit established
for the subdivision plat, unless a separate SWPPP permit is approved for the
lot.
   G.   Term Of Permit: The permit shall be granted for the number of months
estimated by the applicant to be necessary for completion of the proposed
construction activity, which permit shall expire after the estimated period of
time has elapsed. Any portion of a month shall be counted as one full month. If
construction activity will exceed the number of months granted on the permit,
the applicant shall request an extension from the authorized enforcement
officer prior to the expiration date and pay the monthly fee for each
additional month under the requested extension period. Failure to request such
extension and pay the required fees shall be considered to be a violation of
this article. No refunds shall be granted in the event the applicant
overestimates the period of time for construction.
(Ord. 2006-45, 7-25-2006)
9-7B-3: REVIEW AND APPROVAL:
   A.   The authorized enforcement officer will review each application for a
permit to determine its conformance with the provisions of this article. Within
thirty (30) days after receiving an application, the authorized enforcement
officer shall in writing:
      1.   Approve the permit application, together with any required SWPPP;
      2.   Approve the permit application, together with any required SWPPP,
subject to such reasonable conditions as may be necessary to secure compliance
with the requirements of this article, and issue the permit subject to these
conditions; or
      3.   Disapprove the permit application, together with any required SWPPP,
indicating the reason(s) and procedure for submitting a revised application
and/or submission.
   B.   Failure of the authorized enforcement officer to act on an original or
revised application within thirty (30) days of receipt shall authorize the
applicant to proceed in accordance with the plans as filed unless such time is
extended by agreement between the applicant and the authorized enforcement
officer. Pending preparation and approval of a revised plan, development
activities shall be allowed to proceed in accordance with conditions
established by the authorized enforcement officer.
(Ord. 2006-45, 7-25-2006)
9-7B-4: STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLANS:
   A.   Storm water pollution prevention plans shall include the following:
      1.   Map(s) or site plan(s) describing:
         a.   The existing topography of the site;
         b.   Delineation of any areas of vegetation or trees to be saved;
         c.   Clear and definite delineation of any wetlands, natural or
artificial water storage detention areas, and drainage ditches on the site;
         d.   Clear and definite delineation of any 100-year floodplain on or
near the site;
         e.   Approved grading and drainage plans;
         f.   Watercourses or portions of the city's storm drainage systems
either on or near the site.
      2.   A sequence of construction activity to occur on the site, including
stripping and clearing; rough grading; construction of utilities,
infrastructure, and buildings; and final grading and landscaping. Sequencing
shall identify the expected date on which clearing will begin, the estimated
duration of exposure of cleared areas, areas of clearing, installation of
temporary erosions and sediment control measures, and establishment of
permanent vegetation.
      3.   All storm water pollution control measures or BMPs necessary to meet
the objectives of this article throughout all phases of the construction and
after completion of development of the site. Depending upon the complexity of
the project, the drafting of intermediate plans may be required at the close of
each season.
      4.   Provisions for maintenance of erosion or sediment control
facilities.
      5.   An inspection schedule for determining the overall effectiveness of
the SWPPP.
      6.   Such other additional information or data deemed necessary to ensure
compliance with the requirements of this article.
   B.   Storm water pollution prevention plans shall be stamped as approved by
a registered civil engineer. The authorized enforcement officer may waive such
requirement when it is self-evident that the construction activity is simple,
clearly shown, and entails no hazard or nuisance potential to adjacent
properties or watercourses, and does not include the placement of fill upon
which a structure may be erected.
   C.   Requests to modify a permit or an SWPPP shall be submitted and reviewed
in the same manner as provided in sections
9-7B-2 and
9-7B-3 of this article for permit applications; provided that any modification
deemed by the authorized enforcement officer to be minor may be approved on
site or informally by the authorized enforcement officer without the need for a
formal application and fee payment. Such informal modifications shall be
documented on a field report or correction notice, and the approved plans, with
a dated signature.
(Ord. 2006-45, 7-25-2006)
9-7B-5: SWPPP DESIGN REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   The authorized enforcement officer may establish by administrative
order city design criteria for grading, erosion control practices, sediment
control practices, and watercourse crossings, which administrative order shall
be effective upon filing in the city recorder's office.
   B.   Grading, erosion control practices, sediment control practices, and
watercourse crossings shall meet any design criteria established by the
authorized enforcement officer pursuant to subsection A of this section, and
shall be adequate to prevent transportation of sediment from the site to the
satisfaction of the authorized enforcement officer. Cut and fill slopes shall
be no greater than two to one (2:1), except as approved by the authorized
enforcement officer to meet other community or environmental objectives.
   C.   Clearing, except that necessary to establish sediment control devices,
shall not begin until all sediment control devices have been installed and have
been stabilized.
   D.   Erosion control practices shall, at a minimum, include the following:
      1.   Soil stabilization shall be completed within five (5) days of
clearing or inactivity in construction.
      2.   If seeding or another vegetative erosion control method is used, it
shall become established within two (2) weeks or the authorized enforcement
officer may require the site to be reseeded or a nonvegetative option employed.
      3.   Soil stockpiles maintained off site must be stabilized or covered at
the end of each workday.
      4.   Specialized techniques meeting design criteria approved by the
authorized enforcement officer must be employed to stabilize steep slopes or
along drainageways to ensure stabilization.
      5.   The entire site must be stabilized, using a heavy mulch layer or
another method that does not require germination to control erosion, at the
close of the construction season if applicable.
      6.   Techniques shall be employed to prevent the blowing of dust or
sediment from the site.
      7.   Techniques that divert upland runoff past disturbed slopes shall be
employed.
   E.   Sediment control requirements shall include:
      1.   Settling basins, sediment traps and perimeter controls.
      2.   Settling basins that are designed in a manner that allows adaptation
to provide long term storm water management, if required by the authorized
enforcement officer.
      3.   Protection for adjacent properties by the use of a vegetated buffer
strip in combination with perimeter controls.
   F.   Waterway and watercourse protection requirements shall include:
      1.   A temporary stream crossing installed and approved by the authorized
enforcement officer if a wet watercourse will be crossed regularly during
construction.
      2.   Stabilization of the watercourse channel before, during, and after
any in-channel work.
      3.   All on site storm water conveyance channels designed according to
city design criteria established pursuant to subsection A of this section or
the city's engineering standards adopted pursuant to title 7, chapter 6 of this
code.
      4.   Stabilization adequate to prevent erosion located at the outlets of
all pipes and paved channels.
   G.   Construction site access requirements shall include measures adequate
to ensure that sediment is not tracked onto public streets by construction
vehicles or washed into storm drains.
(Ord. 2006-45, 7-25-2006)
9-7B-6: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Erosion, sediment, or discharge of pollutants, resulting from
construction activity, which enter onto public property or private property not
controlled by the permit holder, shall be eliminated to the maximum extent
practicable unless otherwise permitted or exempted under this article.
   B.   All construction activity commenced pursuant to an approved storm water
pollution prevention plan or permit must at all times comply with the
conditions of the storm water pollution prevention plan or permit. The permit
holder shall be responsible for ensuring their contractor(s), subcontractor(s),
utility trenching subcontractor(s), and all other persons entering the site
abide by the conditions of the permit. The permit holder's signature or that of
his authorized agent on the permit shall constitute an agreement by the permit
holder to accept responsibility for meeting the conditions of the permit.
   C.   No construction activity shall take place without a valid permit unless
exempted herein. If a permit has been suspended or revoked, all work covered by
the permit shall cease until a new permit is issued.
   D.   The authorized enforcement officer shall receive notification of
pending permitted construction activity a minimum of forty eight (48) hours
prior to commencement of such activity.
   E.   All necessary action shall be taken to minimize the depositing and
tracking of mud, dirt, sand, gravel, rock or debris on the public right of way.
The owner of the site of the construction activity or the permit holder with
respect to the construction site shall be responsible for any cleanup of the
public rights of way, city storm drainage system, or private property not under
the permit holder's control necessitated from any tracking or depositing of
mud, dirt, sand, gravel, rock or debris, or shall reimburse the city for any
expenses incurred by the city to effectuate the cleanup.
   F.   Construction ramps shall be constructed of material that will not erode
or deteriorate under adverse conditions, and shall not be placed in a manner as
to interfere with or block the passage of storm water runoff.
   G.   No debris, dirt, aggregate or excavated materials, or construction
supplies shall be placed on the public right of way unless permitted by the
city. In addition, public sidewalks shall not be removed, blocked, or otherwise
rendered unusable by construction activity, equipment or materials, or portable
toilets, unless a safe, usable alternative walkway, meeting the city's
engineering standards adopted pursuant to title 7, chapter 6, of this code, is
placed on the same side of the right of way by the contractor.
   H.   No owner or lessee of real property shall allow the property to be
unoccupied, unused, vacant or undeveloped after the topsoil has been disturbed
or the natural cover removed, unless control measures are undertaken to prevent
mud, sand, dirt and gravel from migrating off site and entering the public
right of way or the city's storm water system. Soil or aggregate stockpiles
shall not be stored on unoccupied, vacant, unused, or undeveloped property
unless otherwise permitted by the city and such control measures are in place.
This provision is not meant to prevent individual homeowners from accepting
title of land that is not yet landscaped, and such homeowners will not be in
violation of this chapter.
   I.   All temporary erosion and sediment control measures shall be removed
after final site stabilization. Trapped sediment and other disturbed soil areas
resulting from the removal of temporary measures shall be permanently
stabilized within thirty (30) days from removal of the temporary measures.
(Ord. 2006-45, 7-25-2006)
9-7B-7: INSPECTION:
   A.   Required Inspections:
      1.   Under the permit, the authorized enforcement officer may require
inspections at the following stages of construction activity:
         a.   Start of construction;
         b.   Installation of sediment and erosion measures;
         c.   Completion of site clearing;
         d.   Completion of rough grading;
         e.   Completion of final grading;
         f.   Close of the construction season, if applicable; and
         g.   Completion of final landscaping.
      2.   If required, the authorized enforcement officer shall either approve
that portion of the work completed or shall notify the permit holder wherein
the work fails to comply with the permit or SWPPP as approved. To obtain
required inspections, the permittee shall notify the authorized enforcement
officer at least twenty four (24) hours before any required inspection.
   B.   Control Measures: The permittee or the permittee's agent shall make
regular inspections of all control measures, including, but not limited to,
inspection of erosion control measures before rainstorms when there is a five
(5) day forecast of rain. Such inspections shall be under the supervision of a
registered civil engineer. The authorized enforcement officer may waive such
requirement when it is self-evident that the work is simple, clearly shown, and
does not include the placement of fill upon which a structure may be erected.
The purpose of such inspections will be to determine the overall effectiveness
of the control plan and the need for additional control measures. All
inspections shall be documented in written form and made available upon request
to the authorized enforcement officer, or submitted to the authorized
enforcement officer at such time intervals specified in the approved permit.
   C.   Authorized Enforcement Officer: The authorized enforcement officer may
enter the property of the permit holder as deemed necessary to make regular
inspections to ensure the validity of the reports filed under subsection B of
this section.
   D.   Plans: Plans for grading, stripping, excavating, and filling work
bearing the stamp of approval of the authorized enforcement officer shall be
maintained at the site during the progress of the work.
(Ord. 2006-45, 7-25-2006)
9-7B-8: STOP WORK ORDERS:
   A.   The authorized enforcement officer may suspend or revoke a permit, or
stop work on a construction activity, either for the entire construction
project or any specified part thereof, if any of the following conditions
exist:
      1.   Any land disturbing activity is being undertaken without a required
permit;
      2.   The SWPPP is not fully implemented;
      3.   The applicant fails to obtain an extension on an expired permit; or
      4.   Any of the conditions of the permit are not being met.
   B.   The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner
of the real property involved, the owner's agent, or to the person doing the
work. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work shall immediately
cease. The stop work order shall state the reason for the order, and the
conditions under which the cited work will be permitted to resume.
   C.   Any person who continues any work after having been served with a stop
work order, except such work as that person is directed to either implement the
SWPPP, meet the conditions of the permit, or otherwise comply with the
requirements of this article, shall be in violation of this section.
(Ord. 2006-45, 7-25-2006)
ARTICLE C.  RESERVED
ARTICLE D.  ILLICIT DISCHARGES
SECTION:
9-7D-1: Applicability
9-7D-2: Prohibition Of Illegal Discharges
9-7D-3: Prohibition Of Illicit Connections
9-7D-4: Suspension Of MS4 Access
9-7D-5: Industrial Or Construction Activity Discharges
9-7D-6: Monitoring Of Discharges
9-7D-7: Requirements To Prevent, Control, And Reduce Storm Water Pollutants By
The Use Of Best Management Practices
9-7D-8: Watercourse Protection
9-7D-9: Notification Of Spills
9-7D-10: Enforcement
9-7D-11: Appeal Of Notice Of Violation
9-7D-12: Enforcement Measures After Appeal
9-7D-13: Recovery Of Cost Of Abatement Or Remediation
9-7D-14: Violations Deemed A Public Nuisance
9-7D-15: Attorney Fees, Costs And Expenses
9-7D-1: APPLICABILITY:
This article shall apply to all water entering the city storm drain system or
the waters of the state of Utah generated on any developed and undeveloped
lands unless explicitly exempted under the provisions of this article.
(Ord. 2006-45, 7-25-2006)
9-7D-2: PROHIBITION OF ILLEGAL DISCHARGES:
   A.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the city storm
drain system or watercourses any materials, including, but not limited to,
pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a
violation of applicable water quality standards, other than storm water.
   B.   The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to
the storm drain system is prohibited except as described as follows:
      1.   The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this article: water line flushing or other potable water
sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising
ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped
ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active ground water
dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs,
noncommercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows,
swimming pools (if dechlorinated - typically less than one PPM chlorine),
firefighting activities, and any other water source not containing pollutants.
      2.   Discharges specified in writing by the authorized enforcement agency
as being necessary to protect public health and safety.
      3.   Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal
notification to the authorized enforcement agency prior to the time of the
test.
      4.   The prohibition shall not apply to any nonstorm water discharge
permitted under a UPDES or NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order
issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the federal
environmental protection agency, provided that the discharger is in full
compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other
applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been
granted for any discharge to the storm drain system.
(Ord. 2006-45, 7-25-2006)
9-7D-3: PROHIBITION OF ILLICIT CONNECTIONS:
   A.   The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.
   B.   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was
permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of
connection.
   C.   A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person
connects a line conveying sewage to the city storm water system (MS4), or
allows such a connection to continue.
(Ord. 2006-45, 7-25-2006)
9-7D-4: SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS:
   A.   Suspension Due To Illicit Discharges In Emergency Situations: The
authorized enforcement officer may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge
access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or
threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial
danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the
MS4 or waters of the state of Utah. If the violator fails to comply with a
suspension order issued in an emergency, the authorized enforcement agency may
take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or
waters of the state of Utah, or to minimize danger to persons.
   B.   Suspension Due To The Detection Of Illicit Discharge: Any person
discharging to the MS4 in violation of this article may have their MS4 access
terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The
authorized enforcement officer will notify a violator of the proposed
termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the authorized
enforcement officer for a reconsideration and hearing.
   C.   Illegal Reinstatement: A person commits an offense if the person
reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this section, without
the prior approval of the authorized enforcement agency.
(Ord. 2006-45, 7-25-2006)
9-7D-5: INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY DISCHARGES:
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity UPDES storm water
discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of
compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the
authorized enforcement officer prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4.
(Ord. 2006-45, 7-25-2006)
9-7D-6: MONITORING OF DISCHARGES:
   A.   Applicability: This section applies to all facilities that have storm
water discharges associated with industrial activity, including construction
activity.
   B.   Access To Facilities:
      1.   The authorized enforcement officer shall be permitted to enter and
inspect facilities subject to regulation under this article as often as may be
necessary to determine compliance with this article. If a discharger has
security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance
before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary
arrangements to allow access to representatives of the authorized enforcement
agency.
      2.   Facility operators shall allow the authorized enforcement officer
ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection,
sampling, examination and copying of records that must be kept under the
conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge storm water, and the performance of
any additional duties as defined by state and federal law.
      3.   The authorized enforcement officer shall have the right to set up on
any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the
authorized enforcement officer to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the
facility's storm water discharge.
      4.   The authorized enforcement officer has the right to require the
discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's
sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe
and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All
devices used to measure storm water flow and quality shall be calibrated to
ensure their accuracy.
      5.   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
operator at the written or oral request of the authorized enforcement officer
and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by
the operator.
      6.   Unreasonable delays in allowing the authorized enforcement officer
access to a permitted facility is a violation of a storm water discharge permit
and of this article. A person who is the operator of a facility with a UPDES
permit to discharge storm water associated with industrial activity commits an
offense if the person denies the authorized enforcement officer reasonable
access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity
authorized or required by this article.
      7.   If the authorized enforcement officer has been refused access to any
part of the premises from which storm water is discharged, and he/she is able
to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this
article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine
inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article
or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety,
and welfare of the community, then the authorized enforcement agency may seek
issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2006-45, 7-25-2006)
9-7D-7: REQUIREMENTS TO PREVENT, CONTROL, AND REDUCE STORM WATER POLLUTANTS BY
THE USE OF BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES:
The authorized enforcement officer will adopt requirements identifying best
management practices for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause
or contribute to pollution or contamination of storm water, the city storm
water system, or waters of the state of Utah. The owner or operator of a
commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at their own expense,
reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or
other wastes into the city storm water system or waters of the state of Utah
through the use of these structural and nonstructural BMPs. Further, any person
responsible for a property or premises, which is, or may be, the source of an
illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's expense,
additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the further discharge
of pollutants to the city storm water system or watercourses. Compliance with
all terms and conditions of a valid UPDES permit authorizing the discharge of
storm water associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable,
shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section. These BMPs
shall be part of a storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) as necessary
for compliance with requirements of the UPDES permit.
(Ord. 2006-45, 7-25-2006)
9-7D-8: WATERCOURSE PROTECTION:
Every person owning property by or through which a watercourse passes, or such
person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles
that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water
through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain
existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so
that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical
integrity of the watercourse.
(Ord. 2006-45, 7-25-2006)
9-7D-9: NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS:
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible
for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a
facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of
materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants
discharging into storm water, the storm drain system, or water of the U.S. said
person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and
cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials
said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the
occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of
nonhazardous materials, said person shall notify the authorized enforcement
officer in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day.
Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice
addressed and mailed to the authorized enforcement officer within three (3)
business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials
emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator
of such establishment shall also retain an on site written record of the
discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall
be retained for at least three (3) years.
(Ord. 2006-45, 7-25-2006)
9-7D-10: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Notice Of Violation: Whenever the authorized enforcement officer finds
that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of
this article, the authorized enforcement officer may order compliance by
written notice of violation to the owner and any other responsible persons.
Such notice may require, without limitation:
      1.   The obtaining of a required permit;
      2.   Submission of storm water pollution prevention plan;
      3.   The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
      4.   The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
      5.   That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and
desist;
      6.   The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property;
      7.   Payment of a civil penalty or the imposition of costs to cover
administrative and abatement or remediation costs; and
      8.   The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
   B.   Abatement; Deadline: If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of
affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within
which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall
further advise, if the authorized enforcement officer anticipates city
performance of abatement, that should the violator fail to remediate or restore
within the established deadline, the work may be done by the city or a
contractor hired by the city and the expense thereof charged to the owner.
(Ord. 2006-45, 7-25-2006)
9-7D-11: APPEAL OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the
authorized enforcement officer. The notice of appeal must be filed in writing
in the city recorder's office within ten (10) days of date of the notice of
violation. Hearings shall be conducted as provided in title 4, chapter 4,
article A of this code. All applications for hearing shall be accompanied by a
copy of the notice of violation and the applicable fee established in section
4-6-1 of this code.
(Ord. 2006-45, 7-25-2006)
9-7D-12: ENFORCEMENT MEASURES AFTER APPEAL:
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth
in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within thirty (30)
days of the decision of the hearing officer upholding the decision of the
authorized enforcement officer, then the authorized enforcement officer, in
addition to any other remedy provided herein, may enter upon the subject
private property and is authorized to take any and all measures necessary to
abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any
person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow
the authorized enforcement officer or designated contractor to enter upon the
premises for the purposes set forth above.
(Ord. 2006-45, 7-25-2006)
9-7D-13: RECOVERY OF COST OF ABATEMENT OR REMEDIATION:
   A.   Itemized Statement; Preparation And Delivery: If city abatement or
remediation is performed pursuant to section
9-7D-12 of this article, the city treasurer, in coordination with the
authorized enforcement officer, shall prepare an itemized statement of all
expenses incurred by the city in the performance of such abatement work
authorized under the provisions of this article, together with all
administrative costs incurred by the city, and shall mail a copy thereof to the
owner of the property demanding payment within thirty (30) days of the date of
mailing. Such notice shall be considered served when mailed by certified mail
addressed to the property owner's last known address.
   B.   Failure To Make Payment: In the event the property owner fails to make
payment of the amount set forth in the statement described in subsection A of
this section to the city treasurer within thirty (30) days of the date of
mailing, the city treasurer may cause suit to be brought in an appropriate
court of law or may refer the matter to the county treasurer as provided
herein.
   C.   Hearing: Any property owner mailed a statement of itemized costs and
demand for payment may request a hearing before the mayor or a hearing officer
designated by the mayor. All applications shall be made by filing a written
application in the city recorder's office, together with a copy of the
statement and the fee established in section
4-6-1 of this code, within ten (10) days of the date of mailing of the
statement. Upon receipt of an application for hearing, the city recorder shall
immediately notify the authorized enforcement officer and the city treasurer.
Hearings shall be conducted as provided in title 4, chapter 4, article A of
this code.
   D.   Collection Through Taxes: In the event that the city elects to refer
the expenses to the county treasurer for inclusion in the tax notice of the
property owner, the city treasurer shall make in triplicate an itemized
statement of all expenses and administrative costs incurred in the city's
performance of such abatement work and shall deliver the three (3) copies of
said statement to the county treasurer within ten (10) days after the
expiration of the thirty (30) day period. Thereupon the costs of said work
shall be pursued by the county treasurer in the same manner provided in section
12-8-9 of this code.
   E.   Collection By Lawsuit: In the event collection of costs of abatement
are pursued through the courts, the city shall sue for and receive judgment for
all of said expenses of abatement, together with all administrative costs
incurred by the city, reasonable attorney fees, interest and court costs, and
shall execute upon such judgment in the manner provided by law.
(Ord. 2006-45, 7-25-2006)
9-7D-14: VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE:
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition
caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this
article is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and
deemed a public nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the
owner's expense as provided herein, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or
otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken pursuant to title
1, chapter 4, article C, of this code.
(Ord. 2006-45, 7-25-2006)
9-7D-15: ATTORNEY FEES, COSTS AND EXPENSES:
The authorized enforcement agency may recover all attorney fees, court costs
and other expenses associated with enforcement of this article, including
sampling and monitoring expenses.
(Ord. 2006-45, 7-25-2006)
ARTICLE E.  PENALTIES
SECTION:
9-7E-1: Penalty
9-7E-2: Remedies Not Exclusive
9-7E-1: PENALTY:
   A.   Criminal Penalties: Any person who violates any of the provisions of
this chapter, or who fails to comply with an order of suspension, revocation or
stop work issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, shall be deemed
guilty of a class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished
as set forth in title 1, chapter 4, article A of this code.
   B.   Civil Penalties: Failure to correct a violation of this chapter after
notice of violation and expiration of the warning period may be enforced by
imposition of the following civil penalties pursuant to title 1, chapter 4,
article B of this code:
      1.   The first civil citation issued after expiration of the warning
period shall subject the person to the initial penalty as provided in
subsection C of this section.
      2.   The second civil citation issued after expiration of the warning
period and the prior imposition of the initial penalty shall subject the person
to the intermediate penalty as provided in subsection C of this section.
      3.   Any subsequent civil citation issued after expiration of the warning
period and the prior imposition of an intermediate penalty, or any reoccurring
violation under section
1-4B-6 of this code, shall subject the person to the maximum penalty as
provided in subsection C of this section.
   C.   Civil Penalty Schedule: Violations of this chapter shall carry civil
penalties pursuant to the following schedule:
 
Violation Classification   Initial Penalty Intermediate  Maximum Penalty
                                            Penalty
1. Failure to obtain a
required permit or submit a     $ 125.00     $ 250.00   $ 500.00
required SWPPP
2. Failure to comply with
the conditions of an SWPP
permit, an approved SWPPP,      125.00       250.00     500.00
or a suspension, revocation
or stop work order
3. Failure to comply with a
final notice of violation
pursuant to section
9-7D-10 of this chapter;
provided that, if the           125.00       250.00     500.00
violation involves: a) a                                  
direct discharge or spill                                 
into the waters of the state                              
of Utah; b) any discharge or                              
spill within 300 feet of the                              
Ogden River or the Weber                                  
River; or c) a failure to                                 
maintain the Ogden River or     1,000.00     1,000.00     1,000.00
the Weber River pursuant to
section
9-7D-8 of this chapter, the
penalty shall be:
 
   D.   Injunctive Relief: This chapter may also be enforced by injunction,
mandamus, abatement or any other appropriate judicial action in law or equity.
   E.   Separate Offense Each Day: Each day that any violation of this chapter
continues shall be considered a separate offense for purposes of the penalties
and remedies available to the city.
   F.   Compliance Not Excused: No criminal conviction or imposition of
penalties shall excuse the person from otherwise complying with the provisions
of this chapter.
(Ord. 2006-45, 7-25-2006)
9-7E-2: REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE:
The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the
discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative remedies.
(Ord. 2006-45, 7-25-2006)
CHAPTER 8
WATER SHORTAGE MANAGEMENT PLAN
SECTION:
9-8-1: Findings; Purpose
9-8-2: Definitions
9-8-3: Plan Required
9-8-4: Violations Deemed A Public Nuisance
9-8-5: Enforcement
9-8-6: Appeal Of Notice Of Violation
9-8-7: Penalty
9-8-1: FINDINGS; PURPOSE:
   A.   The city council finds and declares that adequate water supply and
availability will always play a significant role in safeguarding the public
welfare, that recurring drought conditions are a normal part of the climate of
Ogden City, and that the city should plan in advance for fluctuations in the
available water supply.
   B.   It is further found and determined that the policy of the city is to
anticipate and prepare for water shortages of varying degrees and duration
regardless of the reason for such shortage; encourage water conservation; make
the maximum beneficial use of water from all sources available to the city
without unnecessary waste; and maintain sufficient water supplies to meet the
reasonable future needs of the public. This chapter is enacted to achieve these
policies and to protect the public in times of water shortage.
(Ord. 2009-32, 4-28-2009)
9-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the indicated
meanings:
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: The employees of the city designated by the
mayor with the authority to enforce the provisions of this title and the duly
approved water shortage management plan provided for in this chapter.
DIRECTOR: The director of the department of public services.
EXTREME WATER SHORTAGE: The water supply condition with the greatest number of
mandatory water use restrictions. At the beginning of the irrigation season,
extreme water shortage conditions may be declared only when the SWSI scale is
below -3.51. An extreme water shortage may also be declared when any other
conditions exist, as provided in the water shortage management plan, requiring
significant curtailment in the use of water in all or a large part of the city.
MANAGER: The manager of the water utility division within the department of
public services.
MODERATE WATER SHORTAGE: The water supply condition with the second fewest
number of mandatory water use restrictions. At the beginning of the irrigation
season, moderate water shortage conditions may be declared only when the SWSI
scale is below -1.76.
NORMAL WATER CONDITIONS: The water supply condition where water supply is
expected to adequately meet demand and which has the fewest number of mandatory
water use restrictions. At the beginning of the irrigation season, normal water
conditions exist when the SWSI scale is between +4.1 and -1.75.
SEVERE WATER SHORTAGE: The water supply condition with the second greatest
number of mandatory use restrictions. At the beginning of the irrigation
season, severe water shortage conditions may be declared only when the SWSI
scale is below -2.76.
SURFACE WATER SUPPLY INDEX (SWSI): The index formulated and disseminated by the
United States department of agriculture's natural resources conservation
service for the Ogden River drainage that is scaled from +4.1 (abundant water
supply) to -4.1 (extremely dry) with a value of zero indicating median water
supply as compared to historical analysis. The manager will use the report
issued closest to April 1 of each year in determining the water supply
conditions at the beginning of the irrigation season.
WATER SHORTAGE MANAGEMENT PLAN: The plan prepared pursuant to this chapter
encouraging water conservation and imposing restrictions on the use of water
depending on the available water supply.
(Ord. 2009-32, 4-28-2009)
9-8-3: PLAN REQUIRED:
The director together with the manager shall prepare a water shortage
management plan which, before being implemented, shall be approved by
resolution of the city council.
   A.   Mandatory Provisions: The plan, including approved revisions adopted as
conditions and experience warrant, shall at a minimum:
      1.   Include water usage recommendations and mandatory restrictions
during periods of normal water conditions, moderate water shortage, severe
water shortage and extreme water shortage. Separate recommendations and
restrictions shall be provided for residential, commercial and industrial, and
governmental water users.
      2.   Include guidelines and criteria, in addition to the surface water
supply index, for determining the water supply condition at the beginning of
the irrigation season and under what conditions the water supply condition
should be upgraded or downgraded in response to various water supply, delivery,
and demand conditions.
   B.   Optional Provisions: The plan, including approved revisions adopted as
conditions and experience warrant, may:
      1.   Include a process allowing a person using large volumes of water to
submit for the review and approval of the manager its own water use plan under
which it will operate during periods of drought or water shortage. The manager
may approve a water use plan only if it meets the water reduction targets
associated with each water supply condition set forth in the water shortage
management plan or provides an offsetting public benefit.
      2.   Set higher standards for reduction of city water use during each
water supply condition.
      3.   Allow a person violating a mandatory water use restriction to
receive a warning and be given a period of time to come into compliance with
the terms of the plan.
   C.   Declaration Of Shortage Conditions: Extreme water shortage conditions,
and the accompanying water use restrictions, shall be implemented by
declaration of the mayor upon the advice and recommendation of the director
pursuant to the plan guidelines. Moderate water shortage and severe water
shortage may be declared by the manager pursuant to the plan guidelines.
   D.   Compliance: The plan shall specify a method for providing notice of
violation of mandatory water use restrictions. Other than time of day
irrigation restrictions, the plan may not provide for mandatory water use
restrictions on residential or commercial customers until either: 1) a severe
water shortage condition has been declared; or 2) the director otherwise
determines that, in the exercise of his or her best professional judgment, the
city is unable to meet anticipated essential water needs without implementing
such mandatory measures.
   E.   Enforcement: Compliance with all mandatory response measures set forth
in the plan may be enforced through the imposition and collection of civil
fines, as provided in this chapter. If the plan allows for approval of
independent water plans, a person with an approved water use plan is not
subject to civil fines so long as the terms of the approved plan are followed.
Any person who, within fifteen (15) days after being served with a notice of
violation, fails to pay any civil fine imposed pursuant to this chapter, or
fails to make satisfactory arrangements to pay such civil fine with the
manager, shall be subject to having the water supply to the premises of such
customer shut off. Water service shall be restored only upon full payment of
the civil fine imposed and payment of the turnon fee provided in section
9-1-11 of this title. In addition, at the manager's sole discretion, a customer
may be required to install flow restrictors.
   F.   Plan Nonexclusive: The creation and implementation of the water
shortage management plan as provided in this chapter shall be in addition to,
and not in place of, any other actions taken by the city from time to time to
conserve water or manage limited water supplies, including administrative
orders issued pursuant to section
9-1-8 of this title. Limitations on the use of water by any customer of the
water utility described elsewhere in this code remain in force and shall be in
addition to any restrictions required by the water shortage management plan.
(Ord. 2009-32, 4-28-2009)
9-8-4: VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE:
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, use of water
in violation of the mandatory response measures identified in the plan during
periods of severe water shortage or extreme water shortage is a threat to
public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a public
nuisance, and may be summarily abated at the owner's expense, and/or a civil
action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may
be taken pursuant to title 1, chapter 4, article C of this code.
(Ord. 2009-32, 4-28-2009)
9-8-5: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Notice Of Violation: Whenever an authorized enforcement officer finds
that a person has violated a provision of this title or a mandatory restriction
identified in the water shortage management plan, the authorized enforcement
officer may issue a notice of violation to the property owner, customer, or any
other occupant of the property where a violation is occurring.
   B.   Service Of Notice: Service of a notice of violation shall be complete
when made in the following manner:
      1.   In person on any occupant of the property where a violation is
occurring who is fourteen (14) years of age or older; or
      2.   By posting the notice in a conspicuous place on the premises where
the violation is occurring together with mailing the notice to the billing
address on file with the water utility division.
   C.   Abatement; Deadline: In addition to any other penalty imposed by this
chapter, abatement of a violation may be required by the authorized enforcement
officer. In such case, the notice of violation shall set forth a deadline
within which such abatement must be completed.
(Ord. 2009-32, 4-28-2009)
9-8-6: APPEAL OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the
authorized enforcement officer. The notice of appeal must be filed in writing
in the city recorder's office within ten (10) days of the date of the notice of
violation. Hearings shall be conducted as provided in title 4, chapter 4,
article A of this code. All applications for hearing shall be accompanied by a
copy of the notice of violation and the applicable fee established in section
4-6-1 of this code. As part of an appeal, any civil fine based on a violation
susceptible to corrective action may be reduced or waived by the appeal officer
if the person completes corrective action within a reasonable period of time,
taking into account the nature of the violation, the nature of the action
needed, and the anticipated cost of the corrective action. The scope and
benefit of any proposed corrective action must first be reviewed and approved
by the manager prior to any fine reduction.
(Ord. 2009-32, 4-28-2009)
9-8-7: PENALTY:
   A.   Civil Penalties: Failure to comply with the provisions of this title or
the mandatory water restrictions outlined in the water shortage management plan
shall be enforced by imposition of the following civil penalties pursuant to
title 1, chapter 4, article B of this code:
      1.   The first notice of violation issued after expiration of any
applicable warning period shall subject the person to the initial penalty as
provided in subsection B of this section, and may direct the person to meet
with the manager to discuss how to modify their water use.
      2.   The second notice of violation issued after expiration of any
applicable warning period and the prior imposition of the initial penalty shall
subject the person to the intermediate penalty as provided in subsection B of
this section, and may direct the person to meet with the manager to discuss how
to modify their water use.
      3.   Any subsequent notice of violation issued after expiration of any
applicable warning period and the prior imposition of an intermediate penalty,
or any reoccurring violation under section
1-4B-6 of this code, shall subject the person to the maximum penalty as
provided in subsection B of this section and termination of water service.
   B.   Civil Penalty Schedule: Violations of this chapter shall carry civil
penalties pursuant to the following schedule:
 
                             1st Violation     2nd Violation 3rd And Additional
Violation Classification     (Initial Penalty) (Intermediate Violations
                                               Penalty)      (Maximum Penalty)
1. Failure to comply with
mandatory water use
restrictions imposed by this
title or the water shortage  $ 50.00           $  100.00    $  150.00
management plan during
normal water conditions or
moderate water shortage
2. Failure to comply with
mandatory water use
restrictions imposed by this
title or the water shortage  125.00            250.00        500.00
management plan during
severe water shortage
conditions
3. Failure to comply with
mandatory water use
restrictions imposed by this
title or the water shortage  500.00            1,000.00      1,000.00
management plan during
extreme water shortage
conditions
 
   C.   Violation History: The violation level shall be based on violation
history for the preceding twelve (12) months. A civil fine for a person's first
violation of mandatory water use restrictions provided in the water shortage
management plan during normal water conditions shall be imposed only after the
issuance of a written warning to such person.
   D.   Use Of Fines Collected: All fines collected pursuant to this section
shall be set aside in a segregated fund within the water department, and used
exclusively for paying all or a portion of the costs and expenses incurred by
the city in connection with the implementation and administration of the plan
and other elements of the city's water conservation program.
   E.   Separate Offense Each Day: Each day that any violation of this chapter
continues shall be considered a separate offense for purposes of the penalties
and remedies available to the city.
   F.   Compliance Not Excused: No criminal conviction or imposition of civil
penalties shall excuse the person from otherwise complying with the provisions
of this chapter.
(Ord. 2009-32, 4-28-2009)
TITLE 10
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
MOTOR VEHICLE STATUTES
SECTION:
10-1-1: Motor Vehicle Act
10-1-2: Uniform Driver License Act
10-1-3: Uniform Act Regulating Traffic On Highways
10-1-4: Motor Vehicle Seat Belt Usage Act
10-1-5: Financial Responsibility Of Motor Vehicle Owners And Operators Act
10-1-6: Off-Highway Vehicles Act
10-1-7: Motor Vehicle Insurance Laws
10-1-1: MOTOR VEHICLE ACT:
The Motor Vehicle Act, Utah Code Annotated title 41, chapter 1a, is hereby
adopted as a City ordinance. Provided, however, that any provision of the
foregoing having a penalty which cannot be imposed for violation of a City
ordinance is not adopted.
(1979 Code § 10.02.010; Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994)
10-1-2: UNIFORM DRIVER LICENSE ACT:
The Uniform Driver License Act, Utah Code Annotated title 53, chapter 3, is
hereby adopted as a City ordinance. Provided, however, that any provision of
the foregoing having a penalty which cannot be imposed for violation of a City
ordinance is not adopted.
(1979 Code § 10.02.020; Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994)
10-1-3: UNIFORM ACT REGULATING TRAFFIC ON HIGHWAYS:
The Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways, Utah Code Annotated title 41,
chapter 6, is hereby adopted as a City ordinance. Provided, however, that any
provision of the foregoing having a penalty which cannot be imposed for
violation of a City ordinance is not adopted.
(1979 Code § 10.02.030; Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994)
10-1-4: MOTOR VEHICLE SEAT BELT USAGE ACT:
The Motor Vehicle Seat Belt Usage Act, Utah Code Annotated title 41, chapter 6,
article 17, is hereby adopted as a City ordinance. Provided, however, that any
provision of the foregoing having a penalty which cannot be imposed for
violation of a City ordinance is not adopted.
(1979 Code § 10.02.040; Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994)
10-1-5: FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY OF MOTOR VEHICLE OWNERS AND OPERATORS ACT:
The Financial Responsibility of Motor Vehicle Owners and Operators Act, Utah
Code Annotated title 41, chapter 12a, is hereby adopted as a City ordinance.
Provided, however, that any provision of the foregoing having a penalty which
cannot be imposed for violation of a City ordinance is not adopted.
(1979 Code § 10.02.050; Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994)
10-1-6: OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLES ACT:
The Off-Highway Vehicles Act, Utah Code Annotated title 41, chapter 22, is
hereby adopted as a City ordinance. Provided, however, that any provision of
the foregoing having a penalty which cannot be imposed for violation of a City
ordinance is not adopted.
(1979 Code § 10.02.060; Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994)
10-1-7: MOTOR VEHICLE INSURANCE LAWS:
The Motor Vehicle Insurance laws, Utah Code Annotated title 31a, chapter 22,
part III, is hereby adopted as a City ordinance. Provided, however, that any
provision of the foregoing having a penalty which cannot be imposed for
violation of a City ordinance is not adopted.
(1979 Code § 10.02.070; Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994)
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
10-2-1: Definitions
10-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
In addition to the definitions of words and phrases within Utah Code Annotated
title 41, as amended, as adopted in chapter 1 of this title, the following
terms as used in this title shall have the meanings designated:
ABANDONED JUNK VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle extensively damaged, such damage
including, but not limited to, the following:
   A.   Broken window or windshield;
   B.   Missing wheels and/or tires;
   C.   Missing motor and/or transmission.
AUTOMOBILE HULK: Synonymous with a wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle
and means the remnant or remains of a motor vehicle which is inoperative and
cannot be made mechanically operative without the addition of vital parts and
the application of a substantial amount of labor to effect repairs.
CITY TRAFFIC ENGINEER: The city employee designated by the mayor as holding the
office of city traffic engineer and charged with exercising the powers and
duties of the city traffic engineer as prescribed in the provisions of this
code.
MUTCD: The "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices For Streets And
Highways".
RESIDENTIAL AREA: For purposes of sections
10-5-22 and
10-5-23 of this title: a) any street, alley or public right of way immediately
adjacent to property on which is located a house, duplex, apartment, or other
residential structure; or b) an entire linear block of any street, alley or
public right of way adjacent to properties which are predominantly occupied by
such residential structures. "Linear block" means both sides of that portion of
any street that has street numbers ranging between any two (2) consecutive
multiples of one hundred (100).
(1979 Code § 10.04.010; amd. Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994; Ord. 95-7, 1-24-1995; Ord.
2006-71, 11-14-2006)
CHAPTER 3
ADMINISTRATION OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-3-1: Rulemaking Authority
10-3-2: Traffic Rules And Regulations
10-3-3: Traffic Control Devices; Standards
10-3-4: Police Department; Authority To Enforce And Direct
10-3-5: Unauthorized Devices And Commercial Advertisements
10-3-6: Closed Or Restricted Use Streets
10-3-7: Emergency Vehicles
10-3-8: Workers And Equipment On Streets
10-3-9: Obedience To Peace Officer Or Traffic Controllers
10-3-10: Applicability To Pushcarts, Bicycles And Animals
10-3-11: Penalty
10-3-1: RULEMAKING AUTHORITY:
The mayor is empowered to make and enforce regulations necessary to make
effective the provisions of this chapter and to make and enforce temporary
regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions.
(1979 Code § 10.08.070; amd. Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994)
10-3-2: TRAFFIC RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   City Traffic Engineer Authority: The city traffic engineer is
authorized to place and maintain the following traffic control devices relating
to the use of the public streets of the city, whenever, upon a traffic and
engineering investigation he or she finds that it is necessary to regulate,
warn or guide traffic:
      1.   Traffic Lanes: Designating the streets and roadways which shall be
laned for traffic, specifying the number of lanes for travel in each direction
and the width of each traffic lane;
      2.   One-Way Streets: Designating and specifying the streets or portions
thereof upon which vehicular travel shall move only in one specified direction,
provided that an existing two-way street shall not be changed to a one-way
street unless approved by administrative order of the mayor;
      3.   Division Of Streets Into Separate Roadways: Designating which
streets or portions thereof shall be divided into separate roadways, and
providing for the division of the same into separate roadways, regulating or
prohibiting the crossing from one roadway to the other on such streets and
specifying the place and manner in which the roadway shall be divided as
aforesaid;
      4.   Through Highways And Stop Intersections: Designating the streets or
portions thereof which shall be through highways and the intersections of
streets which shall be stop intersections, and requiring a full stop by
vehicles before entering thereon;
      5.   Yielding Of Right Of Way: Designating the intersections in the
public streets of the city where safety and efficiency require the normal right
of way rule to be modified in favor of one of the intersecting streets or
highways and regulating and requiring the yielding of right of way at such
intersections;
      6.   Left And Right Turns: Designating the intersections in the public
streets of the city at which, during all or at specified times, either left or
right turns, or both, by vehicular traffic is prohibited;
      7.   Traffic Control Signals: Designating street intersections at which
vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic shall be controlled by traffic control
signals;
      8.   Parking: Regulating, restricting and/or prohibiting the stopping,
standing or parking of vehicles upon designated portions of the public streets,
either entirely or at designated times, and/or restricting the length of time
during which any vehicle may remain parked in designated places on the public
streets, provided that:
         a.   The permitting of angle parking shall first be authorized by
administrative order of the mayor pursuant to section
10-5-9 of this title,
         b.   Designating locations subject to time restrictions under section
10-5-4 of this title shall first be approved by administrative order of the
mayor;
      9.   Crosswalks: Designating crosswalks for pedestrians in addition to
those established by law or ordinance at street intersections;
      10.   Safety Zones: Establishing safety zones for the protection of
pedestrians;
      11.   Passenger Loading Zones: Establishing passenger loading and
unloading zones and regulating the use thereof;
      12.   Truck Loading Zones: Establishing truck loading and unloading zones
and regulating the use thereof;
      13.   Bus Zones: Establishing public bus stops or zones and regulating
the use thereof;
      14.   Taxi Zones: Establishing and designating taxicab stands and
regulating the use thereof;
      15.   School Crossing Zones: Establishing school crossing zones and
regulating the use thereof;
      16.   Parking Zones Reserved For Disabled Persons: Establishing parking
areas reserved for persons with disabilities and regulating the use thereof;
      17.   Reduced Speed School Zones: Reduced speed school zones as defined
in Utah Code Annotated section 41-6a-303; and
      18.   Miscellaneous: The establishment of any other traffic control
device necessary to carry out the provisions of this title.
   B.   Previously Established Rules: Traffic control devices installed prior
to November 14, 2006, are presumptively valid and shall continue in force and
effect until such time as they may be altered as provided herein.
(1979 Code § 10.08.020; amd. Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994; 1999 Code; Ord. 2006-71,
11-14-2006)
10-3-3: TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES; STANDARDS:
All traffic control devices shall be installed and maintained in conformance
with the most recent edition of the "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices
For Streets And Highways" (MUTCD) and other standards issued or endorsed by the
federal highway administrator and the manual and specifications adopted by the
Utah transportation commission.
(1979 Code § 10.08.030; amd. Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994; Ord. 2006-71, 11-14-2006)
10-3-4: POLICE DEPARTMENT; AUTHORITY TO ENFORCE AND DIRECT:
It shall be the duty of the police department to administer and enforce the
provisions of this title. Officers of the police department are authorized to
direct all traffic, either in person or by means of visible or audible signal,
in conformance with the provisions of this title; provided, that in the event
of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians,
officers of the police or fire department may direct traffic, as conditions may
require, notwithstanding the provisions of this title.
(1979 Code § 10.08.040; amd. Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994)
10-3-5: UNAUTHORIZED DEVICES AND COMMERCIAL ADVERTISEMENTS:
   A.   Prohibited: No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view
of any highway any unauthorized sign, signal, light, marking or device which
purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic control
device or signal, or authorized emergency vehicle flashing light or which
attempts to direct the movement of traffic; or which hides from view or
interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic device; or which is
of such brilliant illumination and so positioned as to blind or dazzle a driver
on any highway adjacent thereto, and no person shall place or maintain nor
shall any public authority permit upon any highway any traffic sign or signal
bearing thereon any commercial advertising.
   B.   Exception: This shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon
private property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional
information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs.
   C.   Declared Public Nuisance; Removal: Every such prohibited sign, signal
light or marking is declared to be a public nuisance, and the City Traffic
Engineer or any police officer is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause
it to be removed without notice.
(1979 Code § 10.08.035; Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994)
10-3-6: CLOSED OR RESTRICTED USE STREETS:
   A.   Authority; Barriers And Notices Required: Whenever it is deemed
necessary because of construction or maintenance work, or because of emergency
to suspend all or part of the travel on a public highway, street, alley, or
portion thereof, the City may restrict the use of, or close, such highway,
street, alley or portion thereof. When such highway, street or portion is
restricted or closed to travel, the City shall cause suitable barriers and
notices to be posted as required in the MUTCD. It is unlawful for any person to
fail to observe any barricade, warning light, sign or flagman warning the
public that a highway or street, or portion thereof, is restricted or closed to
traffic.
   B.   Parking Or Standing Vehicles Prohibited: No person shall park or leave
standing a vehicle on any street or portion of any street which has been closed
or restricted to use and for which suitable barriers and notices have been
posted as required in the MUTCD.
   C.   Written Permission To Close: No person shall close or attempt to close
any public street by any means without written permission from the City Traffic
Engineer or other authorized City official, except a member of the Police or
Fire Departments when required in the execution of their duties.
   D.   Construction: This Section shall not be construed in derogation of
other provisions of this Code or other general administrative powers of the
City to control the use of City streets.
(1979 Code § 10.08.045; Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994)
10-3-7: EMERGENCY VEHICLES:
   A.   Authority: The operator of an authorized emergency vehicle, when
responding to an emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or
suspected violator of the law or when responding to but not upon returning from
a fire alarm, may exercise the privileges under subsection B of this Section,
when the operator of the vehicle sounds an audible signal as provided under
Utah Code Annotated section 41-6-146, or its successor provision, or uses a
visual signal as defined under Utah Code Annotated section 41-6-132, or its
successor provision, which is visible from in front of the vehicle.
   B.   Privileges: The operator of an authorized emergency vehicle may:
      1.   Stop, stand or park, irrespective of the provisions of this Title;
      2.   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;
      3.   Exceed the maximum speed limits; or
      4.   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in
specified directions.
(1979 Code § 10.08.052; Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994)
10-3-8: WORKERS AND EQUIPMENT ON STREETS:
   A.   Title Not Applicable: Except as provided in subsection B of this
Section or unless specifically made applicable, the provisions of this Title
shall not apply to persons, motor vehicles and other equipment while actually
engaged in authorized work upon the surface of a highway or upon wires or
structures immediately above the surface of the street. However, the entire
Title applies to those persons and vehicles when traveling to or from the work.
   B.   Exceptions: The exemptions provided in subsection A of this Section
shall not apply to Utah Code Annotated sections 41-6-13.5, 41-6-44 and 41-6-45,
as amended, or their successor provisions.
(1979 Code § 10.08.054; Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994)
10-3-9: OBEDIENCE TO PEACE OFFICER OR TRAFFIC CONTROLLERS:
   A.   Required: It is unlawful for any person to wilfully refuse or fail to
comply with any lawful order, signal or direction of a peace officer,
firefighter, flagger at a highway construction or maintenance site, or
uniformed adult school crossing guard invested by law with authority to direct,
control or regulate traffic.
   B.   Flaggers; Devices And Procedures: When flaggers at highway construction
or maintenance sites are directing traffic they shall use devices and
procedures conforming to the latest edition of the MUTCD.
(1979 Code § 10.08.060; amd. Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994)
10-3-10: APPLICABILITY TO PUSHCARTS, BICYCLES AND ANIMALS:
Every person propelling any pushcart or riding a bicycle, moped or any animal
upon a roadway, and every person driving any animal, shall be subject to the
provisions of this Title applicable to the operator of any vehicle, except
those provisions which by their very nature can have no application.
(1979 Code § 10.08.050)
10-3-11: PENALTY 1 :
   A.   Violation Prohibited: It is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to
violate, or for the owner or other person having the right to control the
operation of any such vehicle, to suffer or permit the operation, use,
stopping, standing or parking of such vehicle in violation of any rule or
regulation established and promulgated as provided in Sections
10-3-2 and
10-3-3 of this Chapter, or any regulation of the State Road Commission
applicable to any State highway in the City and adopted pursuant to State law.
It is unlawful for any person to violate any such rule or regulation applicable
to pedestrians.
   B.   Classification Of Misdemeanor: Unless otherwise provided in State law
or this Title, a violation of any provision of this Title, or any rule or
regulation adopted in accordance with the provisions of this Title, is a Class
C misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in Title 1, Chapter 4 of this
Code.
(1979 Code § 10.08.080; amd. Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994; 1999 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also Chapter 6 of this Title.
CHAPTER 4
SPEED RESTRICTIONS AND REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-4-1: Safe And Appropriate Speeds; Certain Locations
10-4-2: Prima Facie Speed Limits
10-4-3: Setting Minimum Speed Regulations
10-4-1: SAFE AND APPROPRIATE SPEEDS; CERTAIN LOCATIONS:
A person shall not operate a vehicle in the City at a speed greater than is
reasonable and prudent under the existing conditions, giving regard to the
actual and potential hazards then existing, including when:
   A.   Approaching and crossing an intersection or railroad grade crossing;
   B.   Approaching and going around a curve;
   C.   Approaching a hill crest;
   D.   Traveling upon any narrow or winding roadway; and
   E.   Special hazards exist due to pedestrians, other traffic, weather or
highway conditions.
(1979 Code § 10.32.010; Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994)
10-4-2: PRIMA FACIE SPEED LIMITS:
If no special hazard exists, the following speeds are lawful within the City,
but any speed in excess of that indicated below for the particular district,
location or condition shall be prima facie evidence that the speed is not
reasonable or prudent and that it is unlawful:
   A.   Twenty Miles Per Hour:
      1.   Upon meeting or overtaking any school bus which is displaying
alternating flashing amber warning light signals meeting the requirements of
State law, provided such school bus bears upon the front and rear thereof a
plainly visible sign containing the words "School Bus" in letters no less than
eight inches (8") high which can be removed or covered when the vehicle is not
is use as a school bus;
      2.   In a reduced speed school zone as defined in Utah Code Annotated
section 41-6-20.1.
   B.   Twenty Five Miles Per Hour: On all streets and at all places within the
City the prima facie speed limit shall be twenty five (25) miles per hour,
except as otherwise provided in subsection A of this Section, or as otherwise
determined under subsections C and D of this Section.
   C.   Mayor; Authority To Approve Different Limits: When determined on the
basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that the prima facie speed
permitted under this Section is not reasonable and safe under the conditions
found to exist upon the street or highway or part of a street or highway, the
Mayor, or the Mayor's designee, may approve a different reasonable and safe
prima facie limit by issuance of an administrative order. Determinations under
this subsection shall conform to the requirements of Utah Code Annotated
section 41-6-48, or any successor provision. The prima facie speed approved by
the Mayor, or the Mayor's designee, is effective when appropriate signs giving
notice are erected upon the street or highway. Prima facie speed limits
previously determined and set by the City Council on the basis of an
engineering and traffic investigation are presumptively valid and shall
continue in effect until such time as they may be altered under this
subsection.
   D.   Public Parks: When determined on the basis of an engineering and
traffic investigation that the prima facie speed permitted under the above
subsections is inadequate to provide for the safety of the public, the Mayor,
or the Mayor's designee, may establish speed limits for vehicles in public
parks which may be different than the prima facie speeds required under Utah
Code Annotated section 41-6-48, or any successor provision, as provided under
Utah Code Annotated section 41-6-17e.
   E.   Excess Speed Unlawful: Any speed in excess of the limits provided above
is prima facie evidence that the speed is not reasonable or prudent and that it
is unlawful.
(1979 Code § 10.32.020; Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994)
10-4-3: SETTING MINIMUM SPEED REGULATIONS:
When determined on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that
slow speeds on any part of a highway within the City consistently impedes the
normal and reasonable movement of traffic, the Mayor, or the Mayor's designee,
may determine and shall post a minimum speed limit below which no person may
operate a vehicle except when necessary for safe operation, as provided under
Utah Code Annotated section 41-6-49.
(1979 Code § 10.32.030; Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994)
CHAPTER 5
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
SECTION:
10-5-1: Prohibited Parking; Generally
10-5-2: Streets; Parking Prohibited At All Times
10-5-3: Streets; Parking Prohibited During Certain Hours
10-5-4: Time Limited Parking
10-5-5: Parking On Sidewalk Or Parkway Area Prohibited
10-5-6: Parks, Playgrounds, Grounds Of Public Buildings
10-5-7: Municipal Building Parking
10-5-8: Parallel Parking Required; Exceptions
10-5-9: Angle Parking
10-5-10: Parking Space Markings
10-5-11: Business District
10-5-12: Special Loading Permits
10-5-13: Bus And Taxicab Zones
10-5-14: Buses And Taxicabs
10-5-15: Blocking Traffic
10-5-16: Reserved
10-5-17: Reserved
10-5-18: Using Streets For Storage
10-5-19: Working On Vehicles In Streets, Parks Or Parking Lots
10-5-20: Abandoned Vehicles
10-5-21: Snow Removal
10-5-22: Restricted Vehicles; Parking Regulations
10-5-23: Restricted Recreational Vehicles
10-5-24: Vehicles Illegally Parked On Street; Police Authority To Move
10-5-25: Fire Lanes
10-5-26: Parking For Persons With Disabilities
10-5-27: Oversized Vehicles; Ogden City Mall
10-5-28: Vacant Lots Or Parking Lots; Display For Sale Prohibited
10-5-29: Prohibited Parking In Front Yards On Residential Property
10-5-1: PROHIBITED PARKING; GENERALLY:
Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance
with law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic control
device, no person shall:
   A.   Stop, stand or park a vehicle:
      1.   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of a street;
      2.   On a sidewalk;
      3.   Within an intersection;
      4.   On a crosswalk;
      5.   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet
(30') of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone,
unless a different length is indicated by signs or markings;
      6.   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
      7.   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within
a highway tunnel;
      8.   On any railroad tracks;
      9.   On any controlled access highway;
      10.   In the area between roadways of a divided highway, including
crossovers;
      11.   Any place where official traffic control devices prohibit stopping.
   B.   Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except momentarily to
pick up or discharge a passenger or passengers:
      1.   In front of a public or private driveway;
      2.   Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant;
      3.   Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at an intersection;
      4.   Within thirty feet (30') upon the approach to any flashing signal,
stop sign, yield sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a
roadway;
      5.   Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire
station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station
within seventy five feet (75') of said entrance when properly signposted;
      6.   At any place where official traffic control devices prohibit
standing.
   C.   Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the
purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading property or
passengers:
      1.   Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
      2.   At any place where official traffic control devices prohibit
parking.
   D.   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under such person's control
into any prohibited area or an unlawful distance from the curb.
(1979 Code § 10.48.010; amd. Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994)
10-5-2: STREETS; PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES:
It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle or permit such vehicle to remain parked
upon any street, part of a street or roadway, when signs or traffic markings
are erected by the city which give notice that parking is prohibited.
(1979 Code § 10.48.200; Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994)
10-5-3: STREETS; PARKING PROHIBITED DURING CERTAIN HOURS:
When signs or traffic markings are erected or placed by direction of the city,
no person shall park a vehicle or permit said vehicle to remain standing during
the hours and days specified by such signs and markings upon any street, parts
of a street, or roadway.
(1979 Code § 10.48.210; Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994)
10-5-4: TIME LIMITED PARKING:
It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle or permit such vehicle to remain parked
upon any street, part of a street, or roadway, for a period of time longer than
the time specified, between the hours shown, when signs or traffic markings are
erected or placed by the city restricting the times for parking. The parking
time restrictions established shall not be applicable on Sundays, and the time
before eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and after six o'clock (6:00) P.M. on any day,
and on state legal holidays.
(1979 Code § 10.48.190; Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994; amd. Ord. 2006-49, 8-8-2006)
10-5-5: PARKING ON SIDEWALK OR PARKWAY AREA PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave or cause to be left, or parked,
any vehicle upon any portion of a street or highway between the curb lines or
the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent sidewalk or property line, if
no sidewalk is present, unless such area has been designated by the city for
parking through the placement of signs or traffic markings.
(1979 Code § 10.48.020; amd. Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994)
10-5-6: PARKS, PLAYGROUNDS, GROUNDS OF PUBLIC BUILDINGS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle:
   A.   At any place in any public park, playground or grounds of any public
building other than on the roads or parking lots provided for public parking
and then only in accordance with provisions of any officially installed signs;
   B.   On any footpath or trail in any city park or playground.
(1979 Code § 10.48.030; amd. Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994)
10-5-7: MUNICIPAL BUILDING PARKING:
   A.   Designation For Employees And Officials: Certain areas of the parking
lots or streets within the municipal building block, located between Washington
Boulevard and Grant Avenue and 25th Street and 26th Street may be designated by
the mayor for parking by employees and officials of the city, Weber County and
the state. These parking areas shall be designated by appropriate signs setting
forth the nature of the restriction and the times thereof. Parking restrictions
and regulations for parking lot areas held in joint ownership by the city and
Weber County shall be issued by order approved by the chair of the county
commission and the mayor.
   B.   Permit Required: Only vehicles displaying a valid and authorized
parking permit issued by the city shall be allowed to park in the areas
designated in subsection A of this section. Any parking space specifically
designated for a particular vehicle by number or other denotation shall be
occupied only by a vehicle displaying a parking permit bearing that particular
number or denotation.
   C.   Altered Or False Permits: It is unlawful for any person to alter or
falsify a parking permit referred to herein or to display a facsimile or copy
of such a permit which has not been issued by the city, or to provide a parking
permit to an unauthorized person.
   D.   Unauthorized Vehicles: It shall be unlawful for any person to park in
any parking areas designated in subsection A of this section other than a
person whose vehicle displays a valid and authorized parking permit or which
bears the corresponding number or denotation required for the designated
parking space.
   E.   Special Permits; Mayor Authority: The mayor may authorize special
permits for jurors, witnesses and attorneys, using the Ogden City justice
court, which allow the permittee to park for periods of time in excess of the
designated time restrictions, in the public parking areas within the municipal
block and in designated parking spaces on the public streets immediately
adjacent to the municipal block. Annual permits for attorneys may be issued
only upon payment of a forty dollar ($40.00) fee.
(1979 Code § 10.48.080; amd. Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994; Ord. 2006-49, 8-8-2006)
10-5-8: PARALLEL PARKING REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS:
Except when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signs or
signals, the operator of a vehicle shall not stop, stand or park such vehicle
in a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway, headed in the
direction of traffic, and with the curb side wheels of the vehicle within
twelve inches (12") of the curb or edge of the roadway, except as provided in
the following subsections:
   A.   Designated Angle Parking: Upon those streets which have been designated
and marked or signed for angle parking, vehicles shall be parked at the angle
to the curb indicated by such marks or signs.
   B.   Loading Or Unloading Merchandise; Permit Required: In places where, and
at hours when, stopping for the loading or unloading of merchandise or
materials is permitted, vehicles used for the transportation of merchandise or
materials may back into the curb to take on or discharge loads, but not
otherwise, when the owner of such vehicle holds a permit granting him such
special privilege under section
10-5-12 of this chapter; provided, that such permit shall be either in the
possession of the operator or on the vehicle at the time such vehicle is backed
against the curb to take on or discharge a load. It is unlawful for any owner
or operator to violate any of the special terms or conditions of any such
special permit.
(1979 Code § 10.48.040; amd. Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994)
10-5-9: ANGLE PARKING:
   A.   Designation; Mayor Authority: The mayor shall determine, based upon an
engineering and traffic investigation, upon what city streets or portions
thereof angle parking shall be permitted, having due regard to the width of the
street, the nature of the surface thereon, the volume, speed and nature of the
traffic, the nature of the neighborhood through which the same travels, the
demand for parking space, and available facilities for parking in such
neighborhood. Whenever the mayor determines that angle parking shall be
permitted upon a given street or portion thereof, he shall designate the same
by written order filed with the city recorder and shall cause the same to be
marked and signed for angle parking in accordance with the MUTCD.
   B.   Exceptions: It is specifically provided, however, that the mayor shall
have no power or authority to authorize or permit angle parking on any federal
aid or state highway. Angle parking upon any federal aid or state highway may
be authorized or permitted only by ordinance, and shall not be authorized or
permitted unless the Utah department of transportation has determined that the
roadway is of sufficient width to permit angle parking without interfering with
the free movement of traffic.
(1979 Code § 10.48.050; amd. Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994)
10-5-10: PARKING SPACE MARKINGS:
At any place where parking is limited by time restrictions or where angle
parking is authorized under the terms of this title, the city traffic engineer
is authorized, when he finds that the demand for parking space and the orderly
use thereof requires such action, to cause to be marked and designated upon the
curbs and roadways the parking spaces to be used for parking of vehicles.
Whenever such parking spaces have been designated and marked as set forth in
this section, it is unlawful to park any vehicle in such manner that it
occupies or encroaches upon more than one parking space unless such vehicle is
of such size that it cannot be parked wholly within one such space.
(1979 Code § 10.48.070; amd. Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994)
10-5-11: BUSINESS DISTRICT:
No person shall stop any motor vehicle in the business district of the city for
a period of time longer than is reasonably necessary for loading or unloading
passengers, except in a proper parking zone or in obedience to an official sign
or signal, whether said motor vehicle is attended or unattended.
(1979 Code § 10.48.150; amd. Ord. 86-22, 4-17-1986; Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994)
10-5-12: SPECIAL LOADING PERMITS:
The mayor, or the mayor's designee, is authorized to issue to any owner of a
vehicle used to transport merchandise or materials a special permit, for a term
not exceeding one year, and to state therein the terms and conditions thereof,
allowing the operator of such vehicle the privilege of loading and unloading
while the vehicle is backed against the curb, if, in the opinion of the mayor,
or the mayor's designee, such privilege is reasonably necessary in the conduct
of the owner's business and will not seriously interfere with traffic or
endanger life or property.
(1979 Code § 10.48.060; amd. Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994)
10-5-13: BUS AND TAXICAB ZONES:
It is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle other than a bus to stand or
park in an officially designated bus stop, or for any vehicle other than a
taxicab to stand or park in an officially designated taxicab stand, except that
the operator of any passenger vehicle may temporarily stop in any such stop or
stand for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the loading or unloading
of passengers.
(1979 Code § 10.48.090; amd. Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994)
10-5-14: BUSES AND TAXICABS:
It is unlawful for the operator of any bus or taxicab to stand or park upon any
street upon which parking is prohibited, restricted, or limited as to time, at
any place other than at a bus stop or taxicab stand, respectively, except that
this provision shall not prevent the operator of any such vehicle from
temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations
at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or
unloading passengers.
(1979 Code § 10.48.100; amd. Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994)
10-5-15: BLOCKING TRAFFIC:
   A.   Streets: It is unlawful for any operator to stop, stand or park any
vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in such manner or under such
conditions as to leave available less than ten feet (10') of the width of the
roadway for the movement of vehicular traffic, except that an operator may stop
temporarily during the actual loading or unloading of passengers or when
necessary in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signs or signals or a
police officer.
   B.   Alleys: It is unlawful for any operator to park a vehicle within an
alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to have available less than
ten feet (10') of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular
traffic. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such
a position as to block the driveway entrance or access to any abutting
property.
(1979 Code § 10.48.110; amd. Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994)
10-5-16: RESERVED:
(1979 Code § 10.48.130; amd. Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994; Ord. 2004-70, 9-21-2004)
10-5-17: RESERVED:
(1979 Code § 10.48.140; amd. Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994; Ord. 2004-70, 9-21-2004)
10-5-18: USING STREETS FOR STORAGE:
   A.   Restrictions: No person who owns or has possession, custody or control
of any nonmotorized vehicle, utility trailer, house trailer, boat, boat trailer
or any other type of trailer shall park or store such vehicle, trailer or boat,
whether attached or unattached to a motor vehicle, upon any public street or
alley for a period of time more than twenty four (24) hours. Such vehicle shall
be considered to be in violation of this section if parked in any one location
for longer than twenty four (24) hours or if the vehicle has been parked in one
or more locations within the same block for longer than such twenty four (24)
hour period.
   B.   Unmounted Camper; Automobile Hulk: It shall be unlawful to park, place,
store, abandon, or otherwise leave any unmounted camper or any "automobile
hulk", (as defined in section
10-2-1 of this title), on any public street, alley, sidewalk or right of way,
at any time.
(1979 Code § 10.48.160; amd. Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994)
10-5-19: WORKING ON VEHICLES IN STREETS, PARKS OR PARKING LOTS:
No person shall park or operate a motor vehicle or any type trailer upon the
public street or in any city park or public parking lot for the purpose of
repairing, painting or greasing such vehicle, and no person shall repair,
grease or paint a motor vehicle or any type trailer on a public street or in
any city park or public parking lot except to make repairs necessitated by an
emergency.
(1979 Code § 10.48.170; amd. Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994)
10-5-20: ABANDONED VEHICLES:
It shall be unlawful to abandon any vehicle upon any highway or street. A
vehicle is presumed to be abandoned if it is left unattended on a highway or
street for a period in excess of forty eight (48) hours.
(1979 Code § 10.48.180; amd. Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994; Ord. 2003-69, 11-25-2003)
10-5-21: SNOW REMOVAL:
From November 1 of each year to March 15 of the following year, the following
regulations shall apply:
   A.   Snowbound Vehicles; Removal: It shall be unlawful for the owner of a
vehicle to allow such vehicle to remain standing upon any public street for
longer than forty eight (48) consecutive hours after such vehicle has become
snowbound due to snowplows plowing around the vehicle. Such vehicles shall be
presumed to be abandoned. Abandoned vehicles, as provided under section
10-8-1 of this title, shall be subject to removal and impound under chapter 8
of this title.
   B.   Obstructing Snow Removal; Impoundment: It shall be unlawful to park any
vehicle or permit a vehicle owned by that person to park in a manner that
obstructs snow removal by failing to leave adequate room for passage of plows
and other removal equipment. Vehicles so parked are subject to impoundment
under chapter 8 of this title.
   C.   Temporary Prohibited Parking; Authority: In order to permit the removal
of accumulations of snow, the mayor, or the mayor's designee, shall have the
authority to designate and post streets for a temporary period so that parking
or allowing a vehicle to remain on such posted street is prohibited. It shall
be unlawful to park or fail to remove a vehicle on a street when so designated
and posted and any vehicle in violation may be removed and impounded under
chapter 8 of this title. Adequate designation and posting shall occur by
posting such designation for at least twenty four (24) hours, at intervals not
exceeding one-half (1/2) mile.
(1979 Code § 10.48.120; amd. Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994; Ord. 2003-69, 11-25-2003)
10-5-22: RESTRICTED VEHICLES; PARKING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Defined: For purposes of this section, "restricted vehicle" shall mean:
      1.   A vehicle or trailer with a rated capacity of one and one-half (11/
2) tons or more;
      2.   A vehicle or trailer licensed for more than eighteen thousand
(18,000) pounds gross;
      3.   A vehicle or trailer with a length of more than forty five feet
(45') or a width of more than eight feet (8');
      4.   Construction vehicles or equipment, except as allowed under section
7-4-3 and title 7, chapter 5 of this code; or
      5.   Farm tractors or self-propelled implements of husbandry, or other
agricultural equipment or implements.
   B.   Residential Area; Loading And Unloading: No person shall park, or allow
to remain standing, any "restricted vehicle", as defined in subsection A of
this section, upon any street, part of a street or roadway in any residential
area of the city except while actually loading or unloading. In no event shall
it remain parked for purposes of loading or unloading in excess of eight (8)
hours.
   C.   Time Limitation: For purposes of this section a restricted vehicle
shall be deemed parked, even though the motor is running, if the vehicle is
left standing for any period in excess of three (3) minutes when the same is
not attended by a driver lawfully authorized to drive the said vehicle (except
when unloading or loading as provided in subsection B of this section).
(1979 Code § 10.48.220; Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994)
10-5-23: RESTRICTED RECREATIONAL VEHICLES:
   A.   Definitions:
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicular unit, primarily designed as a temporary
dwelling for travel, recreational, and vacation use, which is either self-
propelled or is mounted on or pulled by another vehicle, including, but not
limited to, a travel trailer, a camping trailer, a truck camper, a motor home,
a fifth wheel trailer and a van.
   RESTRICTED RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A recreational vehicle which has or exceeds
either a body height of seven feet (7'), a body width of eight feet (8') or a
body length of twenty feet (20').
   B.   Residential Areas: It shall be unlawful to park, place, store, or
otherwise leave a restricted recreational vehicle upon any street in a
residential area for a period of time longer than twenty four (24) hours. Such
vehicle shall be considered to be in violation of this section if parked in any
one location for longer than twenty four (24) hours or if the vehicle has been
parked in one or more locations within the same block for such twenty four (24)
hour period.
   C.   Intersections: It shall be unlawful to stop, stand or park a restricted
recreational vehicle within thirty feet (30') of an intersection.
(1979 Code § 10.48.165; Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994)
10-5-24: VEHICLES ILLEGALLY PARKED ON STREETS; POLICE AUTHORITY TO MOVE:
Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle parked or standing upon a highway
and such vehicle is creating a danger to persons or property, such officer is
hereby authorized to move such vehicle, cause such vehicle to be moved or
require the driver or other person in charge of the vehicle to move the same,
to a safe position off the highway.
(1979 Code § 10.48.230; Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994)
10-5-25: FIRE LANES:
No person shall park a vehicle within a fire lane as designated by the fire
chief, or the chief's designees, and marked in accordance with the provisions
of the current fire code, as adopted by title 16, chapter 2 of this code, or
its successor provisions.
(Ord. 2011-39, 6-28-2011)
10-5-26: PARKING FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES:
   A.   Authority To Park In Restricted Areas:
      1.   "Appropriately marked", as used in this section, shall mean:
         a.   A vehicle bearing a disability special group license plate which
will be displayed like any other license plate; or
         b.   A temporary removable windshield placard or removable windshield
placard, displayed in the front windshield of the vehicle; and
         c.   The plate or identification card shall have been issued by the
State Department of Motor Vehicles, in accordance with Utah Code Annotated
section 41-1a-408, as amended.
      2.   Any disabled person qualifying under Utah Code Annotated section 41-
1a-408(6), as amended, shall be allowed to park an appropriately marked motor
vehicle in the following identified restricted parking areas, notwithstanding
any other State or City parking restriction: freight loading zones, passenger
loading zones and time-limited parking zones for a reasonable period of time,
and in a manner which allows proper access to the automobile by the disabled
person.
      3.   It is unlawful for such disabled person to park for longer than
reasonable periods of time in any such restricted parking areas. "Reasonable",
as used herein, shall mean the designated time or two (2) hours, whichever is
longer.
      4.   Nothing herein shall be construed to permit parking by any
individual, contrary to or as an exception to the limited purpose of the
following designated areas at:
         a.   Any area where official signs or traffic markings absolutely
prohibit stopping, standing or parking;
         b.   Areas reserved for emergency use. "Emergency use", as used
herein, means and shall include, but not be limited to, fire hydrant zones as
defined in subsection 10-5-1B2 of this Chapter; fire lanes, as designated in
Section
10-5-25 of this Chapter, whether private or public property; or any other
designated area of the City posted as restricted for emergency vehicles or
emergency use;
         c.   Any area where parking is prohibited under Section
10-5-5 of this Chapter.
(1979 Code § 10.49.010; Ord. 85-32, 8-22-1985; amd. Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994;
1999 Code)
   B.   Parking Spaces Identified As Reserved For Disabled Persons; Public And
Private Property: It is unlawful for any vehicle to be parked in any parking
space or area designated as reserved for use by disabled persons, unless such
vehicle is displaying a disability special group license plate, temporary
removable windshield placard or removable windshield placard issued by the
State and such vehicle is transporting a qualifying handicapped person. This
subsection applies to and may be enforced on public property and on private
property which is used or intended for use by the public, whether parking is
provided to the general public for free or for a fee.
(1979 Code § 10.49.020; Ord. 85-32, 8-22-1985; amd. Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994)
   C.   Out Of State Vehicles: The parking privileges granted by subsections A
and B of this Section also apply to vehicles displaying a distinctive
disability license plate or transferable identification card issued by another
state, if displayed on a vehicle being used by a person with a disability.
(1979 Code § 10.49.030; Ord. 85-32, 8-22-1985; amd. Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994)
   D.   Issuance Of Citations By Volunteers: The Chief of Police may appoint
volunteers to issue citations for violations of subsection B of this Section.
The Chief of Police may establish reasonable guidelines for the appointment of
such volunteers and shall establish a training program for all such volunteers.
No volunteer shall issue a citation until such training program is completed. A
volunteer appointed under this subsection shall be twenty one (21) years or
older. The Chief of Police may remove a volunteer appointed under this
subsection at any time for any reason. A citation issued by a volunteer
appointed under this subsection has the same force and effect as a citation
issued by a peace officer for the same offense.
(1979 Code § 10.49.040; Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994)
10-5-27: OVERSIZED VEHICLES; OGDEN CITY MALL:
   A.   Council Findings:
      1.   The City Council finds and determines that Utah Code Annotated
section 41-6-17.5, provides that municipalities may enact ordinances governing
parking areas open to the public. It further finds that a special need exists
in the area of the Ogden City Mall to provide parking for oversized vehicles
that cannot park in the Ogden City Mall parking terrace and to provide for
enforcement thereof.
      2.   It is further found and determined that the interior surface parking
area in the Ogden City Mall is generally held open for use of the public for
purposes of vehicular parking to serve a commercial establishment. It further
finds that the owner of the interior surface parking area of the Ogden City
Mall agrees to the enactment of the Ordinance codified as this Section and the
enforcement thereof.
(1979 Code § 10.50.010; Ord. 88-43, 10-13-1988; amd. Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994)
   B.   Height Restrictions Within Interior Parking Area: It is unlawful to
stop, stand, or park any vehicle under six feet eight inches (6'8") in height
within the interior surface parking area of the Ogden City Mall in those stalls
officially designated as parking for vehicles over six feet eight inches (6'8")
in height.
(1979 Code § 10.50.020; Ord. 88-43, 10-13-1988; amd. Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994)
10-5-28: VACANT LOTS OR PARKING LOTS; DISPLAY FOR SALE PROHIBITED:
   A.   Unlawful Unless Licensed: It shall be unlawful for the owner of a motor
vehicle, trailer or boat or for any other person to park such vehicle, trailer
or boat or allow such vehicle, trailer or boat to be parked on a vacant lot or
parking lot owned by another person for the purpose of displaying it for sale
unless the owner or lessee of the property on which it is parked has a City
business license to engage in the business of selling motor vehicles, trailers
or boats at that location. It shall also be unlawful for the owner or lessee of
such property to allow another person to park a motor vehicle, trailer or boat
on the property for the purpose of displaying it for sale unless the owner or
lessee is duly licensed to engage in the business of selling motor vehicles,
trailers or boats at that location.
   B.   Public Nuisance: Any vehicle, trailer or boat parked in violation of
this Section is declared to be a public nuisance. If a notice of violation has
been placed upon such vehicle, trailer or boat and it is not removed within
twenty four (24) hours thereafter, or if two (2) or more notices of violation
have been placed on the same vehicle, trailer or boat within the last thirty
(30) days, the vehicle, trailer or boat shall be impounded as a nuisance. The
vehicle, trailer or boat shall be released to the owner or responsible party
only after the Police Department has received a receipt for the same
acknowledging responsibility of that person for the item being unlawfully
parked. Impoundments under this Section shall be accomplished in accordance
with the provisions and procedures outlined under Chapter 8 of this Title.
   C.   Each Day Separate Violation: Each day a vehicle, boat, or trailer is
parked contrary to the provisions of this Section represents a separate
violation.
   D.   Defense: It shall be a defense to the owner or lessee of any parking
lot or vacant lot on which vehicles have been parked in violation of this
Section, if the owner or lessee has posted signs on such lots restricting the
parking of such vehicles.
(1979 Code § 10.48.145; Ord. 91-17, 6-20-1991; amd. Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994)
10-5-29: PROHIBITED PARKING IN FRONT YARDS ON RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY:
   A.   Front Yard Area Defined: "Front yard area" means the open space, on the
same lot with a building used as a dwelling, between the line of the building
and the lot line adjacent to any public street and extending across the full
width or length of the lot.
   B.   Unlawful: It shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle, trailer or boat
in a front yard area on any residential property.
   C.   Exception: This Section shall not prohibit the parking of any vehicle
upon a concrete or asphalt slab or upon a driveway which leads to legal parking
to the rear or side of the building, which slab or driveway is in compliance
with the requirements of the Zoning Title of the City, either under existing
provisions or as a nonconforming use.
(1979 Code § 10.48.175; Ord. 96-18, 4-23-1996)
CHAPTER 6
CIVIL ENFORCEMENT OF PARKING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-6-1: Unauthorized Use Of Streets, Lots And Other Areas
10-6-2: Strict Liability Of Owner
10-6-3: Parking Violation; Owner's Responsibility
10-6-4: Appeal Procedures
10-6-1: UNAUTHORIZED USE OF STREETS, LOTS AND OTHER AREAS:
   A.   Liable For Civil Penalty: Any person engaged in the unauthorized use of
streets, parking lots or other areas as provided under this chapter, within the
city, shall be liable for a civil penalty. Any penalty assessed herein may be
in addition to such other penalties as may be provided in this title.
   B.   Imposed: The "unauthorized use of streets" shall include violations of
the following sections and civil penalties shall be imposed as follows, subject
to the reductions for early payment authorized in subsection D of this section:
 
Section Penalty
1. Overtime parking restrictions under the following sections and     $100.00
subsection of this title:
10-3-11                                                                
10-5-4                                                                 
10-5-6                                                                 
10-5-7                                                                 
10-5-26A3                                                              
                                                                      
2. Prohibited or restricted parking, except for overtime parking      110.00
violations, under the following sections of this title:
10-3-11                                                                
10-5-1                                                                 
10-5-2                                                                 
10-5-3                                                                 
10-5-5                                                                 
10-5-6                                                                 
10-5-7                                                                 
10-5-8                                                                 
10-5-10                                                                
10-5-11                                                                
10-5-12                                                                
10-5-13                                                                
10-5-14                                                                
10-5-15                                                                
10-5-18                                                                
10-5-19                                                                
10-5-20                                                                
10-5-21                                                                
10-5-22                                                                
10-5-23                                                                
10-5-24                                                                
10-5-25                                                                
10-5-27                                                                
                                                                      
3. Parking in vacant lots under section                               115.00
10-5-28 of this title
4. Parking in front yards on residential property under section       115.00
10-5-29 of this title
5. Parking of improperly registered vehicle under subsection
10-7-8B of this title (upon showing proof of registration the penalty 120.00
shall be reduced by $10.00)
6. Disabled persons parking violations under subsection               200.00
10-5-26B of this title
 
   C.   Date Of Notice Defined: As used in this section, "date of notice"
means:
      1.   The date that a notice or civil citation is either:
         a.   Affixed to the vehicle alleged to have been employed in such
authorized use, or
         b.   Personally delivered to the owner or driver thereof; or
      2.   Five (5) days after a notice or civil citation is mailed via first
class mail, postage prepaid, to the registered owner of the vehicle alleged to
have been employed in such authorized use at the address as shown in the
registration records of the state of Utah.
   D.   Payment Reduction; Time Limits:
      1.   Any penalty that is paid within ten (10) days from the date of
notice shall be reduced by the sum of ninety dollars ($90.00).
      2.   Any penalty that is paid within twenty (20) days from the date of
notice shall be reduced by the sum of sixty dollars ($60.00).
      3.   Any penalty that is paid within thirty (30) days from the date of
notice shall be reduced by the sum of thirty dollars ($30.00).
(1979 Code § 10.53.010; Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994; amd. Ord. 95-7, 1-24-1995; Ord.
96-18, 4-23-1996; 1999 Code; Ord. 2004-47, 6-15-2004, eff. 7-1-2004; Ord. 2004-
70, 9-21-2004; Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
10-6-2: STRICT LIABILITY OF OWNER:
Whenever any vehicle shall have been employed in the unauthorized use of
streets, parking lots and other areas the person in whose name such vehicle is
registered shall be strictly liable for such unauthorized use and the penalty
therefor.
(1979 Code § 10.53.020; Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994)
10-6-3: PARKING VIOLATION; OWNER'S RESPONSIBILITY:
Whenever any vehicle shall have been parked in violation of any of the
provisions of any ordinance prohibiting or restricting parking, the person in
whose name such vehicle is registered shall be prima facie responsible for such
violation and subject to the civil penalty therefor.
(1979 Code § 10.53.040; Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994)
10-6-4: APPEAL PROCEDURES:
   A.   Hearing Officers; Mayor Appoints: The mayor shall appoint such hearing
officers as he or she deems appropriate to consider matters relating to the
unauthorized use of streets.
   B.   Appearance: Any person having received notice of such unauthorized use,
or the owner of any vehicle employed in such use, may appear before a hearing
officer and present and contest such alleged unauthorized use. Such hearing may
either be conducted informally, without reporting of the proceeding, or by
hearing conducted pursuant to title 4, chapter 4, article A of this code. All
applications for hearing pursuant to title 4, chapter 4, article A of this code
shall be filed in writing in the city recorder's office within ten (10) days of
the date of notice and accompanied by the fee established in section
4-6-1 of this code.
   C.   Defense; Burden To Prove: The burden to prove any defense shall be upon
the person raising such defense.
   D.   Dismissal; Defenses: If the hearing officer finds that no unauthorized
use occurred or an unauthorized use occurred but one or more of the defenses
set forth in this subsection is applicable, the hearing officer may dismiss the
notice of unauthorized use and release the owner or driver from liability
thereunder. Such defenses are:
      1.   At the time of the unauthorized use, possession of the subject
vehicle had been acquired by a third party in violation of the criminal laws of
the state;
      2.   Compliance with the subject ordinances would have presented an
imminent and irreparable injury to persons or property;
      3.   Such other defense as may be approved by the city attorney's office.
   E.   Reduction Of Penalty: If the hearing officer finds that an unauthorized
use occurred but one or more of the mitigating circumstances set forth in this
subsection is applicable, the hearing officer may reduce the penalty associated
therewith, but in no event shall such penalty be reduced below the sum of two
dollars ($2.00). Such defenses are:
      1.   At the time of date of the notice, possession of the subject vehicle
had been acquired by another party pursuant to a written lease agreement or
similar written agreement;
      2.   The subject vehicle was mechanically incapable of being moved from
such location; provided, however, such circumstances shall not apply to any
vehicle which remains at such location in excess of six (6) hours;
      3.   Any markings, signs or other indicia of parking use regulation were
not clearly visible or comprehensible;
      4.   Such other mitigating circumstances as may be approved by the city
attorney's office.
   F.   Agreement For Payment: If the hearing officer finds that an
unauthorized use occurred and no applicable defense exists, the hearing officer
may, in the interest of justice and on behalf of the city, enter into an
agreement for the timely or periodic payment of the applicable penalty.
   G.   Collection: If the penalty imposed pursuant to this chapter remains
unsatisfied after forty (40) days from the date of notice, or ten (10) days
from such date as may have been agreed to by the hearing officer, the city may
use such lawful means as are available to collect such penalty, including court
costs and attorney fees.
(1979 Code § 10.53.030; Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994; amd. Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
CHAPTER 7
MISCELLANEOUS RULES AND REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-7-1: Permitting Others To Drive Owner's Vehicle
10-7-2: Backing Limitations
10-7-3: Emerging From Alley Or Private Way
10-7-4: Keeping Proper Lookout
10-7-5: Standing Requirements
10-7-6: Parking Lights
10-7-7: Skateboarding And Similar Devices
10-7-8: Motor Vehicle Registration Requirements
10-7-9: Funeral Processions
10-7-10: Prohibited Acts
10-7-11: Skateboard Park And BMX Track Regulations
10-7-12: Use Of Roadways By Pedestrians; Prohibited Activities
10-7-1: PERMITTING OTHERS TO DRIVE OWNER'S VEHICLE:
   A.   Information Required: No registered owner and no person in possession
of any vehicle shall permit another person to drive the same without first
ascertaining the name and address of such other person and that he is legally
licensed to operate such vehicle.
   B.   Records Maintained: Every person renting, leasing or hiring a motor
vehicle to another person shall keep a record of the vehicle license number of
the motor vehicle so rented, the name and address of the person, the number of
his operator's license, and the date and place when and where such vehicle
operator's license was issued. Such record shall be open to inspection by any
peace officer.
   C.   Records Furnished Upon Request: The information and records required by
this section shall be furnished to any peace officer for police purposes on
demand.
   D.   Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this section shall be
guilty of a class B misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in title 1,
chapter 4 of this code.
(Ord. 2014-33, 7-29-2014)
10-7-2: BACKING LIMITATIONS:
   A.   Interference With Traffic: The driver of a motor vehicle shall not back
the same unless such movement can be made with safety and without interfering
with other traffic.
   B.   Across Centerline: No driver shall back across the centerline of a
roadway when there is sufficient width to complete movement in that section of
roadway first entered into.
(Ord. 2014-33, 7-29-2014)
10-7-3: EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR PRIVATE WAY:
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, private road, driveway or
building within the city shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving
onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across such alley, building
entrance, road or driveway, or in the event there is no sidewalk area, shall
stop at the point nearest the street to be entered where the driver has a view
of approaching traffic thereon.
(Ord. 2014-33, 7-29-2014)
10-7-4: KEEPING PROPER LOOKOUT:
No person shall drive a motor vehicle on the public streets, sidewalks or
public places within the corporate limits of the city in such a manner as to
endanger life or property by failing to keep a safe and proper lookout for
other traffic, objects or persons.
(Ord. 2014-33, 7-29-2014)
10-7-5: STANDING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Streets: No person having control or charge of a motor vehicle shall
allow such vehicle to stand on any street unattended without first setting the
brakes thereon and stopping the motor of said vehicle and, when standing upon a
perceptible grade, without turning the wheels of such vehicles to the curb or
the side of the street or highway.
   B.   Removal Of Ignition Key:
      1.   Required: No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall
permit it to stand unattended in any public place, new or used car sales lots
or parking lot, during all times when such new or used car or parking lot does
not have an attendant, without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition,
removing the ignition key from the vehicle, effectively setting the brake
thereon and, when standing upon any grade, turning the front wheels to the curb
or side of the highway. "Public place" includes any public street and property
owned by any municipality or other public agency.
      2.   Removal; Authority Of Police: Whenever any police officer finds a
motor vehicle standing unattended with the ignition key in the vehicle, in
violation of this subsection, such police officer is authorized to remove the
key from the vehicle and to forthwith deliver the key to the police officer in
charge of the desk at the police department at the municipal building, where it
may be reclaimed by the owner properly identifying himself.
      3.   Owner Responsible: The registered owner of a vehicle found in
violation of this section shall be held prima facie responsible for any such
violation.
(Ord. 2014-33, 7-29-2014)
10-7-6: PARKING LIGHTS:
   A.   Sufficient: Whenever a vehicle is lawfully parked upon a street during
the hours between one-half (1/2) hour after sunset and one-half (1/2) hour
before sunrise, and there is sufficient light to reveal any person or object
within a distance of five hundred feet (500') upon such street, no lights need
be displayed upon such parked vehicle.
   B.   Insufficient: Whenever a vehicle is parked or stopped upon a street or
shoulder adjacent thereto, whether attended or unattended, during the hours
between one-half (1/2) hour after sunset and one-half (1/2) hour before
sunrise, and there is not sufficient light to reveal any person or object
within a distance of five hundred feet (500') upon such street, such vehicle so
parked or stopped shall be equipped with one or more lamps meeting the
following requirements: at least one lamp shall display a white or amber light
visible from a distance of five hundred feet (500') to the front of the
vehicle, and the same lamp or at least one other lamp shall display a red light
visible from a distance of five hundred feet (500') to the rear of the vehicle,
and the location of said lamp or lamps shall always be such that at least one
lamp or combination of lamps meeting the requirements of this section is
installed as near as practicable to the side of the vehicle which is closest to
passing traffic. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to a motor
driven cycle.
   C.   Parked Vehicle; Headlamps: Any lighted headlamps upon a parked vehicle
shall be depressed or dimmed.
(Ord. 2014-33, 7-29-2014)
10-7-7: SKATEBOARDING AND SIMILAR DEVICES:
   A.   Restricted Areas: It shall be unlawful for any person on rollerskates,
in-line skates, skateboards or riding on or by means of any coaster, toy
vehicle or similar device:
      1.   To go upon any public sidewalk or street in the central downtown
which is described as follows: between 21st Street and 27th Street on
Washington Boulevard; between 21st and 26th on Grant Avenue; between 24th and
26th on Lincoln Avenue and Wall Avenue; between Adams Avenue and Grant Avenue
on 21st Street, 22nd Street and 26th Street; between Adams Avenue and
Washington Boulevard on 23rd Street; between Adams Avenue and Wall Avenue on
24th Street and 25th Street; between 24th Street and 26th Street on Kiesel
Avenue; and between 25th Street and 26th Street on Ogden Avenue.
      2.   To use such devices upon the public grounds on the Municipal Gardens
block which is located between 25th Street and 26th Street and between
Washington Boulevard and Grant Avenue; or upon the public grounds surrounding
the Union Station.
      3.   To go upon any roadway designed for vehicle traffic except while
crossing a street at a crosswalk.
      4.   To skate or ride in a reckless manner on any public sidewalk.
"Reckless", as used herein, shall mean wilful or wanton disregard for the
safety of persons or property. No person shall ride a skateboard or rollerskate
on a sidewalk without exercising due care for the safety of others using the
sidewalk.
   B.   Exceptions: Special events or parades, when permitted by the city,
shall not be subject to subsections A1 through A3 of this section, nor shall
such provisions apply to pedestrian vehicles governed under Utah Code Annotated
section 41-6-82.50.
(Ord. 2014-33, 7-29-2014)
10-7-8: MOTOR VEHICLE REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Driving: It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate, or for an
owner knowingly to permit to be driven or moved any motor vehicle on the
streets of the city unless the vehicle is properly registered in conformity
with the motor vehicle act, Utah Code Annotated title 41, chapter 1a.
   B.   Stopping, Standing Or Parking: It is unlawful for any person to stop,
stand or park, or for an owner knowingly to permit to be stopped, stood or
parked any motor vehicle on the streets of the city unless the vehicle is
properly registered in conformity with the motor vehicle act, Utah Code
Annotated title 41, chapter 1a.
(Ord. 2014-33, 7-29-2014)
10-7-9: FUNERAL PROCESSIONS:
   A.   Definitions:
   APPROVED ESCORT SERVICE: A funeral escort service which has been given
written permission from the chief of police to provide the services described
in this chapter within the corporate limits of the city, and which consists of
two (2) escort vehicles or one escort vehicle for each twenty five (25)
vehicles included in the funeral procession, whichever is greater.
   FUNERAL PROCESSION: A single direct movement from a mortuary, church or
other public gathering place to the place of burial of a human body, under
direction or supervision of a funeral director.
   B.   Display Required: Each motor vehicle participating in a funeral
procession, when accompanied by an adequate police escort or approved escort
service, when going to any place of burial, shall display illuminated
headlights thereon and shall follow not more than thirty feet (30') behind the
preceding motor vehicle, and such vehicles so identified shall have the right
of way at any street intersection over all other vehicles, except authorized
emergency vehicles. Any escort vehicle used as part of an approved escort
service shall display a five inch by eight inch (5" x 8") card in the lower
corner of the right front windshield containing the words "FUNERAL PROCESSION".
   C.   Driving Between Vehicles Prohibited: No driver of a vehicle shall drive
between the vehicles comprising a funeral procession when such procession is
accompanied by an adequate police escort or approved escort service while they
are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as required
in this chapter except when otherwise directed by a police officer. The
provisions of this section shall not apply to drivers of authorized emergency
vehicles.
(Ord. 2014-33, 7-29-2014)
10-7-10: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   Driving Within Sidewalk Area: The driver of a motor vehicle shall not
drive within any sidewalk area except at a permanent or temporary driveway.
   B.   Driving With Person On Lap: No vehicle driver shall have on his lap any
other person, adult, or child, or any animal, nor shall he be seated in the lap
of any person while the vehicle is in motion.
   C.   Driving With Person Standing On Seat: No driver shall operate any
vehicle while any person or child is standing on the seat in such vehicle.
(Ord. 2014-33, 7-29-2014)
10-7-11: SKATEBOARD PARK AND BMX TRACK REGULATIONS:
   A.   Definitions: In this section, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
   BICYCLE: Every device propelled by human power upon which any person may
ride, having two (2) tandem wheels, except scooters and similar devices.
   CITY BMX TRACK: The area in Romrell Park set aside and designated as a BMX
track.
   CITY SKATEBOARD PARK: The area in Lorin Farr Park set aside and designated
as a skateboard park.
   MOPED: A motor driven cycle having both pedals to permit propulsion by human
power, and a motor which produces not more than two (2) brake horsepower and
which is not capable of propelling the cycle at a speed in excess of thirty
(30) miles per hour on level ground. If an internal combustion engine is used,
the displacement may not exceed fifty (50) cubic centimeters and the moped
shall have a power drive system that functions directly or automatically
without clutching or shifting by the operator after the drive system is
engaged. A moped includes an electric assisted bicycle and a motor assisted
scooter.
   MOTOR ASSISTED SCOOTER: A self-propelled device with at least two (2) wheels
in contact with the ground, a braking system capable of stopping the unit under
typical operating conditions, a gas or electric motor not exceeding forty (40)
cubic centimeters, a deck design for a person to stand while operating the
device and the ability to be propelled by human power alone.
   MOTOR DRIVEN CYCLE: Every motorcycle and motor scooter, moped, electric
assisted bicycle, motor assisted scooter, and every motorized bicycle having an
engine with less than one hundred fifty (150) cubic centimeters displacement or
having a motor which produces not more than five (5) horsepower.
   SCOOTER: A self-propelled device with at least two (2) wheels in contact
with the ground, with or without a braking system capable of stopping the unit
under typical operating conditions, and a deck design for a person to stand
holding a handlebar while operating the device.
   B.   City Skateboard Park Regulations: It shall be unlawful for any person
to use or enter the city skateboard park when riding upon or having immediate
possession of a bicycle, scooter, moped, motor assisted scooter or motor driven
cycle.
   C.   City BMX Park Regulations: It shall be unlawful for any person to use
or enter the city BMX track when riding upon or having immediate possession of
a scooter, moped, motor assisted scooter, motor driven cycle or other motorized
vehicles.
(Ord. 2014-33, 7-29-2014)
10-7-12: USE OF ROADWAYS BY PEDESTRIANS; PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES:
   A.   Legislative Findings; Purpose: The Ogden City council makes the
following findings:
      1.   There is a significant risk of severe injury and death to
pedestrians who are struck by moving vehicles.
      2.   There is a significant risk of injury to vehicle occupants as a
result of pedestrian-vehicle accidents and chain reaction accidents with other
vehicles.
      3.   There is a significant risk of traffic disruption as a result of
pedestrian-vehicle accidents and chain reaction accidents between vehicles.
      4.   It is in the best interest of the health and safety of the citizens
of Ogden to minimize the potential contact between pedestrians and vehicles on
certain roadways where higher speeds or multiple lanes of traffic are desired
to promote efficient vehicle travel.
      5.   The purpose of this section is to address concerns regarding the
safety of pedestrians and vehicle occupants and prohibit individuals from
engaging in conduct that impedes or blocks traffic within certain high traffic
roadways.
   B.   Definitions: For purposes of this section the following terms shall
have the following meanings:
   DRIVEWAY APPROACH: That portion of a driveway contained within the public
right of way that provides direct access to a high traffic roadway.
   HIGH TRAFFIC ROADWAY: For any road with two (2) or more lanes of traffic in
the same direction, including those portions of a road where markings show more
than one lane at an intersection, or with a speed limit at or above thirty five
(35) miles per hour, means that portion of road improved, designed, or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel.
   LEGALLY PARKED: A vehicle that is standing, stopped, or otherwise
appropriately parked in an area designated or legally authorized for parking.
   SHOULDER AREA: That portion of road contiguous to the roadway, including
gutters, for accommodation of stopped vehicles, for emergency use, and for
lateral support.
   SIDEWALK: That portion of road between the curb lines and the adjacent
property lines intended for the use of pedestrians; or, where there is no curb,
that portion of road between the shoulder and adjacent property lines intended
for the use of pedestrians, except for that portion of a sidewalk extending
into a driveway approach.
   C.   Prohibited Acts:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person:
         a.   While a pedestrian, to engage in conduct that impedes or blocks
traffic within a high traffic roadway, including shoulder areas and driveway
approaches, other than sidewalks. Conduct that impedes or blocks traffic
includes: loitering; demonstrating or picketing; distributing materials;
gathering signatures; holding signs; or soliciting rides, contributions or
other business.
         b.   While a pedestrian, to enter a high traffic roadway, including
lanes of travel, shoulder areas and driveway approaches, to give, receive,
exchange, or otherwise take or relinquish possession or control of goods,
services, printed material, or money.
         c.   While a driver or passenger in a motor vehicle on a high traffic
roadway, including lanes of travel, shoulder areas and driveway approaches, to
give, receive, exchange, or otherwise take or relinquish possession or control
of goods, services, printed material, or money to or from a pedestrian.
      2.   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this section, the
conduct proscribed by this section shall not be unlawful if:
         a.   Such conduct is required as a result of a traffic accident,
medical emergency, or similar exigent circumstances.
         b.   Such conduct is directed by a police officer or authorized
traffic controller in the course of their official duties.
         c.   Such conduct is undertaken after the motor vehicle has been
legally parked.
      3.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit a temporary,
spontaneous demonstration that takes place outside the high traffic roadway,
shoulder area or driveway approach, or an activity authorized pursuant to title
6, chapter 5 of this code, setting forth a permitting process for special
events.
   D.   Constitutionally Protected Activity: This section should be held
inapplicable in any such cases where its application would be unconstitutional
under the constitution of the state of Utah or the constitution of the United
States Of America.
   E.   Severance Clause: If any subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence,
clause or phrase of this section is for any reason held to be unconstitutional,
invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision
shall not affect the validity of effectiveness of the remaining portions of
this section. The city council hereby declares that it would have passed each
subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof
irrespective of the fact that any one or more subsections, subdivisions,
paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid
or ineffective.
   F.   Violation; Penalty: A violation of this section is a class C
misdemeanor, subject to the penalties provided under title 1, chapter 4 of this
code.
(Ord. 2014-33, 7-29-2014)
CHAPTER 8
VEHICLE IMPOUNDMENT
SECTION:
10-8-1: Authorized When
10-8-2: Vehicle Reclamation; Requirements
10-8-3: Notification
10-8-4: Unclaimed Vehicles; Sale
10-8-5: Fees Constitute Lien
10-8-6: Record Keeping Requirements
10-8-7: Vehicle Pound; Designation
10-8-8: Administrative Hearings
10-8-9: Remedy Not Exclusive
10-8-10: State Impounds
10-8-1: AUTHORIZED WHEN:
   A.   Nuisance Vehicle Criteria: The vehicles described below are hereby
determined to be public nuisances which may be summarily abated by a police
officer of the City by removing or causing such vehicle to be removed and
impounded in any authorized vehicle pound:
      1.   Any unattended vehicle stopped, standing or parked in violation of
any of the provisions of this Title, or of the laws of the State;
      2.   Any vehicle found upon the streets or alleys of the City with faulty
or defective equipment;
      3.   Any vehicle left unattended upon any bridge, viaduct or at any
location where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction or hazard to the safe
movement of traffic;
      4.   Any vehicle upon a street or other publicly-owned property, so
disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic and the person or persons
in charge of the vehicle are by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such
an extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal;
      5.   Any vehicle, the driver of which has been taken into custody by the
Police Department, under such circumstances as would leave such vehicle
unattended on a street, alley, restricted parking areas or other publicly owned
property;
      6.   Any vehicle found parked in such a manner to constitute a fire
hazard or an obstruction to firefighting apparatus, including marked hydrants;
      7.   Any vehicle parked upon a public street in violation of Section
10-5-21 of this Title;
      8.   Any vehicle, under Utah Code Annotated section 41-6-116.10, or
Section
10-5-20 of this Title, which a police officer has reasonable grounds to believe
that the vehicle has been abandoned or which is presumed to be abandoned
because it has been left unattended on any public street for a period in excess
of twenty four (24) consecutive hours or on other public or private property
for a period in excess of seven (7) consecutive days without the express or
implied consent of the owner or person in lawful possession or control of the
property;
      9.   Any "abandoned junk vehicle", as defined in Section
10-2-1 of this Title, or "automobile hulk", as defined in Section
10-2-1 of this Title, parked in the same place on any street or alley
continuously for twenty four (24) hours;
      10.   Any vehicle parked on a closed or restricted use street in
violation of Section
10-3-6 of this Title.
   B.   Improperly Registered, Stolen Or Other Vehicles: Every police officer
of the City is authorized to seize and take possession of any vehicle which is
being operated upon the public streets of the City with improper registration,
or which the officer has good reason to believe has been stolen, or on which
any motor number, manufacturer's number or identification mark has been
defaced, altered or obliterated, and to remove or cause such vehicle to be
removed and impounded in any authorized vehicle pound.
   C.   Written Report: Every police officer impounding a vehicle under the
provisions of this Chapter shall, within twenty four (24) hours, make written
report thereof to the Chief of Police, specifying the manufacturer's trade name
and model of the impounded vehicle, its license and motor number, the time and
place where the vehicle was taken and impounded and the cause of impounding.
(1979 Code § 10.76.010; amd. Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994)
10-8-2: VEHICLE RECLAMATION; REQUIREMENTS:
Before the owner, or the owner's agent or the lienholder of record of an
impounded vehicle shall be permitted to reclaim and obtain the release thereof,
the owner shall:
   A.   Evidence Of Ownership Or Interest: Furnish to the Chief of Police or
the Chief's authorized representative satisfactory evidence of his/her identity
and his/her ownership or interest in said vehicle;
   B.   Payment Of Fee Levied: Pay to the City a fee of twenty dollars
($20.00), which fee is hereby levied upon the impounding of every such vehicle.
Said sum is hereby determined to be the reasonable cost of impounding a
vehicle;
   C.   Payment Of Costs And Expenses: Pay to the City all of its storage costs
and expenses incident to storing the vehicle in the authorized vehicle pound
and to giving notice of the impounding thereof as provided in this Chapter. In
cases where a vehicle has been impounded pursuant to this Chapter as originally
adopted or as amended, in a vehicle pound maintained and operated by the City,
he/she shall pay to the City storage charges at the rate of two dollars ($2.00)
per day or fraction thereof, which charges are determined to be the reasonable
cost of storing an impounded vehicle by the City.
   D.   Obtain Written Order For Release: Obtain from the Police Department a
written order directed to the place of storage in which said vehicle is
impounded, authorizing the release of said vehicle to said owner or his/her
agent upon the payment to said place of storage of towing and storage charges
reasonably incurred in impounding to the time of presenting the order of
release from the Police Department thereof.
   E.   Sign Receipt: Sign a written receipt of said vehicle and deliver the
same to the place of storage upon receiving said impounded vehicle.
   F.   Improperly Registered Or Stolen: In cases where a vehicle has been
impounded, as provided in this Chapter, by reason of the vehicle having been
improperly registered or stolen, or by reason of the obliteration of motor or
manufacturer's numbers or identification marks, such vehicle shall not be
released, in any event, until the requirements of Utah Code Annotated sections
41-1a-1101 and 41-1a-1102, have been satisfied, or until such release has been
specifically authorized by the Motor Vehicle Division of the State Tax
Commission.
   G.   Specific Violations: Seizures and impoundments of vehicles for
violations of Utah Code Annotated sections 41-6-44 or 41-6-44.10 shall comply
with the requirements of Utah Code Annotated section 41-6-44.30.
(1979 Code § 10.76.020; amd. Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994; 1999 Code)
   H.   Fee Waiver: If, upon the reclaiming of an impounded vehicle by the
owner thereof, it shall be made to appear to the Chief of Police, or the
Chief's designee, by evidence satisfactory to him/her that the vehicle was
stolen from the owner thereof and that the owner is not responsible for the
cause for which the vehicle was impounded, the Chief of Police, or the Chief's
designee, may waive the impounding fee and, if the vehicle has been kept and
stored in a pound maintained by the City itself, the storage charges assessed
against the vehicle.
(1979 Code § 10.76.030; amd. Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994)
10-8-3: NOTIFICATION:
   A.   Contents; Information: The notice required by subsection B of this
Section shall describe the vehicle and shall inform the owner of the vehicle:
      1.   That the vehicle has been impounded, the location of the vehicle,
that impound and storage fees have been assessed and are accruing on a daily
basis, and how the vehicle may be claimed;
      2.   Of the owner's right to an administrative hearing to determine
whether there was probable cause to impound the vehicle upon filing a written
request with the City for such a hearing within ten (10) days after the owner
has learned of the impound of such vehicle, or within ten (10) days after
mailing of the date set in the notice, whichever occurs first; and
      3.   That the vehicle shall be sold at public auction, as provided by the
ordinances of the City, if the vehicle is not claimed by the owner or the
lienholder of record prior to such auction.
(1979 Code § 10.76.060; amd. Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994)
   B.   Mail To Owner: As soon as is reasonable under the circumstances, a
written notice that the said vehicle has been impounded shall be mailed to the
owner and recorded lienholder thereon, if there be one, of the said vehicle at
their last known address as disclosed by the records of the Motor Vehicle
Division of the State Tax Commission. The notice shall be sent by United States
certified mail, directed to the persons to be notified at their last known
addresses as disclosed by the records of the State Tax Commission as stated in
this Section.
   C.   Publication: If the Chief of Police, or the Chief's designee, is unable
to ascertain the name or address of any person having an interest in the
impounded vehicle, such notice shall, in lieu of mailing by certified mail as
stated in this Section, be published once in a newspaper published and having
general circulation in the City, and copies thereof shall be mailed to such
person or persons as the Chief of Police, or the Chief's designee, may have
reason to believe have or claim some right, title or interest in the vehicle at
their last post office address according to the information, if any, received
by the Chief of Police, or the Chief's designee, from sources other than the
records of the State Tax Commission.
   D.   Licensed In Other State: If the license plates on said vehicle are from
another state, written notice shall be mailed to the department of motor
vehicles in such state, requesting such department to notify the registered
owner of such vehicle that the same has been impounded by the Police Department
of the City and that the same will be sold at public auction if not claimed by
the owner or his/her proper representative, as provided by City ordinances.
(1979 Code § 10.76.050; amd. Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994)
   E.   Proof Of Notification: Proof by affidavit of the giving of notice of
impounding as provided in this Chapter shall be made in duplicate and preserved
with the record of impounding provided for in this Chapter.
(1979 Code § 10.76.070; amd. Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994)
10-8-4: UNCLAIMED VEHICLES; SALE:
   A.   Procedure: If any vehicle impounded as provided in this Chapter is not
claimed within thirty (30) days after the giving of notice as set forth in this
Chapter, it shall be deemed to have been abandoned by the owner or owners
thereof, and the Chief of Police or the Chief's designee, shall proceed to sell
the same at public auction. Notice of such public auction shall be published at
least once, not less than seven (7) nor more than fourteen (14) days prior to
the time fixed for the sale in a newspaper published and having a general
circulation in the City.
   B.   Notice: The notice of sale shall:
      1.   Describe the vehicle by manufacturer's trade name or make body type,
year model, if known, and motor and license numbers, if any;
      2.   Specify the time and place of sale, which shall be within the
corporate limits of the City; and
      3.   State the name (if any) shown as owner on the records of the vehicle
division of the State Tax Commission. If the name of the owner is unknown, such
fact shall be stated. In addition, a copy of the notice of public auction shall
be mailed to the owner of the place of storage, if stored by a person or entity
other than the City.
   C.   Bid Procedure: At the time and place fixed for the public auction, the
Chief of Police, or the Chief's designee, may accept or reject all bids for
such vehicle but, upon acceptance, the vehicle must be sold to the highest
bidder for cash.
   D.   Purchase By City: At such sale the City may bid upon and purchase the
vehicle. If the City becomes the purchaser at the sale, it may credit upon the
purchase price the pound service fee, the storage costs and charges incident to
the impounding of the vehicle and its costs and expenses incident to the making
of such sale.
(1979 Code § 10.76.080; amd. Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994)
   E.   Certificate Of Sale: Upon the consummation of the sale and receipt of
the purchase price therefor, the Chief of Police shall deliver possession of
the vehicle to the purchaser and shall also execute and deliver to the
purchaser his certificate of such sale. The certificate shall describe the
vehicle in substantially the same manner as the notice of impounding, shall
recite the fact of the sale, the price paid, and the purchaser's name and
address, and shall contain a reference to the pertinent sections of the
ordinances of the City which constitute the authority for the sale. A copy of
the certificate shall be filed with the City Recorder.
(1979 Code § 10.76.090; amd. Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994)
   F.   Disposition Of Money:
      1.   The money received from the sale of such vehicle shall be applied
first to the actual cost of towing and storage of such impounded vehicle, then
to pay the expenses of sale, including the cost of advertising the notice of
sale, and the balance, if any shall be deposited with the City Treasurer.
      2.   At any time within one year from and after such sale, the former
owner or owners of the vehicle sold, upon application to the Mayor and upon
presentation of satisfactory proof of ownership of the vehicle sold, shall be
paid the proceeds of such sale, less the necessary expenses incurred as
identified above. The check shall be made payable jointly to the owner and any
recorded lienholder. If the proceeds of such sale are not reclaimed within the
period of one year, they shall be credited to the General Fund of the City.
(1979 Code § 10.76.100; amd. Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994)
10-8-5: FEES CONSTITUTE LIEN:
The impounding fee levied pursuant to this Chapter and all storage charges and
all costs and expenses incident to the giving of notice of impounding and to
the sale of the vehicle as provided in this Chapter shall be a lien upon the
impounded vehicle, which lien may be summarily foreclosed in the manner
provided in this Chapter.
(1979 Code § 10.76.040; amd. Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994)
10-8-6: RECORD KEEPING REQUIREMENTS:
The Chief of Police, or the Chief's designee, shall keep a record in duplicate
of all vehicles impounded by manufacturer's trade name or make, body type,
model and license number, the names of the owners of such vehicles if the same
are known, and the names and addresses of all persons claiming the same, and
such other descriptive matter as may identify such vehicle, the nature and
circumstances of the impounding thereof, and the violation, if any, an account
of which such vehicles were impounded, the date of such impounding, the name
and address of any person to whom any such vehicle is released, a record of all
notices given with respect to the impounding and sale of such vehicle and a
record of the sale thereof, if any. Whenever such vehicle has been sold as
provided in this Chapter, one of the copies of such record shall be filed with
the City Recorder with the certificate of sale and a copy of the affidavit of
the giving of notice upon the impounding and sale of such vehicle.
(1979 Code § 10.76.110; amd. Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994)
10-8-7: VEHICLE POUND; DESIGNATION:
The Mayor or the Chief of Police, if so designated by the Mayor shall designate
such vehicle pounds and appoint such vehicle pound keepers to have charge
thereof as may be necessary or convenient to carry out the provisions of this
Chapter, and agree with such pound keepers as to the terms of their service.
(1979 Code § 10.76.120; amd. Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994)
10-8-8: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS:
   A.   Request: If a person holding an ownership interest in an impounded
vehicle requests an administrative hearing pursuant to the provisions of
subsection 10-8-3A2 of this Chapter, a hearing shall be conducted in accordance
with the provisions of Title 4, Chapter 4, Article A of this Code.
   B.   Determination: The hearing examiner shall determine whether the City
had probable cause, pursuant to City, State and Federal laws, to impound the
vehicle in question. In appropriate cases, the hearing examiner may determine
whether fees and charges should be reduced in the interest of justice. If the
hearing examiner determines the impound was justified pursuant to City and
state enactment, the owner or agent shall be responsible for the impound and
storage fees accrued and accruing on the vehicle.
(1979 Code § 10.76.140; Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994)
10-8-9: REMEDY NOT EXCLUSIVE:
Neither the impounding or the sale of a vehicle, nor the payment of the
impounding fee, storage charges and other expenses, as provided in this
Chapter, shall prevent or preclude the institution and the prosecution of
criminal proceedings against the owner or operator of the impounded vehicle for
any public offense or prevent or preclude the imposition of civil penalties
under Chapter 6 of this Title.
(1979 Code § 10.76.130; amd. Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994)
10-8-10: STATE IMPOUNDS:
If the City uses a vehicle impound yard established by the State, wherein the
reclamation, noticing and sale of impounded vehicles is performed by the State,
the requirements of Sections
10-8-2 through
10-8-6 of this Chapter shall not be followed. A person holding an ownership
interest in an impounded vehicle may still request a hearing under Section
10-8-8 of this Chapter to determine whether there was probable cause to impound
the vehicle.
(1979 Code § 10.76.150; amd. Ord. 94-60, 11-15-1994)
CHAPTER 9
CITY PARKING PERMIT PROGRAM
SECTION:
10-9-1: Purpose
10-9-2: Definitions
10-9-3: Area Designation; Authority
10-9-4: Area Designation Criteria
10-9-5: Area Designation Process
10-9-6: Area Designation; Mayoral Actions
10-9-7: Signs And Markings In Designated Areas
10-9-8: Parking Permit Application Term
10-9-9: Parking Permit Fees
10-9-10: Parking Permit Issuance Conditions
10-9-11: Parking Permit Display Required
10-9-12: Parking Permit Activities Permitted
10-9-13: Temporary Visitor Permits
10-9-14: Enlargement Of Area
10-9-15: Removal Of Area Designation Or Deletion Of Streets
10-9-16: Modification Of Regulations
10-9-17: Parking Permit Revocation Conditions
10-9-18: Unlawful Activities Penalty
10-9-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   There exist certain entities within the city, such as hospital and
university complexes and other large buildings, which attract commuters seeking
parking in nearby areas which are predominantly residential and business in
nature. The increased demand often exacerbates the severe shortage of street
parking for residents and businesses in such areas.
   B.   This chapter authorizes a program and the implementation of a
procedural system by which residents and businesses within qualifying areas may
receive preferential treatment when competing with commuter vehicles for
available on street parking in predominantly residential neighborhoods of the
city. The enactment of a preferential parking permit program, administered by
the mayor and implemented and operated by the parking permit coordinator, can
address the adverse effect of motor vehicle congestion caused by the long term
parking of commuter vehicles within these areas by:
      1.   Increasing access to residents and businesses;
      2.   Increasing traffic/pedestrian safety by reducing traffic congestion;
      3.   Reducing the adverse environmental impacts on an area created by
excessive air and noise pollution and the accumulation of trash and refuse on
public streets;
      4.   Encouraging the use of mass transit, carpooling and other
alternative modes of transportation by reducing commuter vehicle traffic that
originates from outside the permit area and has no apparent relation to area
residents and businesses;
      5.   Promoting the tranquility, safety, health and welfare of area
inhabitants, which are desirable attributes that are associated with a positive
urban environment.
(Ord. 2004-79, 11-2-2004)
10-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
ADDRESS: The street number and applicable apartment/condominium number for each
dwelling unit, business, or other use. Each apartment or commercial unit is
regarded as a unique address.
AREA: Irrespective of zoning, a geographical region, not necessarily
contiguous, where residents dwell and businesses may operate.
AREA BUSINESS: Any professional establishment or nonresident property owner
whose business property is located within a city parking permit area.
AREA PERMIT OR PERMIT DECAL: The permanent adhesive decal issued by the parking
permit coordinator for assignment to a vehicle under the legal control of area
residents and businesses.
AREA PERMITTEE: An area resident or an area business that has received from the
parking permit coordinator an authorized area permit.
AREA RESIDENT: Any person who dwells or resides within a parking permit area.
AREA VEHICLE: A vehicle that originates from inside a permit area and is under
the control of area residents or area business owners and includes automobiles,
trucks, motorcycles, or other motor driven forms of transportation. It does not
include boats and trailers.
CITY PERMIT AREA OR PARKING PERMIT AREA: Any officially designated permit
parking area within the corporate limits of the city wherein motor vehicles
displaying a valid permit as described herein shall be exempt from the parking
regulations or restrictions solely applicable to commuter vehicles.
CITY PERMIT PROGRAM: The city's permit parking program, as a whole,
administered by the mayor and operated by the parking permit coordinator
pursuant to the provisions and regulations of this chapter.
COMMUTER VEHICLE: A motor vehicle parked in a city permit parking area that: a)
is not under the control of an area resident, business owner or property owner,
and b) does not bear a permit for the designated area.
DECLARATION: The final action taken by the mayor setting the conditions for
either approval or denial of the proposed city permit area.
DWELLING: A building, or portion thereof, which is designated for residential
purposes. Such dwelling must bear an address assigned by the city engineer. The
number of independent dwelling units recognized therein shall not exceed the
number authorized under permit for zoning.
GUEST PERMIT: The portable card stock placard issued by the parking permit
coordinator to area residents and area businesses for use on vehicles under the
legal control of guests, customers, clients or service persons, exclusive of
operators of construction vehicles or equipment, during periods when persons
operating said vehicles are actually visiting or engaged in business at the
permittee's address not to exceed two (2) days per visit.
LEASE: A person pays rent or other remuneration for use of a parcel of real
property as such person's residence or place of business.
OWNS: A person has at least one-quarter (1/4) of the fee or equitable interest
in a parcel of real property within a city permit parking area.
PARKING PERMIT COORDINATOR: The officer or employee of the city designated as
the city's traffic engineer, and who operates and manages the permit parking
program, including the implementation and operation of permit parking areas, on
a routine, daily basis.
PERMIT DECALS: See definition of Area Permit Or Permit Decal.
PERMIT VEHICLE: Any vehicle properly displaying area regular, guest, or
temporary visitor permit, issued by the parking permit coordinator for
authorized use on such vehicles.
PERMIT YEAR: The twelve (12) month period set for the administration of a city
permit area, including the expiration and renewal of permit area regular and
guest permits.
PROGRAM: The process of designation, administration and enforcement of all city
parking permit areas and regulations established by the mayor pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.
RESIDENT: A person who resides in the city parking permit area on a regular
basis.
TEMPORARY VISITOR PERMIT: The temporary disposable paper permit issued for a
predetermined length of time, not to exceed forty five (45) days, to area
residents and area businesses for use on vehicles under the legal control of
service persons, operators of construction vehicles or equipment, and long term
visitors at the area permittee's address.
(Ord. 2004-79, 11-2-2004)
10-9-3: AREA DESIGNATION; AUTHORITY:
The mayor may, upon recommendation of the parking permit coordinator, and
pursuant to the provisions hereunder, consider for designation as a city permit
parking area any area which satisfies the threshold criteria established below.
Where deemed necessary and appropriate to accomplish the legislative intent and
objectives, the mayor may then designate by declaration any qualified area as
an approved city permit parking area in which motor vehicles displaying a valid
area parking permit may stand or be parked without the limitations imposed on
commuter vehicles by the parking regulations in the area. Such declaration
shall also identify the parking regulations imposed on commuter vehicles in the
area that are affected by the designation and permit issuance.
(Ord. 2004-79, 11-2-2004)
10-9-4: AREA DESIGNATION CRITERIA:
   A.   General Criteria: An area shall be deemed eligible for consideration as
a city permit parking area if the mayor determines, after evaluation of the
surveys and traffic studies prepared at the direction of the parking permit
coordinator, that the qualified area is adversely affected by commuter vehicles
for any extended period(s) during the day or night, on weekends or holidays.
   B.   Specific Factors: In determining alleged adverse effects upon an area,
the mayor shall analyze and evaluate factors which include, but are not limited
to, the following:
      1.   The extent of the desire and perception of need by the residents for
permit parking as evidenced by receipt of verified petitions as required
herein;
      2.   The extent to which legal on street parking spaces are occupied by
motor vehicles during any given time period; and
      3.   The extent to which vehicles parking in the area during the period
proposed for parking regulations are commuter vehicles rather than resident
vehicles.
   C.   Threshold Technical Criteria: The mayor may, upon recommendation of the
parking permit coordinator, and pursuant to the provisions hereunder, consider
for designation as a city permit parking area, an area whose streets (or
portions thereof) qualify by satisfying the following eligibility criteria:
      1.   Seventy percent (70%) or more of the parking capacity is generally
occupied;
      2.   Such occupancy continues for any consecutive four (4) hour period
and such occupancy rate occurs at least four (4) days per week during at least
a nine (9) month period per year.
      3.   Twenty five percent (25%) of the vehicles occupying the on street
spaces are other than area vehicles; and
      4.   The parking permit coordinator agrees that implementing the proposed
permit area will not, to a significant extent, transfer the commuter vehicle
parking problem to a different adjacent area should the area under
consideration be designated permit parking.
(Ord. 2004-79, 11-2-2004)
10-9-5: AREA DESIGNATION PROCESS:
   A.   Persons desiring to have their area designated permit parking shall
consult with the parking permit coordinator or his designee to tentatively
establish the boundaries of the area proposed for designation.
   B.   Upon receipt of a petition containing the signatures of a minimum of
fifty one percent (51%) of residents and/or businesses within the area boundary
proposed for permit parking designation, the parking permit coordinator shall
cause a parking study, or other surveys as may be deemed necessary, to be
undertaken as soon as is practicable consistent with scheduling constraints, in
order to determine if the proposed area satisfies the eligibility requirements
as set forth in section
10-9-4 of this chapter, or its successor. Should the studies reflect that other
nearby area streets are similarly congested with curb parking, the parking
permit coordinator may require such streets (or portions thereof) to be added
to the proposed permit parking area.
   C.   Upon receipt of the parking permit coordinator's favorable
recommendation to establish a permit parking program for the area, the mayor,
as soon as practicable consistent with scheduling constraints, shall fix a
time, date and location for a public hearing to consider the parking permit
coordinator's recommendation to designate the proposed area of city permit
parking area where curb parking is restricted or allowed by permit only. Said
hearing shall also be conducted for comment and analysis to determine the
boundaries as well as the appropriate area rules and regulations, parking
restrictions, issuance of permits, and other pertinent matters.
   D.   At least ten (10) days prior to the hearing date, written notice of the
public hearing(s) provided for herein shall be mailed to the listed residents,
owners and those institutions known to the parking permit coordinator to
generate a significant volume of commuter parking in the neighborhood. The
notice shall clearly state the purpose of the hearing, the location of the
hearing, the proposed boundaries of the permit area, the permit fee schedules
and formulas or conditions for issuance, and the location where the parking
permit coordinator's recommendation is on file and available for public view.
   E.   Any interested party shall be entitled to appear and be heard on the
proposal, subject only to reasonable rules of order that may be established by
the mayor.
(Ord. 2004-79, 11-2-2004)
10-9-6: AREA DESIGNATION; MAYORAL ACTIONS:
   A.   Within thirty (30) days following the hearing, the mayor shall deny or
approve the designation of a city permit parking area as he deems justified
under the objectives and procedures above. The mayor's decision shall be
reduced to writing either in the form of a report or as part of the
administrative order approving the permit parking area. The mayor's written
decision shall be filed with the city recorder, accompanied by the parking
permit coordinator's recommendation related to the permit parking area and made
available to any interested party upon request.
   B.   The mayor's decision shall include:
      1.   Significant subjects and concerns raised at the public hearing
conducted;
      2.   The findings relative to those designation criteria deemed
applicable to the city permit area;
      3.   Conclusions as to whether the findings, including testimony obtained
at the public hearing, justify preferential permit parking for the area under
consideration;
      4.   The mayor's approval (or denial) of the proposed permit parking
area; and, if approved:
         a.   The proposed boundaries of the city parking permit area;
         b.   The proposed parking regulations, including administrative
provisions for issuing permits; and
         c.   An implementation schedule indicating when the new permit parking
area will become effective.
   C.   If the mayor approves creation of a city permit parking area, a
declaration of designation shall be prepared as an administrative order
establishing the program for the area, including the boundaries, parking
regulations, the fees required in this chapter, and other pertinent matters,
for its administration and implementation. The declaration shall be mailed to
each listed address in the area's designated boundaries. The parking permit
coordinator shall promptly implement the program pursuant to the schedule. If
the mayor denies the creation of a city permit parking area, a notice of such
denial shall be mailed to each listed address in the area's designated
boundaries.
   D.   Information generated through the original designation process and the
designation criteria set forth in this chapter shall also be utilized by the
mayor in determining whether to remove any particular existing city permit
parking area or portion thereof from designated status and participation in the
program.
   E.   Action by the mayor in creating, deleting or modifying the boundaries
applicable in city parking permit areas under this chapter shall be final.
   F.   Actions by the mayor as to the implementation and enforcement shall be
considered administrative matters.
(Ord. 2004-79, 11-2-2004)
10-9-7: SIGNS AND MARKINGS IN DESIGNATED AREAS:
Upon the declaration of the mayor designating a city permit parking area, the
parking permit coordinator shall cause appropriate signs and markings to be
erected in the area, indicating prominently thereon the parking regulations and
conditions under which permit parking shall be exempt therefrom.
(Ord. 2004-79, 11-2-2004)
10-9-8: PARKING PERMIT APPLICATION TERM:
Each parking permit issued by the parking permit coordinator's office shall be
valid for one year or portion thereof to be determined by the parking permit
coordinator excluding temporary visitor permits. Permits shall not be
transferable but may be renewed annually upon reapplication in the manner
required by the parking permit coordinator. Each application or reapplication
for a parking permit shall contain information sufficient to identify the
applicant's identity, claim for permit eligibility, authorized residence or
business within the city permit parking area, the license number of the motor
vehicle for which application is made, and such other information that may be
deemed relevant by the parking permit coordinator. Applications shall be
accompanied by the fee established in section
10-9-9 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2004-79, 11-2-2004)
10-9-9: PARKING PERMIT FEES:
To defray program administration costs, fees associated with the city parking
permit program shall be established by the declaration of the mayor applicable
to the city permit parking area.
The fees shall be as follows:
   A.   Area regular permit:
      One year permit, twenty dollars ($20.00);
      Annual renewal permit, ten dollars ($10.00).
   B.   Area guest permit:
      One day permit, five dollars ($5.00);
      Two day permit, ten dollars ($10.00).
   C.   Area temporary visitor permit, fifteen dollars ($15.00).
   D.   A no cost permit for special events may be issued to residents for
groups not to exceed fifteen (15) permits.
(Ord. 2004-79, 11-2-2004)
10-9-10: PARKING PERMIT ISSUANCE CONDITIONS:
Parking permits shall be issued by the parking permit coordinator's office.
Each such permit shall be designed to state or reflect thereon the particular
city permit parking area. No more than one parking permit shall be issued for
each motor vehicle included on the application and, in no case, may more than
three (3) regular permits be issued for any dwelling unit. The number of
permits available and the manner for allocating permits between various
competing residents' (as opposed to commuter) vehicles, and the manner in which
the process will be administered for each designated area in the program, shall
be established by the mayor.
   A.   The following classifications of persons or entities (listed in order
of priority) may be issued parking permits for motor vehicles under their
control upon request pursuant to the allocation basis and conditions set forth
in said declaration:
      1.   Area residents of the city permit parking area for motor vehicles
owned or controlled and regularly parked in the area by household members.
      2.   Area business owners who own or lease property (and their full time
employees) within a city permit parking area for motor vehicles associated with
the business use regularly parked in the area. However, no more than one
parking permit may be issued for each such motor vehicle.
      3.   Guests, customers, and/or clients of city permit area residents or
area businesses who may be provided guest permits by such area permittees for
use on vehicles under the legal control of guests, customers and/or clients
during periods when persons operating such vehicles are actually visiting or
engaged in business at the area permittee's address, for periods not to exceed
two (2) days per visit.
      4.   Temporary visitors as provided by section
10-9-13 of this chapter or its successor.
   B.   Issuance of a permit shall not guarantee or reserve to the holder
thereof an on street parking space within the designated permit parking area.
(Ord. 2004-79, 11-2-2004)
10-9-11: PARKING PERMIT DISPLAY REQUIRED:
Permits shall be displayed on the authorized vehicle as provided in the
regulations adopted in the declaration.
(Ord. 2004-79, 11-2-2004)
10-9-12: PARKING PERMIT ACTIVITIES PERMITTED:
A motor vehicle bearing a valid parking permit displayed as provided for herein
shall be permitted to stand or be parked in the permit area for which the
permit has been issued without being limited by parking regulations or
prohibitions solely applicable to commuter vehicles. The permit does not exempt
drivers or owners from complying with general parking regulations and penalties
imposed by this title. All other motor vehicles not displaying permits that are
parked within a city permit parking area shall be subject to the commuter
parking regulations adopted by such declaration authorized by this chapter, and
the penalties provided for herein.
(Ord. 2004-79, 11-2-2004)
10-9-13: TEMPORARY VISITOR PERMITS:
Each declaration may authorize the parking permit coordinator to issue
temporary visitor parking permits to residents and businesses located within
designated permit areas for use of their bona fide transient visitors, service
persons, and construction personnel for a limited duration not to exceed forty
five (45) days. Prior to expiration, a vehicle bearing a visitor permit shall
have all the parking rights, obligations and privileges held by permanent
permits. Appropriate requirements or limitations on visitor permits shall be
recommended in each permit parking area by the parking permit coordinator and
contained in the mayor's declaration.
(Ord. 2004-79, 11-2-2004)
10-9-14: ENLARGEMENT OF AREA:
Upon recommendation from the parking permit coordinator that the designation
criteria and circumstances indicate that enlargement of an existing permit
parking area is warranted and appropriate, the mayor may begin proceedings to
enlarge the area by initiating the following procedure:
   A.   Notice shall be given to all addresses within the proposed permit area
expansion boundary of a public hearing to be held. Such notice shall be given
as provided for in subsection 10-9-5D of this chapter. Where the total area to
be enlarged or removed from the designated permit area exceeds ten percent
(10%) of the designated permit area or eight (8) homes, the procedure shall
include the petition process described under section
10-9-5 of this chapter.
   B.   Such notice shall contain:
      1.   The date, time and place of the public hearing to consider the
proposed area expansion.
      2.   A description of the mayor's intentions to enlarge the existing
permit parking area.
      3.   A listing of the streets (or portions thereof) proposed to be added
to the existing permit parking area.
      4.   A listing of the rules and regulations proposed for governing the
enlarged permit parking area and the issuance of permits.
   C.   The hearing shall be conducted as provided under subsection 10-9-5E of
this chapter. The mayor shall take into account the factors justifying the
permit parking area expansion in accordance with section
10-9-4 of this chapter.
   D.   Within thirty (30) days of the public hearing the mayor shall approve
or deny the proposed permit area enlargement. The mayor's decision shall be
reduced to writing either in the form of a report or as part of the
administrative order approving the expansion, which decision shall be filed
with the city recorder and made available to any interested party upon request.
The decision shall follow the format outlined in subsection 10-9-6B of this
chapter.
   E.   If the permit parking area enlargement is approved, a declaration of
expansion shall be prepared as amendment or addendum to the applicable
administrative order. A notice of enlargement shall be mailed to each listed
address in the expansion area. Criteria contained in subsections 10-9-6D
through F of this chapter shall apply.
(Ord. 2004-79, 11-2-2004)
10-9-15: REMOVAL OF AREA DESIGNATION OR DELETION OF STREETS:
Upon recommendation from the parking permit coordinator that the designation
criteria and circumstances indicate that removal of permit designation from an
entire permit parking area is warranted and appropriate, the mayor may begin
proceedings to delete a permit parking area or selected streets of a permit
parking area by initiating the following procedure:
   A.   By giving notice to all addresses within the boundary of the permit
parking area proposed to be wholly removed from permit parking designation or
within the boundary of an existing permit parking area where certain streets
(or portions thereof) are proposed to be deleted from permit parking area, that
a public hearing is to be held to consider this action. Such notice shall be
given as provided for in subsection 10-9-5D of this chapter. Where the total
area to be enlarged or removed from the designated permit area exceeds ten
percent (10%) of the designated permit area or eight (8) homes, the procedure
shall include the petition process described under section
10-9-5 of this chapter.
   B.   Such notice shall contain:
      1.   The date, time and place of the public hearing to consider the
proposed removal or deletion.
      2.   A description of the mayor's intention to remove from designation a
permit parking area or to delete certain streets (or portions thereof) from an
existing permit parking area.
      3.   A listing of the streets (or portions thereof) proposed for removal
from designation or deletion from a permit parking area.
   C.   The hearing shall be conducted as provided under subsection 10-9-5E of
this chapter. The mayor shall take into account the factors justifying the
proposed removal of area permit parking designation or the proposed deletion of
certain streets (or portions thereof) from an existing permit parking area.
   D.   Within thirty (30) days of the public hearing the mayor shall approve
or deny the proposed removal from permit designation of an entire permit
parking area or the proposed deletion of certain streets (or portions thereof)
from an existing permit parking area. The mayor's decision shall be reduced to
writing either in the form of a report or as part of the administrative order
approving the removal, which decision shall be filed with the city recorder and
made available to any interested party upon request. The mayor's decision shall
include:
      1.   Significant subjects and concerns raised at the public hearing
conducted;
      2.   The findings relative to those designation criteria and
circumstances which indicate whether or not removal from designation or the
deletion of certain streets (or portions thereof) from an existing city permit
parking area is warranted;
      3.   Conclusion as to whether the findings, including testimony obtained
at the public hearing, justify the removal from designation or the deletion of
certain streets (or portions thereof) from an existing city permit area;
      4.   The mayor's approval (or denial) of the proposed removal or
deletion;
      5.   If approved, an implementation schedule for removal or deletion.
   E.   If permit parking designation is removed from an entire area, a
declaration of removal shall be prepared by repeal of the applicable
administrative order designating the parking permit area. If only the deletion
of certain streets (or portions thereof) from an existing permit parking area
is approved, a declaration of removal shall be prepared as amendment or
addendum to the applicable administrative order. A notice of the removal shall
be mailed to each listed address in the area being removed.
(Ord. 2004-79, 11-2-2004)
10-9-16: MODIFICATION OF REGULATIONS:
Upon recommendation from the parking permit coordinator that circumstances
warrant modification to regulations or restrictions governing an existing
permit parking area the mayor may begin proceedings to make such modifications
by initiating the following procedure:
   A.   Notice shall be given to all addresses within the boundary of the
existing permit area of a public hearing to be held. Such notice shall be given
as provided for in subsection 10-9-5D of this chapter.
   B.   Such notice shall contain:
      1.   The date, time and place of the public hearing to consider the
proposed area modifications.
      2.   A description of the mayor's proposed modifications to the existing
permit parking area.
      3.   A listing of the streets (or portions thereof) that will be affected
by the proposed modifications.
   C.   The hearing shall be conducted as provided under subsection 10-9-5E of
this chapter. The mayor shall take into account the factors justifying the
proposed modifications/changes to rules, regulations and/or restrictions
governing the existing parking permit area.
   D.   Within thirty (30) days of the public hearing the mayor shall approve
or deny the proposed modification(s) to the permit area. Should the
modification(s) be approved, the parking permit coordinator shall be directed
to implement the change(s) as soon as is practicable, consistent with
scheduling constraints. The administrative order designating the parking permit
area shall also be amended to reflect the new, approved modification(s) to the
area rules, regulations and/or restrictions.
(Ord. 2004-79, 11-2-2004)
10-9-17: PARKING PERMIT REVOCATION CONDITIONS:
   A.   Faithful compliance with the terms of the city parking permit program
is a condition subsequent to the privilege of obtaining a permit. Violation of
the terms of the city parking permit area shall be deemed a forfeiture of those
privileges.
      1.   Any permit holder convicted for violation of this chapter may be
required to surrender such permit as a part of sentencing.
      2.   The parking permit coordinator is authorized to revoke the parking
permit of any person found to be in violation of this chapter, the provisions
of the declaration, or for abusing the guest or visitor permit system
established herein, and upon written notification thereof, the person shall
surrender such permit to the parking permit coordinator.
      3.   Upon revocation, any further application for a permit by such person
may be denied for a period of not more than one year.
   B.   Any person aggrieved by such a determination made by the parking permit
coordinator under subsections A2 and A3 of this section shall have the right to
appeal to the mayor, or the mayor's designated hearing officer, within seven
(7) days of such determination.
(Ord. 2004-79, 11-2-2004)
10-9-18: UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES PENALTY:
   A.   It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter, unless expressly
provided to the contrary herein, for any person to stand or park a motor
vehicle, or to cause the same to be done contrary to the parking regulations
established pursuant hereto.
   B.   It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter for a person to falsely
represent himself as eligible for a parking permit, or to furnish false
information in an application therefor to the parking permit coordinator's
office.
   C.   It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter for a person holding a
valid parking permit issued pursuant hereto to permit the use or display of
such permit on a motor vehicle other than that for which the permit is issued.
Such conduct shall constitute an unlawful act and violation of this chapter,
both by the person holding the valid parking permit and the person who so uses
or displays the permit on a motor vehicle other than that for which it is
issued.
   D.   It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter for a person to copy,
produce or otherwise bring into existence a facsimile or counterfeit parking
permit in order to evade parking regulations applicable in a city permit
parking area.
   E.   It is unlawful for any person to fail to surrender a parking permit
upon receiving written notification of its revocation pursuant to section
10-9-17 of this chapter, or to continue to use or authorize the use of a
revoked permit.
   F.   A violation of this section is a class B misdemeanor, unless otherwise
provided herein.
(Ord. 2004-79, 11-2-2004)
TITLE 11
POLICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
UTAH CRIMINAL CODE
SECTION:
11-1-1: Provisions Of Utah Criminal Code; Adopted By Reference
11-1-1: PROVISIONS OF UTAH CRIMINAL CODE; ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
   A.   Except as specifically excluded in subsection B of this Section, or as
the application thereof is impractical or inappropriate in view of the context
of purposes or penalties as provided, all of the definitions, requirements,
regulations, prohibitions, provisions and sections of the Utah Criminal Code,
Utah Code Annotated title 76, as amended, with a corresponding penalty of
infraction, Class C misdemeanor or Class B misdemeanor are hereby adopted by
the City. Any and all violations thereof shall be considered violations of this
Code, and each violation shall be subject to the penalties provided in Title 1,
Chapter 4 of this Code.
   B.   The following sections or their successor provisions are specifically
excluded from this Chapter:
 
Section Title
76-5-107.5         Hazing
76-5-111.5         Report Requirements - Child Abuse
76-6-409.3         Theft Of Utility Or Cable Television Services
76-6-409.6         Use Of Telecommunication Device To Avoid Lawful Charge For
                   Service
76-6-505           Issuing A Bad Check Or Draft - Presumption
76-6-506.1-6       Financial Transaction Card Offenses
76-6-901 et seq.   Cultural Sites Protections
76-6a-1 et seq.    Pyramid Scheme Act
76-7-101 et seq.   Offenses Against The Family
76-8-601 et seq.   Abuses Of Process
76-8-701 et seq.   Colleges And Universities
76-8-801 et seq.   Sabotage Prevention
76-8-901 et seq.   Syndicalism And Sabotage
76-8-1201 et seq.  Public Assistance Fraud
76-9-301.8 et seq. Bestiality
76-10-201 et seq.  Waters
76-10-401 et seq.  Fences
76-10-701 et seq.  Corporation Frauds
76-10-1001 et seq. Trademarks, Trade Names And Devices
 
(1979 Code § 9.01.010; Ord. 98-46, 6-23-1998)
CHAPTER 2
OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON
SECTION:
11-2-1: Dead Falls And Pits
11-2-1: DEAD FALLS AND PITS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person maliciously to prepare or arrange any
dead fall or dig any pit, or set a gun, or arrange any trap to injure another
person or property within the corporate limits of the City.
   B.   A violation of this Section is a Class B misdemeanor, subject to the
penalties provided under Title 1, Chapter 4 of this Code.
(1979 Code § 2.02.010; Ord. 98-46, 6-23-1998)
CHAPTER 3
OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
SECTION:
11-3-1: Unauthorized Use Of Motor Vehicles On Private Or Public Property
11-3-2: Trespassing On City Parks, Cemeteries And Golf Courses
11-3-3: Open Fires
11-3-4: Unlawful Posting Of Notices
11-3-5: Removal Of Gates Or Signs
11-3-6: Scavenging Prohibited
11-3-1: UNAUTHORIZED USE OF MOTOR VEHICLES ON PRIVATE OR PUBLIC PROPERTY:
   A.   Private Property: It is unlawful for any person to operate any type of
motor vehicle (including, but not limited to, motorcycles, trail bikes, dune
buggies, motor scooters or jeeps) upon the private property of another, except
a highway or private street, without first obtaining the written permission of
the person in lawful possession of the property or, if the property is
unoccupied, the owner of such property.
   B.   Public Property: It is unlawful for any person to operate any type of
motor vehicle (including, but not limited to, motorcycles, trail bikes, dune
buggies, motor scooters or jeeps) upon any public property, except a highway or
private street, without first obtaining the written permission of the public
entity which is in possession of such property or, if the property is
unoccupied, the public entity which owns such property.
   C.   Possession Of Written Permission: Every person who operates any type of
motor vehicle upon the private property of another or upon any public property,
except a highway or private street, at all times while so operating such motor
vehicle shall maintain in their possession the written permission required by
subsections A and B of this section, except that if the same document grants
permission to two (2) or more persons, a person named in such document need not
have it in their possession while another person named in the same document
riding in the same group and not more than three hundred feet (300') from said
person has such document in his possession.
   D.   Private Street Defined: As used in this section, "private street" means
a street over which private persons have an easement to travel and does not
include driveways, paths or other ways over which no one has a right to travel
except by license.
   E.   Exceptions: This section does not prohibit the use of such property by
the following:
      1.   Emergency vehicles;
      2.   Vehicles of commerce in the course of the conduct of normal
business;
      3.   Vehicles being operated on property devoted to commercial or
industrial purposes where such operation is in conjunction with commercial or
industrial use and where such operation is implied or expressly given by the
person in possession of said property;
      4.   Vehicles operated on property actually used for residential purposes
and where such vehicles are there at the expressed or implied invitation of the
owner or occupant;
      5.   Vehicles being operated on public or private parking lots where
permission to so operate is implied or expressly given by the person in
possession of the lot.
   F.   Violation; Penalty: A violation of this section is a class C
misdemeanor, subject to the penalties provided under title 1, chapter 4 of this
code.
(1979 Code § 9.03.010; Ord. 98-46, 6-23-1998)
11-3-2: TRESPASSING ON CITY PARKS, CEMETERIES AND GOLF COURSES:
   A.   Parks: It is unlawful for any person to enter or be upon any city park
at any time from one hour after sunset to one hour before sunrise, except when
participating in or attending an activity sponsored by the city or allowed
under a special event permit issued by the city, and except for persons
crossing a park on a regularly established walkway.
   B.   Cemetery: It is unlawful for any person to enter or be upon the city
cemetery at any time from one hour after sunset to one hour before sunrise,
except for the day before Memorial Day and Memorial Day, when the hours when no
person shall enter or be upon the city cemetery shall be between ten o'clock
(10:00) P.M. and four o'clock (4:00) A.M.
   C.   Golf Courses: It is unlawful for any person to enter or be upon the
city golf courses between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and four
o'clock (4:00) A.M., except when participating in or attending an activity
sponsored by the city or allowed under a special event permit issued by the
city.
   D.   Posting Of Time Restrictions: The time restrictions shall be posted at
the main entrance to the park, cemetery, or golf course.
   E.   Violation; Penalty: A violation of this section is a class C
misdemeanor, subject to the penalties provided under title 1, chapter 4 of this
code.
(1979 Code § 9.03.020; Ord. 98-46, 6-23-1998; amd. Ord. 2007-21, 5-22-2007)
11-3-3: OPEN FIRES:
   A.   Unlawful: It is unlawful for any person to:
      1.   Build, maintain or assist in building or maintaining any fires upon
any of the streets within the limits of the city, whether paved or unpaved.
      2.   Build, maintain, possess or assist in building or maintaining any
open fire or open flame in a location identified in an order issued by the fire
marshal pursuant to section
2-4-17 of this code. For purposes of this section, the terms open fire and open
flame include, but are not limited to: bonfires and recreational fires, whether
contained or uncontained, and the lighting, igniting or carrying of any lighted
tobacco, cigarette, pipe, cigar or other type of smoking paraphernalia or
material.
   B.   Violation; Penalty: A violation of this section is a class B
misdemeanor, subject to the penalties provided under title 1, chapter 4 of this
code.
(Ord. 2009-45, 6-23-2009)
11-3-4: UNLAWFUL POSTING OF NOTICES:
   A.   Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person within the corporate limits
of the city to print, paint, write, mark or in any way post up any notice,
card, advertisement or other device upon any wall, fence, tree, post, building,
bridge or other property, or cause the same to be done, without permission of
the owner or agent thereof, except as may specifically be authorized by law.
   B.   Violation; Penalty: A violation of this section is a class C
misdemeanor, subject to the penalties provided under title 1, chapter 4 of this
code.
(1979 Code § 9.03.040; Ord. 98-46, 6-23-1998)
11-3-5: REMOVAL OF GATES OR SIGNS:
   A.   Unlawful: It is unlawful for any person to remove mischievously any
traffic control devices, gates or signs within the limits of the city.
   B.   Violation; Penalty: A violation of this section is a class C
misdemeanor, subject to the penalties provided under title 1, chapter 4 of this
code.
(1979 Code § 9.03.050; Ord. 98-46, 6-23-1998)
11-3-6: SCAVENGING PROHIBITED:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, sort through or scavenge
solid waste placed or deposited in a solid waste container or receptacle.
   B.   This section does not apply to:
      1.   Law enforcement officers engaged in investigation of any crime under
federal, state or local law;
      2.   Providers of solid waste collection and disposal services under a
contractual or legal obligation to collect solid waste; or
      3.   The owner or authorized user of a container or receptacle or a
person receiving permission from the owner or authorized user of a container or
receptacle to sort through or remove the contents of such container or
receptacle.
   C.   This section shall not be deemed to create a private property right in
any solid waste set out for collection by an owner or authorized user of a
solid waste container or receptacle.
   D.   A violation of this section is a class B misdemeanor, subject to the
penalties provided under title 1, chapter 4, article A of this code.
(Ord. 2007-31, 5-29-2007)
CHAPTER 4
GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION OFFENSES
SECTION:
11-4-1: Temporary Stops; Failure To Identify, Concealment Of Identity,
Furnishing Of False Information
11-4-1: TEMPORARY STOPS; FAILURE TO IDENTIFY, CONCEALMENT OF IDENTITY,
FURNISHING OF FALSE INFORMATION:
   A.   Any peace officer, as defined in Utah Code Annotated section 53-13-101
et seq., charged with enforcement of city ordinances, may stop any person in a
public place when the officer has a reasonable suspicion to believe the person
has committed or is in the act of committing or is attempting to commit a
public offense and may demand the person's name, address and an explanation of
his or her actions.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person stopped and questioned under these
circumstances:
      1.   To fail to identify himself or herself by disclosing his or her
name, but may not be compelled to answer any other inquiry of the peace
officer; or
      2.   To knowingly and intentionally conceal or attempt to conceal his or
her identity, falsely identify himself or herself, or furnish or give false or
misleading information to any such peace officer.
   C.   A violation of this chapter is a class C misdemeanor, subject to the
penalties provided under title 1, chapter 4, article A of this code.
(Ord. 2007-32, 5-29-2007)
CHAPTER 5
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER AND DECENCY
SECTION:
11-5-1: Public Intoxication And Public Drinking
11-5-2: Public Urination
11-5-3: Mutual Combat
11-5-4: Obstructing Streets And Sidewalks
11-5-5: Aggressive Solicitation
11-5-6: Sound Producing Devices
11-5-7: Reserved
11-5-8: Public Indecency
11-5-9: Gang Loitering
11-5-10: Antigang Recruitment
11-5-11: Loitering With The Intent Of Engaging In Drug Related Activity
11-5-1: PUBLIC INTOXICATION AND PUBLIC DRINKING:
   A.   Definitions: As used in this section:
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: "Beer" and "liquor", as defined in Utah Code Annotated
section 32A-1-101, alcoholic beverage control act, or its successor.
   OPEN CONTAINER: A container which has been opened, its seal broken or the
contents of which have been partially consumed.
   OUTDOOR PUBLIC AREA: Any area open to the sky to which the public or a
substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to,
parking lots, accessways, sidewalks, or landscaped areas.
   B.   Drinking Liquor In Public Places: It is unlawful to consume liquor in a
public building, park or stadium, except when consumption occurs as part of a
special event for which a special event permit has been issued under authority
of Utah Code Annotated section 32A-7-101, or its successor section.
   C.   Intoxication:
      1.   It is unlawful to be under the influence of alcohol, a controlled
substance, or any substance having the property of releasing toxic vapors, to a
degree that the person may endanger themselves or another, if such person is in
a public place or in a private place where he/she unreasonably disturbs other
persons.
      2.   A peace officer or a magistrate may release from custody an
individual arrested under this section, if he or she believes imprisonment is
unnecessary for the protection of the individual or another; or a peace officer
may take the arrested person to a detoxification center or other special
facility as an alternative to incarceration or release from custody.
   D.   Unlawful Consumption Or Possession Of Alcoholic Beverages In Public
Places:
      1.   No person shall consume an alcoholic beverage in an unpermitted
public place, or keep, carry or possess any open container containing an
alcoholic beverage in an unpermitted public place.
      2.   "Unpermitted public place", as used in this section means:
         a.   Any public street, sidewalk, alley or right of way;
         b.   Any public park;
         c.   Any publicly owned building or publicly owned real property;
         d.   Any outdoor public area on the premises of a commercial or
manufacturing building, except with the permission of the owner or lawful
possessor of the property;
         e.   Boarded, vacant or abandoned commercial buildings; or
         f.   Vacant lots in areas zoned for commercial or manufacturing uses.
      3.   Notwithstanding the above, the consumption or possession of beer or
alcoholic beverages shall not be prohibited:
         a.   Within any park or recreational facility in which the city has
expressly granted a concessionaire operating in that park or recreational
facility a license to sell alcoholic beverages during the hours the
concessionaire is so operating and for one hour thereafter; or
         b.   Within any park, recreational facility, public building or public
property in which the city has approved issuance of a special event beer
license 1  for a city sponsored, civic event within the park or recreational
facility during the designated hours of the event and for one hour thereafter;
         c.   When consumed or possessed in accordance with an alcoholic
beverage permit for the MTC Learning park, Dinosaur park or the Ogden
amphitheater as provided in subsection 6-1-9A of this code, or Union Station as
provided in subsection 6-1-9B of this code; or
         d.   Within any premises or area identified in an alcoholic beverage
license issued by the city under title 5, chapter 3, article C of this code,
authorizing the sale, consumption or possession of beer.
      4.   It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the applicable
concessionaire, to bring any alcoholic beverage into a city park or
recreational facility for which a concession allowing the sale of beer has been
granted or for any person to consume or possess any alcoholic beverage not sold
by the concessionaire.
   E.   Penalty: An offense under this section is a class C misdemeanor,
subject to the penalties provided under title 1, chapter 4 of this code.
(1979 Code § 9.05.010; Ord. 98-46, 6-23-1998; amd. 1999 Code; Ord. 2002-49, 8-
6-2002)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection 5-3C-5F of this code.
11-5-2: PUBLIC URINATION:
   A.   Unlawful: A person is guilty of public urination where a person
urinates in a public place while in the presence of another or under
circumstances which the person should know will likely cause affront or alarm.
   B.   Penalty: Public urination is a class B misdemeanor, subject to the
penalties provided under title 1, chapter 4 of this code.
(1979 Code § 9.05.020; Ord. 98-46, 6-23-1998; amd. 1999 Code)
11-5-3: MUTUAL COMBAT:
   A.   A person is guilty of mutual combat if he or she knowingly or
recklessly engages in violent, tumultuous, assaultive or threatening behavior
with one or more persons thereby causing public inconvenience, annoyance, or
alarm, or recklessly creating a risk thereof.
   B.   It is no defense to a prosecution under this section that he or she did
not initiate the violent, tumultuous, assaultive or threatening conduct.
   C.   Mutual combat is a class C misdemeanor, subject to the penalties
provided under title 1, chapter 4 of this code.
(1979 Code § 9.05.040; Ord. 98-46, 6-23-1998; amd. 1999 Code)
11-5-4: OBSTRUCTING STREETS AND SIDEWALKS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to remain standing, lying or sitting on
any sidewalk for a longer period than two (2) minutes in such a manner as to
obstruct the free passage of foot travelers thereon, or wilfully to remain
standing, lying or sitting thereon in said manner for more than one minute
after being requested to move by any police officer, or wilfully to remain on
the sidewalk in front of any dwelling house or place of business in such a
manner as to obstruct the free passage of any other person into or out of such
dwelling house or place of business.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to remain standing, lying or sitting on
the street or highway in such a manner as to obstruct the free passage of
vehicular or pedestrian traffic thereon, or wilfully to remain standing, lying
or sitting thereon in said manner for more than one minute after being
requested to move by any police officer, or wilfully to remain on such street
or highways in such a manner as to obstruct the free passage upon said street
or highways or any property having access to said street or highways.
   C.   A violation of this section is a class C misdemeanor, subject to the
penalties provided under title 1, chapter 4 of this code.
(1979 Code § 9.05.040; Ord. 98-46, 6-23-1998)
11-5-5: AGGRESSIVE SOLICITATION:
   A.   Definitions: For purposes of this Section:
   AGGRESSIVE MANNER: Means and includes:
      1.   Intentionally or recklessly making any physical contact with or
touching another person in the course of the solicitation without the person's
consent;
      2.   Following the person being solicited, if that conduct is: a)
intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily
harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's
possession; or b) is intended to or is reasonably likely to intimidate the
person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation;
      3.   Continuing to solicit within five feet (5') of the person being
solicited after the person has made a negative response, if continuing the
solicitation is: a) intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to
fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in
the person's possession; or b) is intended to or is reasonably likely to
intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the
solicitation;
      4.   Intentionally or recklessly blocking the safe or free passage of the
person being solicited or requiring the person, or the driver of a vehicle, to
take evasive action to avoid physical contact with the person making the
solicitation. Acts authorized as an exercise of one's constitutional right to
picket or legally protest, and acts authorized by a permit issued pursuant to
the provisions of this Code, shall not constitute obstruction of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic;
      5.   Intentionally or recklessly using obscene or abusive language or
gestures: a) intended to or likely to cause a reasonable person to fear
imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the
person's possession; or b) words intended to or reasonably likely to intimidate
the person into responding affirmatively to the solicitation; or
      6.   Approaching the person being solicited in a manner that: a) is
intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily
harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's
possession; or b) is intended to or is reasonably likely to intimidate the
person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation.
   AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE: A device, linked to a financial institution's
account records, which is able to carry out transactions, including, but not
limited to: account transfers, deposits, cash withdrawals, balance inquiries,
and mortgage and loan payments.
   AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE FACILITY: The area comprised of one or more
automatic teller machines, and any adjacent space which is made available to
banking customers after regular banking hours.
   DEPOSITORY INSTITUTIONS: Any bank, savings and loan association, savings
bank, industrial local corporation, credit union, or any other institution that
holds or receives deposits, savings, or share accounts, or issues certificates
of deposit, or provides to its customers other depository accounts that are
subject to withdrawal by checks, drafts, or other instruments or by electronic
means to effect third party payments, as provided under the Financial
Institutions Act, Utah Code Annotated section 7-1-101 et seq.
   PUBLIC AREA: An area to which the public or a substantial group of persons
has access, and includes, but is not limited to, alleys, bridges, buildings,
driveways, parking lots, parks, playgrounds, plazas, sidewalks, and streets
open to the general public, and the doorways and entrances to buildings and
dwellings, and the grounds enclosing them.
   SOLICIT: To request an immediate donation of money or other thing of value
from another person, regardless of the solicitor's purpose or intended use of
the money or other thing of value. The solicitation may be, without limitation,
by the spoken, written, or printed word, or by other means of communication.
   B.   Prohibited Acts: It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit money
or other things of value, or to solicit the sale of goods or services:
      1.   In an aggressive manner in a public area;
      2.   Within ten feet (10') of any entrance or exit of any depository
institution or within ten feet (10') of any automated teller machine during the
hours of operation of such depository institution, automated teller machine or
check cashing business without the consent of the owner or other person legally
in possession of such facilities. Provided, however, that when an automated
teller machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, such
distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the automated teller
machine facility; or
      3.   On private property if the owner, tenant, or lawful occupant has
asked the person not to solicit on the property, or has posted a sign clearly
indicating that solicitations are not welcome on the property.
   C.   Demand For Payment Not Included: This section is not intended to
prescribe any demand for payment for services rendered or goods delivered.
   D.   Constitutionally Protected Activity: This section is not intended to
limit any persons from exercising their constitutional right to solicit funds,
picket, protest or engage in other constitutionally protected activity. Rather,
its goal is to protect citizens from fear and intimidation. This section should
be held inapplicable in any such cases where its application would be
unconstitutional under the constitution of the state of Utah or the
constitution of the United States Of America.
   E.   Violation; Penalty: A violation of this section is a class B
misdemeanor, subject to the penalties provided under title 1, chapter 4 of this
code.
(1979 Code § 9.05.050; amd. Ord. 98-46, 6-23-1998; 1999 Code; Ord. 2014-33, 7-
29-2014)
11-5-6: SOUND PRODUCING DEVICES:
   A.   Authority Required: The use of any sound producing device by any person
using the public streets of the city, other than devices authorized by the Utah
uniform act regulating traffic on highways, is unlawful unless said use is part
of an authorized parade, or unless said use is specifically authorized by the
mayor. The mayor shall not authorize the use of any such device between the
hours of eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M., or which
shall emit an unreasonably loud or harsh sound or a whistle, or which is
audible more than four hundred feet (400').
   B.   Violation; Penalty: A violation of this section is a class B
misdemeanor, subject to the penalties provided under title 1, chapter 4 of this
code.
(1979 Code § 9.05.060; amd. Ord. 98-46, 6-23-1998)
11-5-7: RESERVED:
(1979 Code § 9.05.070; amd. Ord. 98-46, 6-23-1998; 1999 Code; Ord. 2001-17, 3-
27-2001, eff. 5-1-2001)
11-5-8: PUBLIC INDECENCY:
   A.   Definitions: As used in this section, the following terms shall have
the following meanings:
   NUDITY: A state of dress in which the female breast below a point
immediately above the top of the areola, or the male or female genitals,
buttocks, anus, or pubic area, are not fully covered by opaque clothing.
   PUBLIC PLACE: 1. Any public building, park or stadium;
      2.   Any publicly owned building or real property;
      3.   Any public street, sidewalk, alley or right of way;
      4.   Any area open to the sky to which the public or a substantial group
of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, parking lots,
accessways, entryways, private streets, sidewalks, landscaped areas,
playgrounds or common areas;
      5.   All buildings and enclosed places to which the public or a
substantial group of the public has access, including such places of
entertainment, taverns, restaurants, private clubs, cabarets, theaters, dance
halls, banquet halls, party rooms or halls limited to specific members,
restricted to adults or to patrons invited to attend, whether or not an
admission charge is levied.
   B.   Prohibited Acts: A person is guilty of public indecency if the person
knowingly or intentionally, in a public place:
      1.   Appears in a state of nudity;
      2.   Exposes on his or her person:
         a.   Any device, costume, or covering which gives the appearance of or
simulates the genitals, pubic hair, natal cleft, perineum anal region or pubic
hair region, or
         b.   Any device worn as a cover over the nipples and/or areola of the
female breast, which device simulates and gives the realistic appearance of
nipples; or
      3.   Engages in any of the following acts:
         a.   An act of sexual intercourse or sodomy;
         b.   Masturbation;
         c.   Fondling the genitals of himself, herself or another person.
   C.   Exceptions: The prohibition set forth in subsection B of this section
shall not apply to:
      1.   A woman exposing a breast in the process of breast feeding an infant
under two (2) years of age, including breast feeding in any location where the
woman otherwise may rightfully be, irrespective of whether or not the breast is
covered during or incidental to feeding; or
      2.   Any child under ten (10) years of age; or
      3.   A licensed sexually oriented business employee performing in a state
of seminudity in an adult live entertainment business, in accordance with the
requirements of title 5, chapter 15 of this code; or
      4.   Prior to January 2, 2001, a licensed professional dancer performing
in a licensed cabaret, in accordance with the requirements of title 5, chapter
4, article B of this code.
   D.   Construction And Severability: It is the intention of the city that the
provisions of this section be construed, enforced and interpreted in such a
manner as will cause the least possible infringement of the constitutional
rights of free speech, free expression, due process, equal protection or other
fundamental rights consistent with the purposes of this section. Should a court
of competent jurisdiction determine that any part of this section, or any
application or enforcement of it is excessively restrictive of such rights or
liberties, then such portion of this section, or specific application of this
section, shall be severed from the remainder, which shall continue in full
force and effect.
   E.   Penalty: Public indecency is a class B misdemeanor.
(Ord. 2000-38, 7-18-2000)
11-5-9: GANG LOITERING:
   A.   Legislative Findings:
      1.   In many locations throughout the city, the presence of street gang
members in public places has intimidated many law abiding citizens;
      2.   One of the methods by which criminal street gangs establish control
over identifiable areas is by loitering in those areas and intimidating others
from entering those areas;
      3.   Criminal street gangs establish control over identifiable areas in
order to control narcotics sales and other illegal activities in those areas,
and to intimidate law abiding residents;
      4.   Members of criminal street gangs avoid arrest by committing no
offense punishable under existing laws when they know police are present, while
maintaining control over identifiable areas by continued loitering;
      5.   The city council has determined that loitering in public places by
criminal street gang members creates a justifiable fear for the safety of
persons and property in the area because of the violence, including
unacceptably high rates of drive by shootings, drug dealing and vandalism often
associated with such activity;
      6.   The city also has an interest in discouraging all persons from
loitering in public places with criminal street gang members because persons
who are not gang members in those circumstances are at risk from drive by
shootings and other gang related violence, and at risk to be recruited by
gangs;
      7.   Aggressive action is necessary to preserve the city's streets and
other public places so that the public may use such places without fear; and
      8.   Current laws are inadequate to deal with problems posed by gang
loitering principally because conventional laws generally depend upon the
willingness of civilians to testify against gang members and drug dealers, and
many civilians are understandably reluctant to put themselves in harm's way by
providing such testimony.
   B.   Definitions: As used in this section, the following terms shall have
the designated meanings:
      CRIMINAL STREET GANG: Any ongoing organization, association in fact or
group of three (3) or more persons, whether formal or informal, having as one
of its primary activities the commission of one or more predicate gang crimes,
having a common name or common identifying sign or symbol, and whose members
individually or collectively engage in or have engaged in a pattern of criminal
gang activity.
      GANG LOITERING: Remaining in any one place under circumstances that would
warrant a reasonable person to believe that the purpose or effect of that
behavior is to enable a criminal street gang to establish control over
identifiable areas, to intimidate others from entering those areas, or to
conceal illegal activities.
      PATTERN OF CRIMINAL GANG ACTIVITY: The commission, attempt to commit,
conspiring to commit, or solicitation of two (2) or more predicate gang crimes
within a five (5) year period, provided that the offenses are committed by two
(2) or more persons, or by an individual at the direction of, or in association
with, any criminal street gang, with the specific intent to promote, further or
assist in any criminal conduct by gang members.
      PREDICATE GANG CRIME: 1. The following offenses under the laws of the
state of Utah (Utah Code Annotated):
         a.   Any criminal violation of title 58, chapter 37, 37a, 37b, or 37c,
regarding drug related offenses;
         b.   Assault and related offenses under title 76, chapter 5, part 1;
         c.   Any criminal homicide offense under title 76, chapter 5, part 2;
         d.   Kidnapping and related offenses under title 76, chapter 5, part
3;
         e.   Any felony sexual offense under title 76, chapter 5, part 4;
         f.   Any property destruction offense under title 76, chapter 6, part
1;
         g.   Burglary, criminal trespass, and related offenses under title 76,
chapter 6, part 2;
         h.   Robbery and aggravated robbery under title 76, chapter 6, part 3;
         i.   Any fraud offense under title 76, chapter 6, part 5, except
sections 76-6-504, 76-6-505, 76-6-507, 76-6-508, 76-6-509, 76-6-510, 76-6-511,
76-6-512, 76-6-513, 76-6-514, 76-6-516, 76-6-517, 76-6-518, and 76-6-520;
         j.   Any offense of obstructing government operations under title 76,
chapter 8, part 3, except sections 76-8-302, 76-8-303, 76-8-304, 76-8-307, 76-
8-308 and 76-8-312;
         k.   Tampering with a witness or other violation of section 76-8-508;
         l.   Retaliation against a witness, victim or informant in violation
of section 76-8-508.3;
         m.   Extortion or bribery to dismiss criminal proceeding as defined in
section 76-8-509;
         n.   Any explosives offense under title 76, chapter 10, part 3;
         o.   Any weapons offense under title 76, chapter 10, part 5;
         p.   Any violation of title 76, chapter 10, part 15, bus passenger
safety act;
         q.   Any violation of title 76, chapter 10, part 16, pattern of
unlawful activity act;
         r.   Communications fraud as defined in section 76-10-1801;
         s.   Any violation of title 76, chapter 10, part 19, money laundering
and currency transaction reporting act;
         t.   Burglary of a research facility as defined in section 76-10-2002;
         u.   Any violation of title 76, chapter 6, part 11, identity fraud
act;
         v.   Felony theft in violation of title 76, chapter 6, part 4, except
sections 76-6-404.5, 405, 407, 408, 409, 409.1, 409.3, 409.6, 409.7, 409.8,
409.9, 410 and 410.5;
         w.   Violations of sections 41-1a-1313 (possession without
identification number), 1315 (false evidence of title and registration), 1316
(receiving/transferring stolen vehicles), 1317 (selling/buying with
identification number) and 1318 (fraudulent alteration of identification
number) of the motor vehicle act.
      2.   Any federal or state felony offense that by its nature involves a
substantial risk that physical force against the person of another may be used
in the course of committing the offense, including assault with a deadly
weapon, aggravated battery, intimidation, compelling organization membership,
homicide or manslaughter, shooting at an occupied dwelling or motor vehicle,
kidnapping, carjacking, robbery, residential burglary, drive by shooting,
unlawful use or possession of weapons, bribery, tampering with or retaliating
against a witness, victim, informant or juror, rape, torture, and arson.
      3.   Any federal or state offense involving:
         a.   Money laundering;
         b.   Felony vandalism;
         c.   Unlawful sale of a firearm; or
         d.   Obstruction of justice.
   PUBLIC PLACE: Any location open to the public, whether publicly or privately
owned.
   C.   Designated Areas: The chief of the Ogden police department shall by
written directive designate areas of the city in which the chief has determined
that enforcement of this section is necessary because gang loitering has
enabled criminal street gangs to establish control over identifiable areas, to
intimidate others from entering those areas, or to conceal illegal activities.
Prior to making a determination under this subsection, the chief shall consult
as he or she deems appropriate with persons who are knowledgeable about the
effects of gang activity in areas in which this section may be enforced. Such
persons may include, but need not be limited to, members of the Ogden police
department with special training or experience related to criminal street
gangs; other personnel of the department with particular knowledge of gang
activities in the proposed designated area; elected and appointed officials of
the area; community based organizations. The chief shall develop and implement
procedures for periodic review and update of designations made under this
subsection.
   D.   Police Action: Whenever a police officer observes a person whom he
reasonably believes to be a member of a criminal street gang engaged in "gang
loitering" as defined herein with one or more other persons in any public
place, the police officer shall: 1) inform all such persons that they are
engaged in gang loitering within an area in which loitering by groups
containing criminal street gang members is prohibited; 2) order all such
persons to disperse and remove themselves from within sight and hearing of the
place at which the order was issued; and 3) inform those persons that they will
be subject to arrest if they fail to obey the order promptly or engage in
further gang loitering at or within the sight or hearing of the place at which
the order was issued.
   E.   Advocacy Activities: The chief of the Ogden police department shall by
written directive promulgate procedures to prevent the enforcement of
subsection D of this section against persons who are engaged in collective
advocacy activities that are protected by the constitution of the United States
or of this state.
   F.   Violation: A violation of this section is a class B misdemeanor, and
upon conviction shall be punishable as set forth in title 1, chapter 4, article
A of this code. Any person who fails to obey promptly an order issued under
subsection D of this section, or who engages in further gang loitering at or
within the sight or hearing of the place at which such an order was issued is
subject to a civil penalty of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and
not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense, or
imprisonment for not more than six (6) months for each offense, or both. A
second or subsequent offense shall be punishable by a mandatory minimum
sentence of not less than five (5) days imprisonment.
   G.   Community Service: In addition to or instead of the above penalties,
any person who violates subsection D of this section may be required to perform
up to one hundred twenty (120) hours of community service.
   H.   Police Officer Training: All law enforcement officers within the Ogden
City police department charged with enforcing this section will undergo
appropriate training on identification of gang members and criminal street
gangs.
(Ord. 2007-53, 7-17-2007)
11-5-10: ANTIGANG RECRUITMENT:
   A.   Legislative Findings:
      1.   The city council hereby finds and declares that it is the right of
every person, regardless of race, color, creed, religion, national origin, sex,
age or disability to be secure and protected from fear, intimidation and
physical harm caused by the activities of violent groups and individuals. It is
not the intent of this section to interfere with the exercise of the
constitutionally protected rights of freedom of expression and association. The
city council hereby recognizes the constitutional right of every citizen to
harbor and express beliefs on any lawful subject whatsoever, to lawfully
associate with others who share similar beliefs, to petition lawfully
constituted authority for a redress of perceived grievances, and to participate
in the electoral process.
      2.   The city council finds, however, that the proliferation of street
gangs often results in crisis situations caused by violent street gangs whose
members threaten, terrorize, and commit a multitude of crimes against the
peaceful citizens of their neighborhoods. These activities, both individually
and collectively, present a clear and present danger to public order and safety
and are not constitutionally protected. The city council finds that there are
approximately four hundred (400) active gang members comprising ten (10)
identified street gangs. It is the intent of the city council in enacting this
section to help prevent criminal activity by street gangs by focusing upon
patterns of criminal gang activity and upon the organized nature of street
gangs, which together, are the chief source of terror created by street gangs.
The city council further finds that an effective means of punishing and
deterring the criminal activities of street gangs is through forfeiture of the
profits, proceeds, and instrumentalities acquired, accumulated, or used by
street gangs.
      3.   The council further finds that it is prudent to institute reasonable
laws so as to make it a violation of a city ordinance to solicit or recruit,
conspire to solicit or recruit a juvenile as a member of a criminal street gang
or to deter a juvenile from leaving a criminal street gang.
   B.   Definitions: As used in this section, the following terms shall have
the designated meanings:
   CRIMINAL STREET GANG: Any ongoing organization, association in fact or group
of three (3) or more persons, whether formal or informal, having as one of its
primary activities the commission of one or more predicate gang crimes, having
a common name or common identifying sign or symbol, and whose members
individually or collectively engage in or have engaged in a pattern of criminal
gang activity.
   PATTERN OF CRIMINAL GANG ACTIVITY: The commission, attempt to commit,
conspiring to commit, or solicitation of two (2) or more predicate gang crimes
within a five (5) year period, provided that the offenses are committed by two
(2) or more persons, or by an individual at the direction of, or in association
with, any criminal street gang, with the specific intent to promote, further or
assist in any criminal conduct by gang members.
   PREDICATE GANG CRIME: 1. The following offenses under the laws of the state
of Utah (Utah Code Annotated):
         a.   Any criminal violation of title 58, chapter 37, 37a, 37b, or 37c,
regarding drug related offenses;
         b.   Assault and related offenses under title 76, chapter 5, part 1;
         c.   Any criminal homicide offense under title 76, chapter 5, part 2;
         d.   Kidnapping and related offenses under title 76, chapter 5, part
3;
         e.   Any felony sexual offense under title 76, chapter 5, part 4;
         f.   Any property destruction offense under title 76, chapter 6, part
1;
         g.   Burglary, criminal trespass, and related offenses under title 76,
chapter 6, part 2;
         h.   Robbery and aggravated robbery under title 76, chapter 6, part 3;
         i.   Any fraud offense under title 76, chapter 6, part 5, except
sections 76-6-504, 76-6-505, 76-6-507, 76-6-508, 76-6-509, 76-6-510, 76-6-511,
76-6-512, 76-6-513, 76-6-514, 76-6-516, 76-6-517, 76-6-518, and 76-6-520;
         j.   Any offense of obstructing government operations under title 76,
chapter 8, part 3, except sections 76-8-302, 76-8-303, 76-8-304, 76-8-307, 76-
8-308 and 76-8-312;
         k.   Tampering with a witness or other violation of section 76-8-508;
         l.   Retaliation against a witness, victim or informant in violation
of section 76-8-508.3;
         m.   Extortion or bribery to dismiss criminal proceeding as defined in
section 76-8-509;
         n.   Any explosives offense under title 76, chapter 10, part 3;
         o.   Any weapons offense under title 76, chapter 10, part 5;
         p.   Any violation of title 76, chapter 10, part 15, bus passenger
safety act;
         q.   Any violation of title 76, chapter 10, part 16, pattern of
unlawful activity act;
         r.   Communications fraud as defined in section 76-10-1801;
         s.   Any violation of title 76, chapter 10, part 19, money laundering
and currency transaction reporting act;
         t.   Burglary of a research facility as defined in section 76-10-2002;
         u.   Any violation of title 76, chapter 6, part 11, identity fraud
act;
         v.   Felony theft in violation of title 76, chapter 6, part 4, except
sections 76-6-404.5, 405, 407, 408, 409, 409.1, 409.3, 409.6, 409.7, 409.8,
409.9, 410 and 410.5; or
         w.   Violations of sections 41-1a-1313 (possession without
identification number), 1315 (false evidence of title and registration), 1316
(receiving/transferring stolen vehicles), 1317 (selling/buying with
identification number) and 1318 (fraudulent alteration of identification
number) of the motor vehicle act.
      2.   Any federal or state felony offense that by its nature involves a
substantial risk that physical force against the person of another may be used
in the course of committing the offense, including assault with a deadly
weapon, aggravated battery, intimidation, compelling organization membership,
homicide or manslaughter, shooting at an occupied dwelling or motor vehicle,
kidnapping, carjacking, robbery, residential burglary, drive by shooting,
unlawful use or possession of weapons, bribery, tampering with or retaliating
against a witness, victim, informant or juror, rape, torture, and arson.
      3.   Any federal or state offense involving:
         a.   Money laundering;
         b.   Felony vandalism;
         c.   Unlawful sale of a firearm; or
         d.   Obstruction of justice.
   C.   Designated Areas: The chief of the Ogden police department shall by
written directive designate areas of the city in which the chief has determined
that enforcement of this section is necessary because criminal street gangs are
targeting juveniles in identifiable areas and using fear intimidation to
recruit juveniles into gang membership or to prevent juveniles from leaving
gang membership. Prior to making a determination under this subsection, the
chief shall consult as he or she deems appropriate with persons who are
knowledgeable about the effects of gang activity in areas in which this section
may be enforced. Such persons may include, but need not be limited to, members
of the Ogden police department with special training or experience related to
criminal street gangs; other personnel of the department with particular
knowledge of gang activities in the proposed designated area; elected and
appointed officials of the area; community based organizations. The chief shall
develop and implement procedures for periodic review and update of designations
made under this subsection.
   D.   Prohibited Conduct: No person shall:
      1.   Conspire to solicit, recruit, entice or intimidate a minor to join a
criminal street gang;
      2.   Solicit, recruit, entice or intimidate a minor to join a criminal
street gang or conspire to do so repeatedly from the same location;
      3.   Expressly or impliedly threaten to do bodily harm to a minor or to
that minor's family or use any other criminally unlawful means to deter any
person from leaving a criminal street gang.
   E.   Violation: A violation of this section is a class B misdemeanor,
subject to the penalties provided under title 1, chapter 4, article A of this
code.
   F.   Police Officer Training: All law enforcement officers within the Ogden
City police department charged with enforcing this section will undergo
appropriate training on identification of gang members and criminal street
gangs.
(Ord. 2007-52, 7-17-2007)
11-5-11: LOITERING WITH THE INTENT OF ENGAGING IN DRUG RELATED ACTIVITY:
   A.   Purpose: Persons loitering in, on or near any thoroughfare or place
open to the public or near any public or private place with the intent to buy,
sell, transfer, possess or use illegal drugs pose a serious threat to the
health, safety and welfare of citizens, including neighboring residents and
passersby. Because of the increasing danger that such activity creates, this
section is needed to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
   B.   Prohibition: It is unlawful for any person to loiter in or near any
thoroughfare, place open to the public, or near any public or private place in
a manner and under circumstances manifesting the intent to engage in drug
related activity contrary to any of the provisions of title 58, chapters 37,
37a, 37b, or 37c, Utah Code Annotated.
   C.   Manifestation Of Intent: Among the circumstances which may be
considered in determining whether such intent is manifested are:
      1.   Such person is a known unlawful drug user, possessor or seller. For
purposes of this chapter, a "known unlawful drug user, possessor or seller" is
a person who has been convicted in any court within this state of any violation
involving the use, possession or sale of any of the substances referred to in
title 58, chapters 37, 37a, 37b, or 37c, Utah Code Annotated, or substantially
similar laws of any political subdivision of this state or of any other state;
or a person who displays physical characteristics of drug intoxication or usage
such as "needle tracks"; or a person who possesses drug paraphernalia as
defined in title 58, chapter 37a, Utah Code Annotated;
      2.   Such person is currently subject to an order prohibiting his/her
presence in a high drug activity geographic area;
      3.   Such person behaves in such a manner as to raise a reasonable
suspicion that he or she is about to engage in or is then engaged in an
unlawful drug related activity, including by way of example only, such person
acting as a "lookout";
      4.   Such person is physically identified by the officer as a member of a
"gang", or association which has as its purpose illegal drug activity;
      5.   Such person transfers small objects or packages for currency in a
furtive fashion;
      6.   Such person takes flight upon the appearance of a police officer;
      7.   Such person manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or herself or
any object which reasonably could be involved in an unlawful drug related
activity;
      8.   The area involved is by public repute known to be an area of
unlawful drug use and trafficking;
      9.   The premises involved are known to have been reported to law
enforcement as a place suspected of drug activity pursuant to section 58-37-14,
Utah Code Annotated; or
      10.   Any vehicle involved is registered to a known unlawful drug user,
possessor or seller, or a person for whom there is an outstanding warrant for a
crime involving drug related activity.
   D.   Penalties: A violation of this section is a class B misdemeanor, and
upon conviction shall be punishable as set forth in title 1, chapter 4, article
A of this code.
(Ord. 2007-54, 7-17-2007)
CHAPTER 6
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY, WELFARE AND MORALS
SECTION:
11-6-1: Discharging Weapon Within City
11-6-2: Fireworks
11-6-3: Hazardous Environmental Conditions
11-6-1: DISCHARGING WEAPON WITHIN CITY:
   A.   Unlawful: It is unlawful for any person to discharge any gun or pistol
or air gun or to shoot any bow and arrow within the limits of the city except
in self-defense, or in the case of a peace officer performing his official
duty, or in case of target shooting after the erection in a proper place of a
proper breastwork or barrier for the protection of other persons and their
property; provided, however, that nothing contained in this section shall be
construed to prohibit the use of play pistols, guns, bows and arrows, or other
similar children's toys.
   B.   Violation; Penalty: A violation of this section is a class B
misdemeanor, subject to the penalties provided under title 1, chapter 4 of this
code.
(1979 Code § 9.06.010; amd. Ord. 98-46, 6-23-1998)
11-6-2: FIREWORKS:
   A.   Permit Required; Application: Except as otherwise provided under
subsection C of this section, it is unlawful for any person within the limits
of the city to discharge, explode or set off any rocket, squib, firecracker,
roman candle, cannon, gun, rifle, pistol or any other firearm or fireworks, or
combustible or explosive matter whatever without first obtaining permission of
the mayor, or the mayor's designee, to do so. Such permission shall be granted
only on written application made therefor and after the application has been
submitted to the chief of the fire department and a report thereon made by him
to the mayor or the mayor's designee. The permission provided for in this
section shall be in writing and shall specify the time when and the place where
such fireworks or firearms or combustible or explosive matter may be
discharged, set off or exploded.
   B.   License Required: It is unlawful for any person to sell or to offer for
sale or have in their possession or custody any rocket, squib, firecracker,
roman candle, fire balloon or other combustible or explosive fireworks or any
article for the making of pyrotechnical display, except sparklers and cap
pistols and caps, without first obtaining from the city a business license to
sell or offer for sale or have in their custody any such article.
   C.   Common, State Approved Explosives: Subject to the prohibitions provided
in subsection D of this section, class C common state approved explosives, as
defined in the Utah fireworks act, Utah Code Annotated section 53-7-201 et
seq., may be possessed and discharged without a permit on the following dates
and at the following times:
      1.   From eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. to eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M.
beginning on July 1 and ending on July 7; except that on July 4, the hours are
from eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. to twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight;
      2.   From eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. to eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M.
beginning on July 21 and ending on July 27; except that on July 24, the hours
are from eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. to twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight;
      3.   From eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. on December 31 to one o'clock (1:
00) A.M. on the following day; and
      4.   From eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. on the Chinese New Year's Eve to
one o'clock (1:00) A.M. on the following day.
   D.   Negligent Discharge Of Fireworks: It shall be unlawful for any person
to:
      1.   Ignite, explode, project or otherwise fire or use, or permit the
ignition, explosion, or projection of any fireworks upon or over or onto the
street or public property or the property of another.
      2.   Ignite, explode, or otherwise make use of any fireworks within one
hundred fifty feet (150') of any fireworks stand.
      3.   Ignite, explode, project or otherwise fire or make use of any
fireworks within thirty feet (30') of:
         a.   Any residence, dwelling or other structure; or
         b.   A vertical or overhead obstruction (such as a tree, line, or
structural overhang) measured from the point on the ground directly below the
outermost perimeter of such obstruction.
      4.   Ignite or discharge any fireworks within or throw the same from a
motor vehicle.
      5.   Place any ignited article of fireworks into or near a motor vehicle
or near any person or group of people.
      6.   Throw any ignited article of fireworks into or at a motor vehicle,
or at or near any person or group of people.
      7.   Ignite, explode, project, or otherwise fire or use, or assist in the
ignition, explosion or projection of any fireworks in a location where such use
has been prohibited pursuant to section
11-6-3 of this chapter.
   E.   Landing Of Fireworks In Prohibited Area: It is a violation of this
section for a person who ignites or assists in igniting fireworks in a lawful
location to allow the fireworks to be launched into, projected over, or to land
in a prohibited area. No person shall be prosecuted under this subsection E
when acting reasonably under authority of a permit issued by the fire marshal.
   F.   Violation; Penalty: A violation of this section is:
      1.   An infraction, subject to the penalties provided under title 1,
chapter 4, article A of this code, if the violation is based on the time of day
restrictions contained in subsection C of this section; or
      2.   A class B misdemeanor, subject to the penalties provided under title
1, chapter 4, article A of this code, if the violation is based on any part of
this section other than the time of day restrictions contained in subsection C
of this section.
(Ord. 2013-28, 6-18-2013)
11-6-3: HAZARDOUS ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS:
   A.   Definitions: For purposes of this section:
   IGNITION SOURCE: Any lighted or burning material or object, including
recreational fires or campfires, a lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette, firework,
lighter, match, or smoking paraphernalia.
   MOUNTAINOUS, BRUSH COVERED, OR FOREST COVERED AREAS: Areas or zones with
open fields, vacant lots, wooded areas, and brush covered hillsides throughout
the city. This includes such areas as: all wooded areas along the Ogden and
Weber River Parkway beginning at the eastern boundary of the city from the
mouth of Ogden Canyon and continuing along the Ogden River to the west city
boundary and along the Weber River to the south city boundary, including any
associated parks along the river corridor; all of Fort Buenaventura, the city
baseball park and dog park area located off of A Avenue; and the old landfill
property located at approximately 2550 A Avenue, near Fort Buenaventura.
   WILDLAND URBAN INTERFACE AREA: The line, area, or zone where structures or
other human development meet or intermingle with undeveloped wildland; and
includes all areas of the city east of Harrison Boulevard from the north city
boundary to the south city boundary.
   B.   Prohibition On Use Of Ignition Source: It is unlawful to ignite or use
an ignition source in the following areas during those periods of time that the
fire marshal has determined hazardous environmental conditions exist or are
expected to persist when notice has been filed with the city recorder:
      1.   Mountainous, brush covered, or forest covered areas;
      2.   The wildland urban interface area; or
      3.   Land being used for an agricultural purpose.
   C.   Fire Marshal Notice: When the fire marshal determines that hazardous
environmental conditions exist in any of the areas described in subsection B of
this section:
      1.   The fire marshal shall issue a notice, in writing, stating the
location where hazardous environmental conditions exist and the length of time
such conditions are expected to persist;
      2.   The notice may include an exhibit with a map or graphical
representation of the area subject to the hazardous environmental conditions;
      3.   The notice, including any exhibits, shall be filed with the city
recorder, who shall publish a summary of the notice one time in a newspaper of
general circulation in the city, including a statement that a copy of the
notice may be obtained from the recorder's office; and
      4.   The fire marshal shall file a copy of the notice and any exhibits
with:
         a.   The city council; and
         b.   The business license coordinator.
   D.   Notice To Vendors: The business license coordinator shall provide two
(2) copies of a notice received pursuant to this section, including any
exhibits, to each person who has a license and permit to sell fireworks. Each
person who has a license and permit to sell fireworks shall post at least one
copy of the notice, including any exhibit, in a prominent location where
fireworks are displayed for sale.
   E.   Violation; Penalty: A violation of a notice issued under this section
is a class B misdemeanor, subject to the penalties provided under title 1,
chapter 4, article A of this code.
(Ord. 2013-28, 6-18-2013)
CHAPTER 7
MINORS 1
SECTION:
11-7-1: Curfew; Nighttime And Daytime
 
Notes
1 1. Prior ordinance history: 1979 Code § 9.07.010; Ord. 98-46, 6-23-1998.
11-7-1: CURFEW; NIGHTTIME AND DAYTIME:
   A.   Minors Prohibited In Public Places; Responsibility Of Parents And
Guardians:
      1.   Under Sixteen; Nighttime: It is unlawful for any minor under the age
of sixteen (16) years to loiter or remain in any public place within the city
between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. of
the following day, except as provided under subsection B of this section.
      2.   Sixteen Or Older; Nighttime: It is unlawful for any minor sixteen
(16) years of age or older to loiter or remain in any public place within the
city between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and five o'clock (5:
00) A.M., except as provided under subsection B of this section.
      3.   Minors Subject To Compulsory Education; Daytime: It is unlawful for
any minor subject to compulsory education to loiter or remain in any public
place, any restricted dwelling, or any unsupervised place within the city
between the hours of eight thirty o'clock (8:30) A.M. and two o'clock (2:00)
P.M. on any day when school is in session for that minor.
      4.   Minors Subject To A Compulsory Alternative Education Program;
Daytime: It is unlawful for any minor subject to a compulsory alternative
education program to loiter or remain in any public place, any restricted
dwelling, or any unsupervised place within the city between the hours of eight
thirty o'clock (8:30) A.M. and two o'clock (2:00) P.M. on any day when that
minor would otherwise be required to attend a regular compulsory education
school.
      5.   Parents, Guardians: It is unlawful for any parent, guardian or other
person having legal care and custody of any minor dealt with respectively in
subsections A1 through A4 of this section to permit or allow, whether wilfully
or by exercise of insufficient parental control, any such minor to remain or
loiter in any public place or in any other restricted place, except as provided
in subsections B and C of this section.
   B.   Defenses; Nighttime Curfew: It shall be a defense to a violation of
subsections A1 and A2 of this section, that at the time the minor was stopped
by a police officer, the minor was:
      1.   A minor, fourteen (14) years or older, emancipated by marriage.
      2.   Accompanied by the minor's parent, guardian or other adult person
having the care, custody or supervision of said minor.
      3.   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel.
      4.   On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian,
without detour or stop.
      5.   Acting in response to an emergency.
      6.   On a sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the
residence which is immediately adjacent to the minor's residence.
      7.   Engaged in a lawful employment activity or going to or returning
home from such an employment activity without any detour or stop.
      8.   Returning home from, going to or being in attendance at any
religious or school function, organized dance, theater, sport event or other
such associational activity; provided, however, that going to or from such
activity shall be by a direct route and within a reasonable time of the
commencement or termination of such event.
   C.   Defenses; Daytime Curfew: It shall be a defense to a violation of
subsections A3 and A4 of this section, that the minor:
      1.   Was accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian;
      2.   Was in a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
      3.   Was on an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian,
without detour or stop;
      4.   Was acting in response to an emergency;
      5.   Was going to, or returning directly from, a medical or dental
appointment;
      6.   Has permission to leave the school campus for lunch or any school-
approved activity;
      7.   Was attending, or without any detour or stop, was going to, or
returning from, a school-approved, recreational or educational activity,
supervised by adults, and sponsored by the local school district, another
school district, or any civic, religious or other government organization;
      8.   Was going to, or returning directly from, a compulsory alternative
education program activity;
      9.   Was going to, or returning directly from, the minor's place of
school-approved employment;
      10.   Has been granted an exemption for "home schooling" as prescribed by
the local board of education; or
      11.   Has been otherwise granted an exemption to compulsory education by
the local board of education, under section 53A-11-102, Utah Code Annotated, as
amended, or any successor provision.
   D.   Enforcement Procedures:
      1.   Before taking any enforcement action under the provisions of this
section, a peace officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for
being in the public place or other restricted place.
      2.   The peace officer shall not take enforcement action under this
section if the officer has reasonable cause to believe that any defense under
subsection B or C of this section applies.
      3.   Upon any violation of subsection A3 or A4 of this section:
         a.   A peace officer may take the minor into temporary custody and/or
issue a citation to the minor.
         b.   If the peace officer takes the minor into temporary custody, the
peace officer, without unreasonable delay, shall:
            (1)   Transport the minor to the school from which the minor is
absent, releasing the child to the principal or other designated school
official;
            (2)   Release the minor to any other individual who has been
designated by the local school board to receive and return the minor to school;
or
            (3)   Transport and release the minor to a receiving center
established and designated by the local school board.
         c.   If the minor refuses to return to the school or go to the
receiving center, or the peace officer is unable to otherwise release the minor
to the appropriate school official or designated receiving center, as provided
in subsection D3b of this section, the peace officer may release the minor to
the minor's parent or guardian, and shall notify the appropriate school
officials of the violation. If a parent or guardian cannot be reached or is
unable or unwilling to accept custody, the minor shall be referred to the
division of child and family services, in the manner required under state law.
      4.   If cited, the minor shall appear, along with a parent or guardian,
in a teen court of the applicable school or in juvenile court, as directed in
the citation.
      5.   A parent or guardian shall not be cited for a violation of
subsection A5 of this section, unless the minor in question was previously
cited for a violation of this section and the parent or guardian was warned or
advised by a peace officer, school official, receiving center, or court
official of such violation.
   E.   Definitions: For purposes of this section:
   EMERGENCY: An unforeseen circumstance or circumstances or the resulting
situation that calls for immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or
loss of life. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural
disaster, or automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action
to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
   ESTABLISHMENT: Any privately owned place of business to which the public is
invited, including, but not limited to, any place of amusement, entertainment,
or recreation.
   LOITER: To idle, linger, wander, stroll, walk, drive, or ride aimlessly
about.
   MINOR: Persons under the age of eighteen (18).
   PUBLIC PLACE: 1. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access, including, but not limited to, public streets, open private
streets, highways, sidewalks, alleys, parks, playgrounds, public buildings and
appurtenant open spaces and parking lots, vacant lots, or other public places.
      2.   The common areas of any establishment, including, but not limited
to, entryways and parking lots.
   REMAIN: To linger or stay, or fail to leave a public place when requested to
do so by a police officer or the person in control of the public place.
   RESTRICTED DWELLING: Any dwelling not the current residence of the minor,
except it shall not include another dwelling if a parent or guardian has left
the minor under the care and supervision of an adult resident of such dwelling
due to illness or injury of the minor.
   SCHOOL APPROVED: An approval evidenced by a valid, school issued, off-campus
permit in the possession of the minor, or other written or verbal indication of
approval by an appropriate school official.
   UNSUPERVISED PLACE: Any private place, not a dwelling, unsupervised by an
adult.
   F.   Violation; Penalty:
      1.   A violation of this section is a class B misdemeanor, subject to the
penalties provided under title 1, chapter 4 of this code.
      2.   A minor adjudicated in violation of this section shall receive a
minimum fine of fifty dollars ($50.00), which minimum fine is not intended to
be in limitation of any other penalty, probation, community service, or other
fine greater than fifty dollars ($50.00), which may be imposed by the court.
(Ord. 2000-58, 10-24-2000)
CHAPTER 8
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
SECTION:
11-8-1: General Provisions
11-8-2: Use Of Marijuana A Prohibited Act
11-8-3: Unlawful Intoxicating Chemical Compounds
11-8-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Except as the application thereof is impractical or inappropriate in
view of the context of purposes or penalties as provided, the following
provisions, sections, definitions, requirements, regulations, and prohibitions
of controlled substances of Utah Code Annotated title 58, chapter 37, as
amended, are hereby adopted by the city:
 
Section  Title
58-37a-3 Drug paraphernalia defined
58-37a-4 Considerations in determining whether object is drug paraphernalia
58-37a-5 Unlawful acts
58-37a-6 Seizure - forfeiture - property rights
 
   B.   Any and all violations thereof shall be considered violations of this
code, and each violation shall be subject to the penalties provided in title 1,
chapter 4 of this code.
(1979 Code § 9.08.010; Ord. 98-46, 6-23-1998)
11-8-2: USE OF MARIJUANA A PROHIBITED ACT:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person knowingly and intentionally to possess or
use any marijuana in violation of Utah Code Annotated section 58-37-8, as
amended.
   B.   A violation of this section is a class B misdemeanor, and subject to
penalties as provided under title 1, chapter 4 of this code.
(1979 Code § 9.08.020; Ord. 98-46, 6-23-1998; amd. 1999 Code)
11-8-3: UNLAWFUL INTOXICATING CHEMICAL COMPOUNDS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person, including a corporation or other
entity, to manufacture, distribute, dispense, ingest, use, possess, purchase,
attempt to purchase, sell, publicly display for sale, attempt to sell, give,
trade or barter, any one or more of the following chemical compounds and/or
substances, including their salts, isomers, homologues and salts of their
isomers and homologues:
      1.   Salvia Divinorum or Salvinorum A; all parts of the plant presently
classified botanically as Salvia Divinorum, whether growing or not, the seeds
thereof, any extract from any part of such plant, and every compound,
manufacture, salts derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds
or extracts;
      2.   Pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-018);
      3.   (6ar,10ar)-9-(hydroxymethyl)-6, 6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2- yl)-
6a,7,10,10a-tetrahydrobenzo[c] chromen-1-ol (also known as HU-210 or 1,1-
dimethylheptyl-11-hydroxy-delta8- tetrahydrocannabinol);
      4.   2-(3-hydroxycyclohexyl)-5-(2-methyloctan-2-yl) phenol (also known as
CP-47,497), and the dimethylhexyl, dimethyloctyl and dimethylnonyl homologues
of CP-47,497;
      5.   1-Butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-073);
      6.   1-(2-(4-(morpholinyl)ethyl))-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole (also known as
JWH-200);
      7.   1-Pentyl-3-(2-methoxyphenylacetyl)indole (also known as JWH-250);
      8.   1-Hexyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-019);
      9.   1-Pentyl-3-(4-chloro-1-naphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-398);
      10.   N-benzylpiperazine (also known as BZP);
      11.   1-(3-trifluoromethylphenyl) piperazine (also known as TFMPP);
      12.   Any similar structural analogs of the above chemical compounds;
      13.   Any other synthetic cannabinoids.
   B.   It is not an offense under subsection A of this section if the person
was acting at the direction of an authorized agent of the city of Ogden to
enforce or ensure compliance with this law prohibiting the sale of the
aforementioned intoxicating chemical compound.
   C.   If any of the aforementioned intoxicating chemical compounds are found
in the possession of any person, they may be confiscated and destroyed by law
enforcement officials.
   D.   This section shall not apply to drugs or substances lawfully prescribed
or to drugs or substances which have been approved by the federal food and drug
administration or which are specifically permitted by Utah law.
   E.   Any person found to be in violation of this section will be guilty of a
class B misdemeanor and/or subject to a term of imprisonment not to exceed six
(6) months and a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or
both. Each day during which a violation of subsection A of this section occurs
shall constitute a separate offense.
   F.   The city of Ogden shall have the authority to seek an injunction to
compel compliance of any business which fails to or refuses to comply with this
section.
(Ord. 2010-31, 9-14-2010)
TITLE 12
HEALTH AND SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
12-1-1: Health And Safety Definitions
12-1-1: HEALTH AND SAFETY DEFINITIONS:
As used in this title the following terms shall have the meanings designated:
APARTMENT HOUSE: A building comprising three (3) or more suites designed for
separate housekeeping tenements.
AUTOMATED CART: Refuse containers meeting certain design specifications
required as part of the automated system employed by the city in delivering
refuse collection services.
AUTOMATED SYSTEM: A refuse collection system using machinery capable of lifting
and dumping refuse containers by remote mechanical means without the operator
handling either the refuse or the containers.
BULKY WASTE: Large items of solid waste, including, but not limited to,
appliances, furniture, motor vehicles, tires, branches and stumps.
CINDERS: The residue of materials burned in boilers, furnaces and heating
plants of public buildings, places of business, apartment houses, hotels and
manufacturing plants.
COMMUNITY WASTE: Lawn cuttings, clippings from bushes and shrubs, leaves,
sweepings from yards, tin cans, newspapers, magazines and cardboard cartons
(but not bulky waste or construction and demolition waste).
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE: Waste building materials and rubble
resulting from construction, remodeling, repair or demolition operations on
houses, commercial or industrial buildings, accessory structures such as
garages or storage facilities, roofs, fences, sidewalks, driveways, walkways,
other structures or pavements.
COUNTY HEALTH DEPARTMENT: The Weber-Morgan district health department or its
successor.
CUSTOMER: The person or persons paying for and receiving refuse collection
service provided by the city.
GARBAGE: The animal and vegetable waste and other food refuse resulting from
handling, preparing, cooking or consumption of food.
GROUP DWELLING: A residential development which has more than one residential
building on a lot and which is planned as a single complex.
HAZARDOUS WASTE: Any solid or hazardous waste designated as such by the U.S.
environmental protection agency or a combination of solid waste that, because
of its quantity, concentration, physical, chemical or infectious
characteristics may:
   A.   Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an
increase in serious illness in humans; or
   B.   Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the
environment if improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or
otherwise managed.
HEALTH OFFICIAL: "Health official" means the director of the Weber-Morgan
County health department or the director's duly authorized agent.
INOPERABLE VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer that cannot be
operated in its existing condition because the parts necessary for operation,
such as, but not limited to, tires, windshield, engine, drive train, driver's
seat, steering wheel or column, gas or brake pedals are removed, destroyed,
damaged, deteriorated or nonfunctioning; or any motor vehicle which is not
currently registered and licensed in this state or another state.
JUNK OR SALVAGE MATERIAL: Articles that are used, secondhand, worn out,
obsolete, defective, destroyed or discarded and which may be reused or resold
in their original form or which may have outlived their usefulness in their
original form and are commonly gathered up and sold to be converted into
another product either of the same or a different kind by some manufacturing or
recycling process, or which may be salvaged by separating, collecting or
retrieving reusable materials or parts therefrom. Junk or salvage material
includes, but is not limited to, inoperable vehicles, auto parts or parts from
other types of vehicles, tires, machinery or parts thereof, building materials,
scrap metal or other scrap material, and recyclable materials.
LITTER: Any quantity of uncontainerized paper, metal, plastic, glass or
miscellaneous solid waste which may be classified as trash, debris, rubbish,
refuse, garbage, or solid waste material.
MARKET WASTE: Condemned or decayed or unsound vegetables, meat, fish and fruit,
and all waste and offal thereof from markets, stores and factories, and all
vegetable waste and refuse from such markets, stores and factories.
MULTIPLE-DWELLING UNITS: An apartment house, a building arranged or designed to
be occupied by three (3) or more families, or a group dwelling, except for
purposes of this title a group dwelling shall not be considered to be multiple-
dwelling units if no more than two (2) dwelling units are located on the site.
NUISANCE: Whatever is dangerous to human life or health and whatever renders
soil, air, water or food impure, unwholesome or offensive is declared to be
"nuisance".
OPERATIONS DIVISION OR DIVISION: The operations division of the Ogden City
public works department.
ORNAMENTAL GRASSES: Any of the following grasses: yellow foxtail (Alopecurus
pratensis), blue or western wheatgrass (Agropyron smithii or Pascopyrum
smithii), big bluestern (Andropogon gerardii), bulbous oatgrass (Arrhenatherum
elatius), sideoats grama (Bouteloua curtipendula), blue grama (Bourelova
gracilis or Chrondrosum gracile), rattlesnake or quaking grass (Briza media),
feather reed grass (Calamagrostis acutiflora or C. arundinacea), northern sea
oats (Chasmanthium latifolium), pampas grass (Cortaderia selloama), lemon grass
(Cymbopogon citratus), tufted hair grass (Deschampsia caespitosa), blue lyme
grass (Elymus arenarius), sand love grass (Eragrotis trichodes), ravenna or
plume grass (Erianthus ravennae or Saccharum ravennae), blue fescue (Festuca
cinerea, F. ovina or F. glauca), variegated mannagrass (Glyceria maxima
variegata), blue oatgrass (Helictotrichon sempervirens), velvet grass (Holcus
lanatus), Japanese blood grass (Imperata cylindrica), junegrass (Koeleria
cristata, K. gracilis or K. macrantha), woodrush (Leymus spp. or Luzula spp.),
hairy melic grass (Melica ciliata), giant Chinese silvergrass (Miscanthus
floridulus or M. giganeus), Japanese silvergrass (Miscanthus oligostachys),
silver banner grass (Miscanthus sacchariflorus), maiden grass or silvergrass
(Miscanthus sinensis), moor grass (Molina caerulea), muhly grass (Muhlenbergia
spp.), Indian ricegrass (Oryzopis hymedoides or Achnatherum hymenoides),
switchgrass (Panicum virgatum), feathergrass (Pennisetum alopecuroides), tender
fountain grass (Pennisetum setaceum), feather top (Pennisetum villosum), ruby
grass (Rychelytrum neriglume), little bluestem (Schizachyrium scoparium or
Andropogon scoparius), autumn moorgrass (Sesleria antumnalis), Indian grass
(Sorghastrum nutans or S. avenaceum), cord grass (Spartina spp.), frost or
graybeard grass (Spodiopogon spp.), prairie dropseed (Sporobolus heterolepis)
and any other species of grass approved by the city manager that is customarily
used for ornamental purposes and not as a turf grass.
OWNER: Any person who alone, jointly or severally with others:
   A.   Has legal title to any premises, dwelling or dwelling unit as legal or
equitable owner, agent of the owner, lessee; or
   B.   Is an executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee or
guardian of the estate of the owner.
PLACE OF BUSINESS: Any place in the city in which there is conducted or carried
on principally or exclusively any pursuit or occupation by any person or
persons for the purpose of gaining a livelihood.
PUBLIC BUILDINGS AND PLACES: Office buildings, theaters, garages, auto camps,
hotels, clubs, schools, hospitals, or other places of similar character.
RECYCLABLE: Waste material that may be collected, separated, cleansed, treated
or reconstituted and returned to the economic stream in the form of raw
materials or products, and which is approved for collection as a recyclable by
the director of the public works department.
RECYCLE, RECYCLING: The process of collecting, separating, cleansing, treating,
and reconstituting post consumer materials that would otherwise become solid
waste and returning them to the economic stream in the form of raw material for
reconstituted products.
RESIDENCES: Buildings or dwellings comprising not more than two (2) dwelling
units designed for separate housekeeping tenements, and where no business of
any kind is conducted except such home occupations as are defined in the zoning
title of the city.
SOLID WASTE: Garbage, refuse, trash, rubbish, community waste, trade waste,
hazardous waste, industrial waste, market waste, construction and demolition
waste, dead animals, sludge, liquid or semiliquid waste; other spent, useless,
worthless or discarded materials or materials stored or accumulated for the
purpose of discarding; materials that have served their original purpose; or
waste material resulting from industrial, manufacturing, mining, commercial,
agricultural, residential, institutional, recreational or community activities.
It does not include solid or dissolved materials in domestic sewage or in
irrigation return flows, or discharges from which a permit is required under
Utah Code Annotated title 26, chapter 11, as amended, or its successor, or
under the federal water pollution control act, 33 USC section 1251 et seq., or
successor sections.
It is not intended to include recyclables as long as such materials are being
properly contained, collected, disposed, or reused.
STOVE ASHES: The residue of material burned in fireplaces, stoves and furnaces
in private residences, but not the residue from furnaces in apartment houses,
hotels, business houses, heating or manufacturing plants.
TRADE WASTE: All discarded wooden boxes, barrels, broken lumber, cardboard
boxes, cartons, waste paper, leather, rubber, excelsior cuttings, sweepings,
rags and other inflammable waste materials, and all discarded trade or
manufacturing refuse from stores, factories or other places of business which
are not included within the definition of garbage, stove ashes and market
waste.
WEEDS: Vegetation growing upon any real property within the city which will
attain such a growth as to become a fire hazard when dry, or which is otherwise
noxious, a nuisance or dangerous, as determined by the fire department or
county health department. Weeds shall also include, but shall not necessarily
be limited to, the following:
   A.   Dry grasses, stubble, brush, tumbleweeds and clippings which endanger
the public health and safety by creating a fire hazard, insect or rodent
harborage, or any other nuisance;
   B.   Poison ivy, when the public health and safety in residential or other
developed and populated areas are affected;
   C.   Those plants named in the Utah noxious weed act, Utah Code Annotated
title 4, chapter 5, and its subsequent regulations and successor sections.
(1979 Code § 8.02.010; Ord. 97-91, 12-16-1997; amd. Ord. 2002-30, 5-7-2002;
Ord. 2002-73, 12-17-2002)
CHAPTER 2
CITY GARBAGE AND REFUSE COLLECTION
SECTION:
12-2-1: Administrative Provisions
12-2-2: Automated Collection System
12-2-3: Materials Prohibited From Collection
12-2-4: Prohibited Conduct
12-2-5: Collection And Disposal Charges
12-2-1: ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS:
   A.   Supervision: Garbage and refuse collection and disposal services
provided by the city, including the provision of recycling services, shall be
under the supervision and management of the operations division of the public
works department, subject, however, to the right of the mayor to contract for
refuse collection services as provided in subsection B of this section.
   B.   Contract; Authority: The mayor shall have the power to contract with
any person to gather, collect, haul and dispose of garbage and other solid
waste material. Any contract for such refuse collection services shall contain
a provision requiring the contracting party to comply with all the applicable
provisions of this chapter.
   C.   Special Cleanup Days: The mayor shall have the power to designate
special cleanup days, in accordance with the provisions of section
7-2-2 of this code. At these designated times, the public works department may
collect large items or materials that otherwise are unacceptable during normal
operations, such as tree limbs, appliances, mattresses and furniture, if
authorized for collection by the mayor.
   D.   Access Restrictions: City personnel shall not enter yards, garages or
other buildings to pick up or collect refuse unless previously approved by the
manager of the operations division.
(1979 Code § 8.04.010; Ord. 97-91, 12-16-1997; amd. 1999 Code; Ord. 2002-30, 5-
7-2002, eff. 5-22-2002)
   E.   Approval Of Recyclable Materials; Notification Of Customers: The
director of the public works department shall determine which materials are
suitable for collection as recyclables based upon the city's ability to recycle
such materials in a reasonable and economical manner. The manager of the
operations division shall notify its customers of which materials may be placed
in a recycling cart and how those materials shall be prepared.
(Ord. 2002-30, 5-7-2002, eff. 5-22-2002)
12-2-2: AUTOMATED COLLECTION SYSTEM:
   A.   Applicability; Automated Cart Required: This section shall apply only
to collections made by the city or a private contractor working for the city.
All garbage and refuse collection services, including all recycling services,
provided by the operations division shall be by means of an automated system
requiring the use of automated carts. No garbage, refuse, or recyclables will
be collected unless deposited in an automated cart.
   B.   Carts Furnished By City: The city will furnish, free of charge for each
billing address, one automated cart for garbage and refuse collection and a
second automated cart for collection of recyclables, both of which carts will
be compatible with the automated collection system. If additional automated
carts are needed by the customer to accommodate additional waste, or if more
than one dwelling unit is at a single billing address, the customer may obtain
additional automated carts at the fee established in title 4, chapter 6 of this
code.
   C.   Placement Of Materials:
      1.   Rules Applicable To All Carts: It shall be the responsibility of the
customer to place all material for collection within the automated carts
provided by the city. All materials to be collected shall be placed inside the
automated cart in such a manner that the attached lid closes completely. No
cans, boxes, barrels or bundled refuse other than that contained in the
automated carts shall be collected or placed on the street. No materials
prohibited under section
12-2-3 of this chapter shall be placed in an automated cart.
      2.   Recycling Cart: Only recyclables approved for collection by the
director of the public works department shall be placed in a recycling cart.
Large boxes, cartons or pieces of corrugated cardboard shall be cut into pieces
no larger than two feet by two feet (2' x 2'). Recyclables shall not be placed
in separate bags or containers within a recycling cart, but placed loose within
the cart to allow for visual inspection of the materials.
      3.   Authority Of Division: In addition to any penalties provided herein,
the operations division may refuse to collect any materials set out or placed
in violation of this subsection. The operations division may also take the
following actions for customer violations of this subsection occurring at least
three (3) times within any twelve (12) month period, if notice of the two (2)
prior violations was affixed to the cart or otherwise delivered to the
customer:
         a.   Overfilled Carts: For carts that are overfilled so that the
attached lid will not close completely, the division may replace the cart with
a larger cart or deliver an additional cart. Thereafter, the customer will be
billed for any additional charges due for the larger or additional carts under
the provisions of these ordinances. The customer may reduce the number or size
of carts only after a twelve (12) month continuous period without further
violations.
         b.   Prohibited Materials: When unapproved or prohibited materials are
placed in a cart, the division, in its sole discretion, may remove the cart or
carts and terminate services, in whole or in part. If only recycling services
are terminated, the customer will continue to receive regular garbage and
refuse services, with no reduction in monthly charges, but will not be allowed
to obtain another recycling cart for the following twelve (12) month period.
   D.   Collection Day; Placement Of Cart: Automated carts shall be placed at
the curbside in the location and position designated by the operator no later
than five thirty o'clock (5:30) A.M. on the day of collection. Each automated
cart shall be placed at least three feet (3') from other automated carts in
order to allow unobstructed use of the collection vehicle lifting mechanism and
at least five feet (5') from obstructions such as trees, parked vehicles, or
mailboxes, so the collection vehicle can easily approach the cart without risk
of damaging surrounding obstacles, the collection vehicle or the automated
cart.
   E.   Removal Of Empty Cart: All empty automated carts must be removed from
the street as soon as practicable. No automated cart shall be left on the
street after the end of the assigned collection day, unless collection has been
delayed by the city.
   F.   Serial Numbers; Records: Automated carts shall be assigned to the
property owner or utility customer by serial number. A record of the serial
number of the cart and the address to which it is assigned shall be kept by the
operations division. The cart shall remain at the address assigned and not be
moved with the owner or tenant. Periodic inventory shall be made by the
operations division to account for the carts. Serial numbers applicable to all
carts assigned to each customer will be shown on the monthly utility bill, and
will also be depicted on the outside of each cart.
   G.   Ownership; Responsibility: Ownership of the automated carts shall
remain in the city. The customer or the owner or occupant of the assigned
premises shall at all times be responsible for the safe use and storage of the
automated cart while the cart is in his or her possession.
   H.   Reporting And Replacement Of Missing Or Stolen Carts: It shall be the
responsibility of the customer to report missing or stolen automated carts.
Upon discovering that a cart is missing, the customer shall make a diligent
search of the area, using the cart serial number indicated on the monthly
utility bill. If it cannot be found, the customer shall report the cart as
stolen to the city's police department (OPD), obtain a case number from OPD,
and then report the missing cart number and case number to the operations
division. Upon completing such procedure, the city will provide a replacement
cart to the customer at no charge, unless it is determined that the customer is
otherwise responsible for the cost of replacement under the provisions of this
chapter.
   I.   Damaged Carts: Damage to the cart caused by hot ashes, clinkers, hot
oil or any other material or substance that cuts, melts or ignites the cart
shall be paid for by the customer.
   J.   Painting Or Defacing Carts: Automated carts shall not be painted,
marked or otherwise defaced; provided, that a customer may repaint a cart using
the original cart color in order to cover over the colors of paint,
unauthorized markings or graffiti. If a customer fails to restore a cart to its
original color and appearance, after being noticed by the operations division,
the division may provide a replacement cart and the replacement costs shall be
paid for by the customer.
   K.   Vacant Premises: When premises are vacant, the property owner or
customer is responsible for placing all automated carts in a secure location to
protect against theft or vandalism. If the failure to place any cart in a
secure location results in cart loss, theft or vandalism, the property owner or
customer shall be responsible for the replacement cost of the cart.
   L.   Cart Replacement Fee: Whenever a customer is required to pay for the
cost of replacing any automated cart under the provisions of this chapter, the
fee for cart replacement shall be as determined in title 4, chapter 6 of this
code. The operations division may require that the fee be paid before a
customer receives a replacement cart.
(1979 Code § 8.04.020; Ord. 97-91, 12-16-1997; amd. Ord. 2002-30, 5-7-2002;
Ord. 2009-55, 8-25-2009)
12-2-3: MATERIALS PROHIBITED FROM COLLECTION:
   A.   Materials Specified: The following materials shall not be set out for
collection by city crews or contractors working for the city, whether placed in
an automated cart or during any designated cleanup day as provided in
subsection
12-2-1C of this chapter:
      1.   Highly inflammable or explosive materials, such as oil, gas or
paint, except that a paint can may be placed in an automated cart not intended
for recyclables, if the paint can lid is removed and the paint has been allowed
to harden in the can prior to placement in the cart;
      2.   Hazardous or radioactive waste material;
      3.   Hot ashes, cinders, clinkers or stove ashes which could ignite other
refuse;
      4.   Septic tank waste or holding tank waste from recreational vehicles
or travel trailers;
      5.   Dead animals;
      6.   Large quantities of dirt, sod, rocks and concrete;
      7.   Large quantities of construction and demolition waste; or
      8.   Large bulky waste items such as appliances, furniture or metal
objects.
   B.   Disposal Of Unacceptable Refuse: A customer having refuse which is not
acceptable for collection may dispose of it at an approved solid waste
collection facility in accordance with the facility rules and regulations
during its normal business hours.
(1979 Code § 8.04.030; Ord. 97-91, 12-16-1997; amd. Ord. 2002-30, 5-7-2002)
12-2-4: PROHIBITED CONDUCT:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person, owner or occupant of any premises to
place or deposit for collection in or upon the public streets or parking of the
city:
      1.   Any refuse container, which is not an automated cart as described
herein;
      2.   Any automated cart, except on regular garbage collection days as
designated by order of the operations division;
      3.   Any materials prohibited under section
12-2-3 of this chapter, whether or not placed in an automated cart;
      4.   Any solid waste material or recyclables except on regular garbage or
refuse collection days as designated by order of the operations division and
then only if placed in automated carts as described herein; provided, that it
shall not be a violation of this section to set out items authorized for
collection under section
7-2-2 of this code.
   B.   No person, other than the city or its authorized representatives, shall
tamper with any automated cart or its contents, remove the contents of any
automated cart, or move an automated cart from the location where the same has
been placed for collection.
   C.   Any violation of this section is a class C misdemeanor, subject to
penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code.
(1979 Code § 8.04.040; Ord. 97-91, 12-16-1997; amd. Ord. 2002-30, 5-7-2002)
12-2-5: COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL CHARGES:
   A.   Charges Imposed On Residences: Refuse collection and disposal charges
are hereby imposed, levied and assessed for the collection and disposal of
garbage, community waste, stove ashes, recyclable materials, and other such
refuse, against all persons and premises receiving such services. Such service
shall be supplied by the city to all residences, without exception, and the
charges shall be assessed and paid as provided herein. Such service may be
supplied by the city to businesses, industries and apartments or multi-family
residences, if requested by the owner or occupant and approved by the public
services director, and where supplied shall be assessed as provided herein.
   B.   Charges: Charges for refuse collection and disposal services shall be
as determined in title 4, chapter 6 of this code. Such charges are intended to
provide sufficient revenue for the costs of all refuse collection and disposal
services and a fair return to the city as payment in lieu of property and
franchise taxes.
   C.   Debt To City:
      1.   Garbage and refuse collection and disposal service charges are
levied and assessed upon the person liable for water services rendered at the
premises receiving refuse collection and disposal services through the city,
and are a debt due the city from and after the end of the accounting period for
which a statement for water services is to be rendered under the ordinances and
regulations governing the sale and distribution of water by the water utility.
      2.   In the event the property does not receive water services from the
city, the property owner shall be responsible and liable for all charges for
refuse collection and disposal services.
   D.   Billing And Collection:
      1.   Past Due; Charges: In the event water service to any building or
premises in the city is shut off or limited under the provisions of this
chapter, the service restoration fees imposed under section
9-1-11 of this code shall be applicable. Water service shall not be turned on
or restored until all past due charges for water, sanitary and storm sewer, and
garbage and refuse collection and disposal service and for turning off and
restoring water service have been paid in full, and all required deposits
provided.
      2.   Lien Against Property: All unpaid charges for garbage and refuse
collection and disposal service are a lien against the premises to which
garbage and refuse collection and disposal service is rendered or for which
service is procured by the city, except to the extent limited by Utah law. Such
lien may be foreclosed in any court of competent jurisdiction, or, by written
direction of the water manager, the lien may be waived and an action in person
may be maintained for the collection of such charges.
   E.   Receipt Of Charges; Accountability: The water division of the public
works department shall receive and collect the garbage and refuse collection
and disposal service charges levied under the provision of this chapter, and
shall promptly after receipt thereof account for and pay over the same to the
city treasurer. Periodically, there shall be paid to the water division out of
the proceeds of such charges the reasonable costs and expenses of the water
division incident to the billing, receiving, collecting and accounting for the
charges, as determined by the public services director.
(1979 Code § 8.04.050; Ord. 97-91, 12-16-1997; amd. Ord. 2001-38, 6-12-2001,
eff. 1-1-2002; Ord. 2002-30, 5-7-2002; Ord. 2004-39, 6-15-2004, eff. 7-1-2004;
Ord. 2004-44, 6-15-2004, eff. 7-1-2004)
   F.   Use Of Unassigned Carts: When a missing or stolen cart is found on any
premises, the water utility customer or owner of such premises shall be
responsible for charges attributable to such cart from the date that the cart
was reported as missing or stolen until its return to the city.
   G.   Temporary Discontinuance Of Services: Garbage and refuse collection
services may be discontinued during periods that the premises are vacant under
the following conditions:
      1.   The operations division picks up all carts assigned to the premises
and no automated carts are found or used on the premises during such period;
and
      2.   The customer pays the fee for pick up and delivery as determined in
title 4, chapter 6 of this code.
   H.   Service Changes: After initial commencement of services, the customer
may request that the number or size of carts assigned to the premises be
changed; provided that any change in service shall be maintained for a minimum
of three (3) months, unless the customer pays the pick up and delivery charge
as determined in title 4, chapter 6 of this code.
(Ord. 2002-30, 5-7-2002)
CHAPTER 3
LITTERING AND LITTER CONTROL
SECTION:
12-3-1: Littering
12-3-2: Distribution Of Flyers
12-3-3: Removal Of Debris From Damaged Vehicles
12-3-4: Materials Transported On Streets
12-3-5: Accumulation Of Litter At Construction Or Demolition Sites Prohibited
12-3-6: Waste Receptacles
12-3-7: New Buildings; Adequate Disposal And Storage Facilities
12-3-8: Penalty
12-3-1: LITTERING:
It is unlawful for any person to throw, deposit, place, or discard litter in
any manner or amount on any public or private property within the corporate
limits of the City, except in containers or areas lawfully provided therefor.
(1979 Code § 8.16.010; Ord. 97-91, 12-16-1997)
12-3-2: DISTRIBUTION OF FLYERS:
It shall be the duty of every person distributing commercial handbills,
leaflets, flyers or other advertising and information material to take whatever
measures are reasonably necessary to keep such material from littering public
or private property or public roadways.
(1979 Code § 8.16.020; Ord. 97-91, 12-16-1997)
12-3-3: REMOVAL OF DEBRIS FROM DAMAGED VEHICLES:
Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a public road, highway,
park, recreation area or other public or private land shall remove any glass or
other injurious substance dropped from such vehicle upon the road or highway or
in the park, recreation area or other public or private land.
(1979 Code § 8.16.030; Ord. 97-91, 12-16-1997)
12-3-4: MATERIALS TRANSPORTED ON STREETS:
   A.   Transportation Of Materials: All materials of any kind whatsoever
conveyed or hauled through or upon any public streets or highways of the City,
shall be transported in such a manner as to prevent such materials from falling
from the transporting vehicles and littering such streets, highways, or
adjacent properties. If necessary to prevent such littering of streets,
highways, or adjacent properties, the material thus transported shall be
securely tied down or shall be tightly covered with heavy canvas or other
suitable covering.
   B.   Haulers: It is unlawful for any person engaged in hauling garbage,
market waste, trade waste, community waste, stove ashes, construction or
demolition waste, dead animals, night soil or other refuse or solid waste
materials, or any soil, sand, gravel, concrete or cement of any kind upon the
streets of the City to permit, suffer, allow or cause any of said material to
fall into or to remain in said streets.
   C.   Vehicles: No vehicle shall be operated or moved on any street or
highway within the City unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to
prevent its contents from dropping, sifting or leaking, or otherwise escaping
from the vehicle.
   D.   Special Provisions For Construction Materials Or Scrap Metals:
      1.   In addition to the requirements under subsection C of this Section,
a vehicle carrying dirt, sand, gravel, rock fragments, pebbles, crushed base,
aggregate, any other similar material, or scrap metal, shall have a covering
over the entire load unless:
         a.   The highest point of the load does not extend above the top of
any exterior wall or sideboard of the cargo compartment of the vehicle; and
         b.   The outer edges of the load are at least six inches (6") below
the top inside edges of the exterior walls or sideboards of the cargo
compartment of the vehicle.
      2.   The following material is exempt from he provisions of subsection D1
of this Section:
         a.   Coal;
         b.   Hot mix asphalt;
         c.   Construction debris or scrap metal if the debris or scrap metal
is a size and in a form not susceptible to being blown out of the vehicle;
         d.   Material being transported across a highway between two (2)
parcels of property that would be contiguous but for the highway that is being
crossed; and
         e.   Material listed under subsection D1 of this Section that is
enclosed on all sides by containers, bags, or packaging;
      3.   A chemical substance capable of coating or bonding a load so that
the load is confined on a vehicle, may be considered a covering for purposes of
subsection D1 of this Section so long as the chemical substance remains
effective at confining the load.
   E.   Snow Removal; Highway Maintenance:
      1.   An authorized vehicle performing snow removal services on a highway
is exempt from the requirements of this Section if the vehicle's load is
screened to a particle size established by rule of the Utah Department of
Transportation.
      2.   This Section does not prohibit the necessary spreading of any
substance connected with highway maintenance, construction, securing traction,
or snow removal.
   F.   Highways: A person may not operate a vehicle with a load on any highway
unless the load and any load covering is fastened, secured, and confined to
prevent the covering or load from becoming loose, detached, or in any manner a
hazard to the safe operation of the vehicle, or to other highway users.
(1979 Code § 8.16.040; Ord. 97-91, 12-16-1997)
12-3-5: ACCUMULATION OF LITTER AT CONSTRUCTION OR DEMOLITION SITES PROHIBITED:
Any person in charge of a construction or demolition site shall take those
steps as are reasonably necessary to prevent the accumulation of litter at the
construction or demolition site.
(1979 Code § 8.16.050; Ord. 97-91, 12-16-1997)
12-3-6: WASTE RECEPTACLES:
   A.   Duty To Provide Waste Receptacles: Every owner, lessee or occupant of
any dwelling, building, premises or place of business shall provide or cause to
be provided, and at all times keep, suitable and sufficient receptacles for
receiving and holding garbage, community waste, market waste, trade waste and
other refuse or solid waste that may accumulate from said dwelling, building or
place of business, or upon said premises or the portion thereof under the
control of such person.
   B.   Container Requirements For Garbage And Market Waste: All garbage and
market waste must be placed in rainproof and flyproof receptacles, either a
metallic container with proper covers or an automated container as described
herein, and shall be at all times kept securely closed and shall be kept in
such place and in such manner as to prevent offense. When automated containers
are being used, they shall only be filled to a level that permits the lid to
close.
   C.   Nonresidential Establishments And Multiple-Dwelling Units: Solid waste
generated or stored for collection at commercial establishments and
institutions, businesses, apartment houses, multiple-dwelling units and public
buildings, shall be:
      1.   Kept containerized and covered or enclosed at all times; and
      2.   Shall be removed at the direction of the owners of such
establishments or institutions at least once each week and on such additional
occasions as are necessary to prevent adverse health and nuisance conditions.
(1979 Code § 8.16.060; Ord. 97-91, 12-16-1997)
12-3-7: NEW BUILDINGS; ADEQUATE DISPOSAL AND STORAGE FACILITIES:
   A.   Disposal Plan; Approval: Before building permits shall be issued for
construction of commercial buildings, industrial uses or buildings and
multiple-family units, plans for the adequacy, location and accessibility of
solid waste containerization and storage facilities must be approved by the
department of community development.
   B.   Certificate Of Occupancy; Approval: No certificate of occupancy shall
be issued for such premises until the department's approval of these facilities
has been obtained.
(1979 Code § 8.16.070; Ord. 97-91, 12-16-1997)
12-3-8: PENALTY:
   A.   A violation of this chapter shall be a class C misdemeanor, subject to
penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code; provided, that the
sentencing judge may also impose as additional penalties the requirements that
the offender shall devote at least one hour in cleaning up any litter caused by
such person and cleaning up any existing litter from a safe area designated by
the sentencing judge.
   B.   Failure to correct a violation of section
12-3-5 or
12-3-6 of this chapter after notice of violation and expiration of the warning
period may be enforced by imposition of the following civil penalties pursuant
to title 1, chapter 4, article B of this code:
      1.   The first civil citation issued after expiration of the warning
period shall subject the responsible party to the initial penalty of one
hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00).
      2.   The second civil citation issued after expiration of the warning
period and the prior imposition of the initial penalty shall subject the
responsible party to the intermediate penalty of two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00).
      3.   Any subsequent civil citation issued after expiration of the warning
period and the prior imposition of the intermediate penalty, or any reoccurring
violation under section
1-4B-6 of this code, shall subject the responsible party to the maximum penalty
of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(1979 Code § 8.16.080; Ord. 97-91, 12-16-1997; amd. Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
CHAPTER 4
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
12-4-1: Property Maintenance Responsibilities; Sidewalks, Park Strips And
Abutter's Alleys
12-4-2: Waste Materials Or Junk; Prohibited On Premises
12-4-3: Weed Control
12-4-4: Noxious Weeds
12-4-5: Vegetation Interfering With Public Ways Or Property
12-4-6: Empty Buildings To Be Kept Secured
12-4-7: Inspectors Authorized To Enforce Chapter
12-4-8: Penalties And Remedies For Violations
12-4-1: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITIES; SIDEWALKS, PARK STRIPS AND
ABUTTER'S ALLEYS:
   A.   It shall be the duty of the owner, agent, occupant or lessee of real
property to keep their exterior property free of conditions which violate the
provisions of this chapter.
   B.   It shall be the duty of the owner, agent, occupant or lessee of real
property abutting and bordering on any public street in the city to keep the
area between their property line and the curb or edge of the roadway free of
conditions which violate the provisions of this chapter. Such area shall
include sidewalks, park strips between streets and sidewalks, or other adjacent
landscaped or open areas within a dedicated public right of way.
   C.   It shall be the duty of the owner, agent, occupant or lessee of real
property which faces on an abutter's alley to keep that portion of the alley
which is adjacent to such property, free of conditions which violate the
provisions of this chapter. If the alley was dedicated for the benefit of real
property on both sides of the alley, the duty shall extend to the centerline of
the alley. If the alley was dedicated only for the benefit of real property
along one side of the alley, the duty shall extend for the entire width.
(1979 Code § 8.26.010; Ord. 97-91, 12-16-1997)
12-4-2: WASTE MATERIALS OR JUNK; PROHIBITED ON PREMISES:
   A.   Prohibition: It is unlawful for any owner, occupant, agent or lessee of
real property within the city, to allow, cause or permit the following material
or objects to be in or upon any yard, garden, lawn, or outdoor premises of such
property:
      1.   Junk or salvage material;
      2.   Litter;
      3.   Any abandoned vehicle or inoperable vehicle.
   B.   Exceptions: The prohibition in subsection A of this section shall not
apply to:
      1.   Materials or objects used, kept or maintained in connection with a
business enterprise lawfully situated and licensed for the same and operating
in conformance with the zoning title or other provisions of this code; or
      2.   The outdoor storage of no more than one vehicle at a residence, as
described in subsection G in the definition of "junk or salvage yard", section
15-2-11 of this code.
   C.   Prohibition On Park Strips, Sidewalks, Etc.: It is unlawful for any
owner, occupant, agent or lessee of real property abutting and bordering on any
public street in the city, for the distance such real property abuts and
borders such street, to allow, cause or permit litter, or junk or salvage
material, to be in or upon the area from the property line to the curb line of
the street or edge of the roadway.
   D.   Abutter's Alleys: It is unlawful for any owner, occupant, agent or
lessee of real property facing on any abutter's alley, to allow, cause or
permit litter or junk or salvage material to be in or upon that portion of the
abutter's alley for which the owner, occupant, agent or lessee is responsible
as provided under subsection 12-4-1C of this chapter.
(1979 Code § 8.26.020; Ord. 97-91, 12-16-1997; amd. 1999 Code)
12-4-3: WEED CONTROL:
   A.   Premises: It is unlawful for any owner, occupant, agent or lessee of
real property in the city to fail to maintain the height of weeds and grasses,
in the manner provided herein, on such property, or to fail to remove from the
property any cuttings from such weeds or grasses.
   B.   Park Strips: It is unlawful for any owner, occupant, agent or lessee of
real property in the city abutting and bordering on any public street, for the
distance such property abuts and borders the street, to fail to maintain the
height of weeds and grasses, in the manner provided herein, in the area from
the property line to the curb line of the street, or to fail to remove from
such area any cuttings from such weeds or grasses.
   C.   Abutter's Alleys: It is unlawful for any owner, occupant, agent or
lessee of real property in the city which faces on an abutter's alley for the
distance such property abuts and borders, to fail to maintain the height of
weeds and grasses, in the manner provided herein, in that portion of the
abutter's alley for which the owner, occupant, agent or lessee is responsible
as provided under section
12-4-1 of this chapter.
   D.   Weed Control Specifications:
      1.   Except as otherwise provided in subsection D2 of this section, weeds
and grasses shall be maintained at a height of not more than six inches (6") at
all times, and the cuttings shall be promptly cleared and removed from the
premises; provided, however, that this subsection shall not be applicable to
any ornamental grass so long as it is used and maintained solely, or in
combination with any other ornamental grass or grasses, as a supplement to an
overall landscaping plan and does not constitute in square footage more than
twenty percent (20%) of the property's overall landscaped area.
      2.   Weeds and grasses shall be maintained at a height of not more than
twelve inches (12") at all times on any of the following properties, and the
cuttings shall be promptly cleared and removed from the premises:
         a.   Areas zoned as open space zone (O-1) pursuant to title 15 of this
code;
         b.   Ditches, ditch rights of way or railroad rights of way; and
         c.   Undeveloped property or vacant lots (no buildings or structures).
      3.   Weeds which are eradicated by chemicals must be done so before their
height exceeds the height limits provided herein, or they must be cut at a
level not exceeding such height limits.
      4.   Weeds which are rototilled or removed by the root must be buried
under the soil or removed from the property.
      5.   When, in the opinion of the fire marshal, or any assistant fire
marshal, the large size or terrain of property makes the cutting of all weeds
or grasses impractical, the fire marshal, or any assistant fire marshal, may,
by written order, allow and limit the required cutting of weeds and grasses to
a firebreak of not less than fifteen feet (15') in width cut around the
complete perimeter of the property and around any structures existing upon the
property, unless the fire marshal, or assistant fire marshal, determines that a
firebreak of a lesser width will provide adequate protection against fire
spread at the particular location.
      6.   The fire marshal may from time to time exempt from, or limit, in
whole or in part, the required cutting of weeds and grasses for property
established and maintained as a nature park or wetland mitigation area, if the
fire marshal, or assistant fire marshal, determines that such limitation or
exemption will not present a potential fire hazard to adjacent properties.
(1979 Code § 8.26.030; Ord. 97-91, 12-16-1997; amd. Ord. 2002-73, 12-17-2002)
12-4-4: NOXIOUS WEEDS:
It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any real property to allow to
grow on such property any noxious weeds or other noxious vegetable growth
determined by the county health department to be especially injurious to public
health, crops, livestock, land, or other property.
(1979 Code § 8.26.040; Ord. 97-91, 12-16-1997)
12-4-5: VEGETATION INTERFERING WITH PUBLIC WAYS OR PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any real property to allow
vegetation on the owner's or occupant's real property to grow to such an extent
or in such a manner that, because of its proximity to public property or a
public right of way, it interferes with the safe or lawful use of public
property or the public right of way, or obstructs the vision of any posted
uniform traffic control device.
(1979 Code § 8.26.050; Ord. 97-91, 12-16-1997)
12-4-6: EMPTY BUILDINGS TO BE KEPT SECURED:
It shall be unlawful for the owners or agents or persons in charge of
unoccupied buildings or structures within the city to fail to keep such
buildings and structures closed and securely locked or otherwise secured
against entry.
(1979 Code § 8.26.060; Ord. 97-91, 12-16-1997)
12-4-7: INSPECTORS AUTHORIZED TO ENFORCE CHAPTER:
   A.   Appointment By Mayor: The mayor shall appoint inspectors who are
authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Powers And Duties:
      1.   An inspector is authorized and directed to inspect and examine real
property situated within the city for the purpose of determining whether or not
a property maintenance violation exists.
      2.   All matters involving health shall be pursued in coordination with
the county health department. All matters involving weeds or other fire hazards
shall be pursued in coordination with the fire department. All matters
involving the boarding of dangerous buildings shall be pursued in coordination
with the building official. All matters involving the lawful use of land under
the zoning title shall be pursued in coordination with the community and
economic development director, or the director's designee.
      3.   The mayor may assign primary responsibility in those areas of
overlapping jurisdiction.
(1979 Code § 8.26.080; Ord. 97-91, 12-16-1997; amd. Ord. 2001-32, 6-5-2001;
Ord. 2004-39, 6-15-2004, eff. 7-1-2004)
12-4-8: PENALTIES AND REMEDIES FOR VIOLATIONS:
   A.   Misdemeanor: Owners, agents, occupants or lessees who violate the
provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor and upon
conviction shall be punishable as set forth in title 1, chapter 4, article A of
this code.
   B.   City Abatement And Associated Civil Penalties: Litter or other unlawful
accumulations or conditions not removed from private property, or adjacent
sidewalks, park strips, alleys, or other adjacent areas for which the person is
responsible under the provisions of this chapter, may be removed by the city
pursuant to the provisions of chapter 8 of this title, or its successor, with
costs and expenses for such cleaning or removal and civil penalties to be
assessed in accordance with the provisions of such chapter.
   C.   Civil Penalties: Owners, agents, occupants or lessees who fail to
correct a violation of the provisions of this chapter after notice of violation
and expiration of the warning period shall be subject to the following civil
penalties pursuant to title 1, chapter 4, article B of this code:
      1.   The first civil citation issued after expiration of the warning
period shall subject the responsible party to the initial penalty of one
hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00).
      2.   The second civil citation issued after expiration of the warning
period and the prior imposition of the initial penalty shall subject the
responsible party to the intermediate penalty of two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00).
      3.   Any subsequent civil citation issued after expiration of the warning
period and the prior imposition of the intermediate penalty, or any reoccurring
violation under section
1-4B-6 of this code, shall subject the responsible party to the maximum penalty
of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
   D.   Other Remedies: This chapter may also be enforced by injunction,
mandamus, judicial abatement or any other appropriate action in law or equity.
   E.   Daily Violations: Each day that any violation of this chapter continues
shall be considered a separate offense for purposes of the penalties and
remedies available to the city.
   F.   Compliance: Accumulation of penalties for violations, but not the
obligation for payment of penalties already accrued, shall stop on correction
of the violation.
   G.   Cumulative: Any one, all, or any combination of the foregoing penalties
and remedies may be used to enforce the provisions of this title.
(1979 Code § 8.26.070; Ord. 97-91, 12-16-1997; amd. Ord. 2002-73, 12-17-2002;
Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
CHAPTER 5
RESERVED
CHAPTER 6
SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL AND HAULING
SECTION:
12-6-1: Authorized Haulers
12-6-2: Designated Solid Waste Disposal Facility
12-6-3: Authority To Establish Sanitary Landfills
12-6-4: Hauling Restrictions
12-6-5: Penalty
12-6-1: AUTHORIZED HAULERS:
   A.   No person except duly authorized collectors of the City or private
haulers or collectors licensed pursuant to law, shall collect or remove any
solid waste accumulated or located within the City, or use the streets,
avenues, alleys or ways within the City for the purpose of collection or
transportation of same.
(1979 Code § 8.09.010; Ord. 85-25, 6-6-1985; amd. 1999 Code)
   B.   Nonprofit, charitable, religious or other comparable groups or persons
shall be exempt from the provisions of this Section; provided, that special
permission to operate shall have been received from the Mayor after proper
application therefor.
(1979 Code § 8.09.040; Ord. 85-25, 6-6-1985; amd. 1999 Code)
12-6-2: DESIGNATED SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY:
All persons or firms lawfully operating within the City shall be required to
dispose of all solid waste at the solid waste facility, 2599 "A" Avenue, Ogden,
Utah.
(1979 Code § 8.09.020; Ord. 85-25, 6-6-1985; amd. 1999 Code)
12-6-3: AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH SANITARY LANDFILLS:
   A.   Administration:
      1.   Authority To Establish: The Mayor may establish sanitary landfill
areas at such place or places the Mayor determines suitable therefor for
covering household, yard or industrial refuse, trash and any other waste
materials.
(1979 Code § 8.20.010; amd. 1999 Code)
      2.   Types Of Waste; Determination: The Mayor may determine the type or
types of wastes to be disposed of at the various sanitary landfill areas
heretofore or hereafter established and shall have one or more signs installed
at the entrance at each such landfill to reasonably inform the public the types
of waste materials allowed to be deposited at each area.
(1979 Code § 8.20.020; amd. 1999 Code)
   B.   Prohibited Acts:
      1.   Disobedience To City Employee: It is unlawful for any person to fail
to obey the oral direction or instructions of any City employee in attendance
at any sanitary landfill area heretofore established as to the location within
that area at which he is to dump the waste material such person takes to that
area.
(1979 Code § 8.20.040)
   C.   Unauthorized Materials: It is unlawful for any person to dump any
material at any sanitary landfill area other than the type or kind authorized
by the sign erected pursuant to subsection A2 of this Section.
(1979 Code § 8.20.030)
   D.   Unauthorized Places: It is unlawful for any person to dump material at
any place within a landfill area operated by the City which is signed or
otherwise noticed against such dumping.
(1979 Code § 8.20.050)
12-6-4: HAULING RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Sanitary Containment: It is unlawful for any person to convey,
transport or haul upon the streets of the City any garbage, market waste, or
similar waste material unless the same is contained in a sanitary receptacle
especially constructed for that purpose and tightly covered and in good
condition and adequate to prevent spillage or the escape of noxious odors.
(1979 Code § 8.08.110; amd. 1999 Code)
   B.   Material Falling On Streets: It is unlawful for any person engaged in
hauling garbage, market waste, stove ashes, community waste, bulky waste, trade
waste, or other solid waste, or any soil, sand, gravel, concrete or cement of
any kind, or construction or demolition waste, upon the streets of the City to
permit, suffer, allow or cause any of said material to fall into or to remain
in said streets.
(1979 Code § 8.08.100; amd. 1999 Code)
   C.   Unnecessary Standing: It is unlawful for any person to suffer, permit
or allow any vehicles controlled by him and which are loaded with garbage or
other waste materials specified in this Chapter to be or remain standing on any
public street within the City any longer than may be necessary for the purpose
of loading the same or moving the same to its destination in accordance with
applicable traffic laws and regulations.
(1979 Code § 8.08.120; amd. 1999 Code)
12-6-5: PENALTY:
The violation of any provision of this Chapter shall constitute a Class B
misdemeanor, punishable as set forth in Title 1, Chapter 4 of this Code. The
license of such person or firm shall likewise be subject to revocation at the
option of the City if such person or firm is duly convicted of a violation.
(1979 Code §§ 8.09.030, 8.20.060; Ord. 85-25, 6-6-1985; amd. 1999 Code)
CHAPTER 7
MISCELLANEOUS HEALTH AND SAFETY REGULATIONS
SECTION:
12-7-1: Enforcement Of Chapter; Health Official
12-7-2: Dead Animals Or Offensive Substances; Keeping Or Disposing Of
Prohibited Where
12-7-3: Dead Animals Or Offensive Substances; Duty To Remove
12-7-4: Keeping Pigs Prohibited; Exceptions
12-7-5: Keeping More Than One Cow Prohibited; Permit Required To Keep One Cow
12-7-6: Keeping Structure For Animals Prohibited Where
12-7-7: Keeping Animal Premises In Unsanitary Condition Prohibited
12-7-8: Keeping Fowl If Allowed; Enclosures Required; Prohibited Where
12-7-9: Place Where Animals Kept For Exhibition To Be Kept Sanitary; Closure
When
12-7-10: Nauseous Premises Prohibited
12-7-11: Empty Buildings
12-7-12: Unclean Drain Or Garbage Receptacle Prohibited
12-7-13: Toilet And Sewer Facilities To Comply With Law
12-7-14: Industrial Waste Or Unsound Containers; Nuisance When
12-7-15: Unclean Or Annoying Industries Prohibited When
12-7-16: Animal Products Manufacture Nuisance When
12-7-17: Collecting Or Depositing Putrid Matter Prohibited
12-7-18: Refuse Accumulation Prohibited When
12-7-19: Emission Of Smoke Nuisance When; Exception
12-7-20: Coal Or Other Substances To Be Unloaded So As To Minimize Dust
12-7-21: Surfaces To Be Sprinkled Before Sweeping When
12-7-22: Reserved
12-7-23: Unlawful Burning
12-7-24: Violation; Penalty
12-7-25: Remedies Cumulative
12-7-1: ENFORCEMENT OF CHAPTER; HEALTH OFFICIAL:
   A.   Health Official: The health official or any state licensed sanitarian
acting under the health official's direction is authorized to enforce the
provisions of this chapter using the powers and authority granted to a local
health department under Utah Code Annotated title 26A.
   B.   Service Of Notice: In order better to carry out the provisions of this
chapter, the health official, in addition to any other duly authorized city
official, or any state licensed sanitarian acting under the direction of the
health official, may serve a notice in writing upon the owner, occupant or
agent of any lot, building or premises in or upon which any nuisance may be
found or upon the person who may be the cause of such nuisance, requiring him
to abate the same in such manner as the city official, health official or
sanitarian may direct and within a reasonable time to be fixed in the notice;
but a failure to give such notice as provided in this subsection shall not
relieve the author of any nuisance from the obligation to abate such nuisance
or from the penalty provided for the maintenance thereof.
   C.   Authority To Abate Nuisance In Case Of Failure: In case of neglect or
failure or refusal of any person to abate any nuisance defined by this chapter
in accordance with a notice in writing served upon him as provided in
subsection B of this section, the health official or any state licensed
sanitarian is authorized to abate or to effect the abatement thereof and the
expense of such abatement shall be collected from the person failing,
neglecting or refusing to abate the same.
   D.   Removal Of Offensive Substances: Whenever the carcass of any dead
animal or other offensive substance injurious to the health of the public or
persons in its vicinity is found in the city and no person can be found who is
liable or responsible for the removal or abatement of such substance, the
health official is authorized to remove the same at the expense of the city.
(1979 Code §§ 8.24.240, 8.24.250, 8.24.260, 8.24.270; amd. 1999 Code)
12-7-2: DEAD ANIMALS OR OFFENSIVE SUBSTANCES; KEEPING OR DISPOSING OF
PROHIBITED WHERE:
It is unlawful for any person to leave exposed in any street, avenue, highway,
alley, lot, public ground or watercourse within the City the carcasses of any
dead animal, or any unsound meat, fish, or other substance, or to permit the
same to be done with his consent; or to make, use, keep or permit in his
dwelling, shop, store, factory, outhouse, cellar, yard, lot or other place
within the City any noxious or offensive liquid or substance prejudicial to the
health of the citizens or of any annoyance to any person; or to throw any
filth, offal or other offensive matter into any street, avenue, highway, public
ground, alley, lot or watercourse in the City, or to permit or cause the same
to run in any watercourse.
(1979 Code § 8.24.020)
12-7-3: DEAD ANIMALS OR OFFENSIVE SUBSTANCES; DUTY TO REMOVE:
It shall be the duty of all persons owning or having charge of animals which
die or are found dead to have the dead animals removed at their own expense to
an authorized solid waste facility or to an authorized byproducts company, and
all putrid meats, fish, clippings of hides, pelts or other offensive substances
shall likewise be disposed of. If the persons whose duty it is to dispose of
said animals, putrid meats, fish, clippings of hides, pelts or other offensive
substances shall fail for twenty four (24) hours to discharge their duties as
required in this chapter, the health official is authorized to have the same
disposed of at the expense of the party whose duty it may be to dispose of the
same.
(1979 Code § 8.24.030; amd. 1999 Code)
12-7-4: KEEPING PIGS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS:
It is unlawful for any person to keep any pig or pigs within the City limits;
provided, that it shall not be unlawful for a duly licensed stockyard engaged
in the business of feeding and/or marketing pigs in transit or in commerce to
keep and maintain the same for a time not longer than reasonably necessary to
feed and rest them when in transit or to receive, sell and make delivery
thereof in the ordinary course of marketing operations, nor for any duly
licensed packinghouse to keep such pigs as may be necessary for its immediate
day to day slaughtering operations.
(1979 Code § 8.24.040)
12-7-5: KEEPING MORE THAN ONE COW PROHIBITED; PERMIT REQUIRED TO KEEP ONE COW:
It is unlawful for any person to keep within the limits of the City more than
one cow, and any person keeping such cow shall obtain from the County Health
Department a permit which shall be issued without cost to the applicant and
which shall be in force up to January 1 next following its issuance. All
stables, barns, yards, feeding and milking equipment, appliances and
appurtenances shall be subject to the inspection of the County Health
Department or its authorized representative, at all reasonable hours, and shall
be kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
(1979 Code § 8.24.050; amd. 1999 Code)
12-7-6: KEEPING STRUCTURE FOR ANIMALS PROHIBITED WHERE:
   A.   Unless specifically allowed by the zoning ordinance, including as a
nonconforming use, it is unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any barn,
stable, shed, or corral in which are kept horses, cows, poultry, or domestic
animals.
   B.   Any structure used for the keeping of animals pursuant to a
nonconforming right shall not be placed within seventy five feet (75') of any
dwelling house or residence or public street within the limits of the City.
(Ord. 2017-50, 12-19-2017)
12-7-7: KEEPING ANIMAL PREMISES IN UNSANITARY CONDITION PROHIBITED:
   A.   Animal Enclosures: It is unlawful for any person having charge of any
stable, stall, shed, coop, apartment or yard in which any animal is kept, or
any place within the limits of the City in which manure or liquid discharges of
any animal accumulate or collect, to permit such stable, stall, shed, coop,
apartment or yard to be kept in an unclean or unsanitary condition.
   B.   Slaughterhouse: It is unlawful for the owner or occupant of any
slaughterhouse, market, meat shop, or other place wherein any animals are
slaughtered, kept or sold to permit the premises or yard connected therewith to
remain unclean or in any state of condition detrimental to the health of any
person.
(Ord. 2017-50, 12-19-2017)
12-7-8: KEEPING FOWL IF ALLOWED; ENCLOSURES REQUIRED; PROHIBITED WHERE:
   A.   Unless specifically allowed by the zoning ordinance, including as a
nonconforming use, it is unlawful for any person to keep any chickens, ducks,
pigeons or other fowl in the City limits.
   B.   No animals are permitted to be kept within the City limits, including
those described in this section, unless allowed by any applicable zoning
ordinance pursuant to title 15 of this Code.
   C.   If the keeping of fowl is a nonconforming right, the same are at all
times to be kept confined in proper pens or enclosures which shall be kept in a
clean and sanitary condition and shall not be placed or maintained within
seventy five feet (75') of any dwelling.
(Ord. 2017-50, 12-19-2017)
12-7-9: PLACE WHERE ANIMALS KEPT FOR EXHIBITION TO BE KEPT SANITARY; CLOSURE
WHEN:
No person shall keep, operate or conduct any place of business at which birds,
pigeons, guinea pigs, dogs, cats or other animals are kept for exhibition, sale
or offered for sale, unless such place shall be kept in a clean and sanitary
condition, and subject at all times to inspection by the health official. The
health official is authorized and empowered to close such place of business if
the same is not kept clean and sanitary and keep it closed until it shall be
placed in a clean and sanitary condition.
(1979 Code § 8.24.090)
12-7-10: NAUSEOUS PREMISES PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for the owner or occupant of any soap factory, tannery,
slaughterhouse, hide house, skinning or rendering establishment, or any pigpen
or pigsty wherein one or more swine are kept or held, or other place in the
City, to suffer or permit the same to become nauseous or offensive or
detrimental to the health of the citizens residing or passing in the vicinity
of such place.
(1979 Code § 8.24.100)
12-7-11: EMPTY BUILDINGS:
The owners or agents or persons in charge of unoccupied buildings or structures
within the City limits shall keep such buildings and structures closed and
securely locked.
(1979 Code § 8.24.110)
12-7-12: UNCLEAN DRAIN OR GARBAGE RECEPTACLE PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for the owner or occupant of any premises to cause or permit any
unclean, stinking, foul, defective or filthy drain, ditch, tank, or gutter or
any leaking or broken slop, garbage, or manure box or receptacle of similar
character to remain on the premises.
(1979 Code § 8.24.120)
12-7-13: TOILET AND SEWER FACILITIES TO COMPLY WITH LAW:
All toilet and sewer facilities shall be constructed and maintained in
accordance with the standards established in title 9 of this Code. All such
facilities that do not comply with the provisions of title 9 of this Code are
declared to be a nuisance and are subject to abatement as prescribed in this
chapter.
(1979 Code § 8.24.130; amd. 1999 Code)
12-7-14: INDUSTRIAL WASTE OR UNSOUND CONTAINERS; NUISANCE WHEN:
Whenever there is found in or about any lot or piece of ground any dirt
gathered in cleaning yards; waste of mills or factories; or any rags, damaged
merchandise, wet, broken or leaking barrels, casks or boxes of any materials
which are offensive or tend to decay, to become putrid or to render the
atmosphere offensive or unwholesome, the same shall be deemed a nuisance, and
it shall be unlawful for any person occupying or owning such premises to fail
to abate the same.
(1979 Code § 8.24.140)
12-7-15: UNCLEAN OR ANNOYING INDUSTRIES PROHIBITED WHEN:
It is unlawful for the owner or occupant of any soap factory, candle factory,
glue factory, pork house, lard house or laundry or plant to permit the same to
remain unclean or to conduct his business to the annoyance of three (3) or more
persons.
(1979 Code § 8.24.150)
12-7-16: ANIMAL PRODUCTS MANUFACTURE NUISANCE WHEN:
The business of bone crushing, bone boiling, fat boiling, gut cleaning or the
making of glue, or the manufacture of fertilizing material from any dead animal
or part thereof, or any boiling of offal, swill, fat or grease which is done or
carried on in any offensive, unclean or defective manner in any building, yard
or lot or ground within the limits of the City shall be deemed a nuisance, and
it shall be unlawful for the owner or manager of any such business to fail to
abate the same.
(1979 Code § 8.24.160)
12-7-17: COLLECTING OR DEPOSITING PUTRID MATTER PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to keep, collect or use or permit to be kept,
collected or used in any manner detrimental to health any stale, putrid or
noisome fat, grease or other offensive matter, or to throw or place in or on
any street, alley, sidewalk, gutter, ditch, aqueduct, canal or vacant lot any
waste material.
(1979 Code § 8.24.170)
12-7-18: REFUSE ACCUMULATION PROHIBITED WHEN:
It is unlawful for any person to permit vegetable waste, litter, garbage, filth
or refuse of any nature, kind or description detrimental to health to
accumulate within or upon any private alley, yard or area unless temporarily
deposited there for removal.
(1979 Code § 8.24.180)
12-7-19: EMISSION OF SMOKE NUISANCE WHEN; EXCEPTION:
The emission of dense or thick black or gray smoke or cinders from any
smokestack or chimney of any stationary engine, locomotive, steam boiler,
incinerator, furnace or building of any description within the limits of the
City is declared to be a public nuisance, and it shall be the duty of the
owner, agent, lessee or occupant thereof to abate the same. Nothing contained
in this section shall be construed to apply to the chimneys of buildings used
exclusively for private residences.
(1979 Code § 8.24.190)
12-7-20: COAL OR OTHER SUBSTANCES TO BE UNLOADED SO AS TO MINIMIZE DUST:
It is unlawful for any person to unload coal, ashes or other substances in such
manner that the dust arising therefrom is offensive and injurious to any person
or the property or business of any person. All such coal, ashes or other
substance shall be unloaded or otherwise manipulated in such a manner as to
minimize the dust therefrom and its dispersion in the atmosphere.
(1979 Code § 8.24.200)
12-7-21: SURFACES TO BE SPRINKLED BEFORE SWEEPING WHEN:
It is unlawful for any person to sweep or cause or permit the sweeping in any
commercial zone of any sidewalk or the interior of any public conveyance or the
floor of any building, hotel, hospital, store, shop, school, church, theater or
other place to which the public has access, without first having sprinkled the
same with water or with moist sawdust or other substances in quantities
sufficient to prevent the raising of dust while sweeping.
(1979 Code § 8.24.210)
12-7-22: RESERVED:
(1979 Code § 8.24.220; amd. 1999 Code; Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
12-7-23: UNLAWFUL BURNING:
It is unlawful for any person to burn in the open air within the City limits
any fallen leaves or other rubbish between September 1 and December 31 of each
year.
(1979 Code § 8.24.230)
12-7-24: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   A.   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter or who
aids, supports or encourages the creation or maintenance of any nuisance, as
defined in this chapter, or creates, supports, continues or maintains the same,
or who fails to remove such nuisance, shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor
and shall be punished as set forth in title 1, chapter 4 of this Code.
   B.   Failure to correct a violation of this section after notice of
violation and expiration of the warning period may be enforced by imposition of
the following civil penalties pursuant to title 1, chapter 4, article B of this
Code:
      1.   The first civil citation issued after expiration of the warning
period shall subject the responsible party to the initial penalty of one
hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00).
      2.   The second civil citation issued after expiration of the warning
period and the prior imposition of the initial penalty shall subject the
responsible party to the intermediate penalty of two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00).
      3.   Any subsequent civil citation issued after expiration of the warning
period and the prior imposition of the intermediate penalty, or any reoccurring
violation under section
1-4B-6 of this Code, shall subject the responsible party to the maximum penalty
of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
   C.   Every day that any nuisance, as defined in this chapter, is maintained
or continues to exist shall be deemed a separate offense.
(1979 Code § 8.24.280; amd. 1999 Code; Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
12-7-25: REMEDIES CUMULATIVE:
The remedies and penalties provided in this chapter pertaining to the
maintenance and abatement of nuisances shall be cumulative and in addition to
all other remedies and provisions for abatement of nuisances that may be
provided by law.
(1979 Code § 8.24.290)
CHAPTER 8
ADMINISTRATIVE ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES 1
SECTION:
12-8-1: Purpose; Conditions Constituting Nuisance
12-8-2: Inspector
12-8-3: Service Of Notice; Abatement Orders; Personal Property
12-8-4: One Notice Per Season Sufficient; Proof Of Service
12-8-5: Appeals
12-8-6: Decision Of Hearing Officer
12-8-7: Itemized Statement; Preparation And Delivery
12-8-8: Failure To Make Payment; Procedure
12-8-9: Expenses; Collection
12-8-10: Chapter Procedure Not Exclusive
12-8-11: Prohibited Activities; Penalties
 
Notes
  1. Prior ordinance history: 1979 Code §§ 8.28.010, 8.28.020, 8.28.030,
  8.28.050, 8.28.060, 8.28.070, 8.28.080, 8.28.090, 8.28.100, 8.28.110,
  8.28.120, 8.28.130, 8.28.140, 8.28.150, 8.28.160; Ord. 87-38, 7-2-1987; Ord.
1 91-42, 10-24-1991; Ord. 95-27, 5-16-1995; Ord. 96-19, 4-23-1996; Ord. 96-22,
  4-30-1996; Ord. 96-49, 10-1-1996; Ord. 97-91, 12-16-1997; 1999 Code; Ord.
  2001-32, 6-5-2001; Ord. 2002-73, 12-17-2002; Ord. 2004-39, 6-15-2004, eff. 7-
  1-2004; Ord. 2004-48, 6-15-2004, eff. 7-1-2004.
12-8-1: PURPOSE; CONDITIONS CONSTITUTING NUISANCE:
   A.   It is the purpose of this chapter to establish a means whereby the city
may remove or abate or cause the removal or abatement of injurious and noxious
weeds; and of garbage, refuse or any unsightly or deleterious objects or
structures pursuant to the powers granted to it by Utah Code Annotated title
10, chapter 11, as amended, and pursuant to its general power to abate
nuisances. The provisions adopted herein are intended to:
      1.   Prevent fire hazards;
      2.   Prevent insect and rodent harborages;
      3.   Prevent the introduction of hazardous pollens in the air;
      4.   Prevent further spreading of vegetation that threatens the public
health, safety or welfare;
      5.   Abate the existence of objects, structures or solid waste that
threaten the public health, safety and welfare;
      6.   Protect and promote the public health and safety of the community by
preventing or abating conditions of real property or the structures thereon
which create or maintain public nuisances.
   B.   The following conditions shall constitute a nuisance subject to
abatement under this chapter:
      1.   Vegetation on private property which due to its proximity to any
public property or right of way interferes with the public safety or lawful use
of the public property or right of way.
      2.   Weeds, grasses, or noxious vegetable growth which has grown to a
height exceeding the height limits or otherwise violating the weed control
specifications and requirements under section
12-4-3 of this title.
      3.   Vegetable waste, litter, garbage, filth or refuse of any nature,
kind or description detrimental to health allowed to accumulate upon any
private alley, yard or area.
      4.   Any property which has been allowed to become a fire hazard due to
the accumulation of garbage, refuse, litter, waste products, dry or drying
weeds or any combustible materials, objects or structures.
      5.   Weeds, garbage, refuse, objects or structures that create a source
of contamination or pollution of water, air or property, a danger to health, a
breeding place of habitation for insects, rodents or other forms of life
deleterious to human habitation or that otherwise creates a condition
deleterious to their surroundings.
      6.   Noxious weeds determined to be especially injurious to public
health, crops, livestock, land, or other property.
      7.   Any property where the outside storage, keeping, accumulation, or
abandonment of the following unsightly material or objects is clearly visible
from a public street and is not a use of property permitted or allowed under
the zoning title:
         a.   Uncontained garbage, refuse, litter or other solid waste;
         b.   Auto parts, tires, scrap metal, machinery or parts thereof, or
other junk or salvage material as defined in either this title or title 15 of
this code; or
         c.   Any inoperable and unlicensed vehicles.
      8.   Vacant buildings or structures which have been secured against entry
by placing secured coverings on openings and which buildings are not maintained
in accordance with the maintenance requirements of title 16, chapter 8, article
B of this code (the "Ogden City code for the abatement of dangerous
buildings").
      9.   Vegetation or structures obstructing the view of drivers of motor
vehicles as prohibited under section
7-3-1 of this code.
      10.   Public nuisances as defined in subsection 6-2-10A of this code.
      11.   Other conditions involving weeds, garbage, refuse or any unsightly
or deleterious conditions, objects or structures subject to city abatement
under other provisions of this code.
   C.   Property owners shall be responsible for any of the above conditions
existing on abutter's alleys or the area between their property line and the
curb or edge of the roadway, as provided in section
12-4-1 of this title.
(Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
12-8-2: INSPECTOR:
   A.   Office Created: The office of inspector is created for the purpose of
administering the provisions of this chapter and the powers delegated to the
city by the statutes cited in section
12-8-1 of this chapter, subject to such control and review as the mayor may
from time to time direct. The mayor may authorize any officer or employee of
the city to exercise the powers and duties of an inspector under the provisions
of this chapter. Absent such authorization of the mayor, the following officers
are hereby authorized to perform the powers and duties of an inspector:
      1.   The city fire marshal and the marshal's assistants, and the building
official and the building official's duly authorized representatives, are
authorized to perform the functions of inspector for the abatement of nuisances
as defined under this chapter.
      2.   The public services director, or the director's designee, is also
authorized to perform the functions of inspector for nuisances under
subsections
12-8-1B1, B9 and B11 of this chapter.
      3.   The urban forester is also authorized to perform the functions of
inspector for public nuisances under subsection
6-2-10A of this code.
   B.   Powers And Duties:
      1.   An inspector is authorized to enter upon any property or premises
within the city to determine whether or not a nuisance exists as described in
subsection
12-8-1B of this chapter and to make any examinations and surveys as may be
necessary, including the taking of photographs, samples, or other physical
evidence. All inspections, entries, examinations, and surveys shall be done in
a reasonable manner based upon cause. If the owner or occupant refuses to allow
the inspector to enter the property, the inspector shall obtain an
administrative search warrant.
      2.   Nuisances involving health concerns shall be pursued in coordination
with the Weber County health department. Nuisances involving weeds or other
fire hazards shall be pursued in coordination with the fire department.
Nuisances involving the boarding, repair or demolition of dangerous buildings
shall be pursued in coordination with the building official. All matters
involving the permitted or allowed use of land under the zoning title shall be
pursued in coordination with the community development director, or the
director's designee.
(Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
12-8-3: SERVICE OF NOTICE; ABATEMENT ORDERS; PERSONAL PROPERTY:
   A.   If the inspector concludes that any of the conditions described in
section
12-8-1 of this chapter exist in whole or in part, he shall:
      1.   Ascertain the names of the owners and descriptions of the premises
where such objects and conditions exist; and
      2.   Serve notice in writing upon the owner or occupant of such land,
either personally or by mailing notice first class, postage prepaid, addressed
to the owner or occupant at their last known post office address, as disclosed
by the records of the county assessor, requiring such owner or occupant, as the
case may be, to abate the nuisance within such time and manner as the inspector
may designate, which shall not be less than ten (10) days from the date of
service of such notice.
   B.   If a written request for hearing is not filed pursuant to section
12-8-5 of this chapter, the notice of the inspector shall be final.
   C.   If the owner or occupant fails to abate the nuisance, either in whole
or in part, as required in a final notice, the city may summarily and without
prior notice to the owner or occupant proceed to abate the nuisance. If such
action is to be taken, the inspector shall prepare an abatement order to be
approved by the mayor or the mayor's designee, authorizing city personnel to
either perform such abatement work or to engage a private contractor to perform
such work under the direction of the city. The order shall identify the
property and describe the abatement work to be performed thereon.
   D.   Upon issuance of an abatement order, city personnel or any authorized
private contractor may enter upon the described private property and perform
the work specified in the abatement order in any reasonable manner. If the
owner or occupant eliminates the nuisance before the city performs the
abatement work, the owner or occupant shall still be responsible for the costs
incurred by the city in responding to the owner's or occupant's failure to
abate the nuisance in a timely manner.
   E.   If the owner or occupant refuses to allow entry, or other conditions
exist on the property affecting the city's ability to enter the property or
otherwise complete the necessary abatement work, the city may seek, but is not
required to seek, such judicial process as it deems necessary to effect the
abatement.
   F.   Personal property constituting a nuisance under this chapter may be
confiscated as part of the abatement process. The mayor may adopt rules and
regulations providing for the disposition of such property, including the
disposition of inoperable, unlicensed or abandoned vehicles.
(Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
12-8-4: ONE NOTICE PER SEASON SUFFICIENT; PROOF OF SERVICE:
One notice shall be deemed sufficient on any lot or parcel of property for the
entire season of weed growth during that year.
(Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
12-8-5: APPEALS:
   A.   Any person served a notice pursuant to section
12-8-3 of this chapter, or mailed a statement of itemized costs and demand for
payment pursuant to section
12-8-7 of this chapter, may request a hearing before the mayor or a hearing
officer designated by the mayor. All applications shall be made by filing a
written application in the city recorder's office, together with a copy of the
notice or statement and the fee established in section
4-6-1 of this code, within ten (10) days of the date of mailing or the date of
personal service of the notice or statement.
   B.   Upon receipt of an application for hearing, the city recorder shall
immediately notify the inspector. If the application is for a hearing in
regards to a statement of itemized costs and demand for payment, the city
recorder shall also notify the city treasurer.
   C.   Except as otherwise provided in section
12-8-6 of this chapter, hearings shall be conducted as provided in title 4,
chapter 4, article A of this code.
(Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
12-8-6: DECISION OF HEARING OFFICER:
   A.   Notification; Compliance: In the event the decision of the mayor or the
designated hearing officer upholds the determination of the inspector, the
notice originally given by the inspector as provided in this chapter shall be
deemed to be sufficient to require the owner or occupant to remove or abate
said objects or conditions and he shall have up to ten (10) days from the date
of notice of the decision within which to conform thereto. In the event that
the decision of the mayor or the designated hearing officer either overrules or
modifies the determination of the inspector, the written decision of the mayor
or the designated hearing officer shall apprise the inspector of that fact and
set forth the details and extent to which the owner or occupant must make
removal or other abatement of the said objects or conditions, if any. The owner
or occupant shall be required to comply with the decision of the mayor or the
designated hearing officer within ten (10) days after personal service or the
date of mailing of a copy of said decision unless more time is provided for
compliance in such decision, and said decision shall be deemed to be the
modified notice of the inspector, which notice shall become final after
expiration of the time given for compliance.
   B.   Failure To Comply; Inspection Action: If any owner or occupant of lands
described in such notice or decision fails or neglects to conform to the
requirements thereof relating to the eradication or destruction or removal of
weeds, garbage, refuse, objects or structures, the inspector shall employ all
necessary assistance to cause such weeds, garbage, refuse, objects or
structures to be removed or destroyed or otherwise abated at the expense of the
city to the extent that such public funds are available.
(Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
12-8-7: ITEMIZED STATEMENT; PREPARATION AND DELIVERY:
The city treasurer, in coordination with the inspector and the other city
officers or employees responsible for performing, or contracting for the
performance of, abatement work, shall prepare an itemized statement of all
expenses incurred in the abatement of the conditions described in this chapter,
together with all administrative costs incurred by the city, and shall mail a
copy thereof to the owner demanding payment within thirty (30) days of the date
of mailing. Said notice shall be considered delivered when mailed by certified
mail addressed to the property owner's last known address.
(Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
12-8-8: FAILURE TO MAKE PAYMENT; PROCEDURE:
In the event the owner or occupant fails to make payment of the amount set
forth in the statement described in section
12-8-7 of this chapter to the city treasurer within said thirty (30) days, the
city treasurer may either cause suit to be brought in an appropriate court of
law or refer the matter to the county treasurer as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
12-8-9: EXPENSES; COLLECTION:
   A.   Lawsuit: In the event collection of expenses of destruction and removal
are pursued through the courts, the city shall sue for and receive judgment for
all of said expenses of destruction and removal, together with all
administrative costs incurred by the city, reasonable attorney fees, interest
and court costs, and shall execute upon such judgment in the manner provided by
law.
   B.   Taxes:
      1.   In the event that the city elects to refer the expenses to the
county treasurer for inclusion in the tax notice of the property owner, the
city treasurer shall make in triplicate an itemized statement of all expenses
and administrative costs incurred in the destruction and removal of the same
and shall deliver the three (3) copies of said statement to the county
treasurer within ten (10) days after the expiration of the thirty (30) day
period. The city treasurer shall also provide to the county treasurer proof of
service of the notice required under section
12-8-3 of this chapter under oath of the city officer or employee who served
such notice.
      2.   Upon receipt of the itemized statement of all expenses, the county
treasurer shall, in accordance with the requirements of section 10-11-4, Utah
Code Annotated, forthwith mail one copy to the owner of the land upon which the
abatement work was performed, together with a notice that objection in writing
may be made within thirty (30) days to the whole or any part of the statement
so filed. The county treasurer shall, at the same time, deliver a copy of the
statement to the clerk of the board of county commissioners.
      3.   If objections to any statement are filed with the board, the  board
shall set a date for hearing, giving notice thereof, to the party objecting,
the inspector, the city treasurer, and the city attorney's office and, upon the
hearing of the matter, determine and fix the actual cost of the abatement work,
reporting the findings to the county treasurer.
      4.   If no objections to the items of the account are made within thirty
(30) days of the date of mailing such statement, the county treasurer shall
certify and enter the amount of such statement on the assessment rolls of the
county in the column prepared for that purpose otherwise, the county treasurer
shall, within ten (10) days of the date of the action of the board of county
commissioners, upon any objections filed, enter in the prepared column upon the
tax rolls the amount found and certified by the board to be the cost of the
abatement work.
      5.   If current tax notices have been mailed, the taxes so incurred may
be carried over the rolls to the following year. After the entry by the county
treasurer of the certified costs of such work, the amount so entered shall have
the force and effect of a valid judgment of the district court, and shall be a
lien upon the lands upon which the work was performed, and shall be collected
by the county treasurer at the time of and in the manner provided for the
payment of general taxes. The county treasurer shall send a copy of the
certification to the city treasurer. Thereafter, upon payment, a receipt shall
be acknowledged upon the general tax receipt issued by the county treasurer and
the collected funds shall be reimbursed to the applicable abatement fund.
      6.   Pending receipt of the county treasurer's entry of the costs on the
assessment rolls of the county and payment of such costs, the city treasurer
may provide notice of pending lien by recording a notice in the records of the
Weber County recorder's office.
(Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
12-8-10: CHAPTER PROCEDURE NOT EXCLUSIVE:
The procedure and authority granted by this chapter shall be in addition to and
not in lieu of procedures provided in other ordinances of the city which have
heretofore been or may hereafter be enacted to accomplish the same or related
purposes, and no ordinances are repealed by this chapter.
(Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
12-8-11: PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES; PENALTIES:
   A.   Causing Or Permitting Nuisance; Duty To Abate: It shall be unlawful for
any owner or occupant of any lot, tract or parcel of land to cause or permit
any nuisance as defined in section
12-8-1 of this chapter to be created or to remain upon such premises; and it
shall be the duty of such owner or occupant to abate and remove any such
nuisance from such premises.
   B.   Failure To Abate: It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant to
fail to abate, within the required time period, any nuisance as defined in
section
12-8-1 of this chapter, after service of notice pursuant to section
12-8-3 of this chapter.
   C.   Misdemeanor: Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall
be guilty of a class B misdemeanor, punishable as provided under title 1,
chapter 4 of this code. Every day that a violation continues shall be
considered a separate offense and shall be punishable as provided herein.
   D.   Civil Penalties: Any person who owns or occupies any lot, tract or
parcel of land and fails to abate within the required time period any nuisance
defined in section
12-8-1 of this chapter, after service of notice pursuant to section
12-8-3 of this chapter, shall be liable for a civil penalty in the amount of
one hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00) unless a greater civil penalty is
required herein. If abatement of the same type of nuisance is required by the
city a second time within the same season or calendar year as applicable, the
owner or occupant shall be liable for a civil penalty in the amount of two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). If abatement is required by the city a third
time within the same season, the owner or occupant shall be liable for a civil
penalty in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00). Notwithstanding the
above, if the owner or occupant was assessed a civil penalty for the same type
of violation on the same property in the prior calendar year or season, the
owner or occupant shall be liable for a civil penalty in the amount of five
hundred dollars ($500.00) upon any failure to abate within the required time
period or upon any abatement performed by the city. Imposition and collection
of such civil penalty shall comply with the procedures provided in title 1,
chapter 4, article B of this code.
(Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
CHAPTER 9
AMBULANCE SERVICES
SECTION:
12-9-1: Findings
12-9-2: Service Established
12-9-3: Fire Chief; Duties And Responsibilities
12-9-4: Rates And Charges
12-9-1: FINDINGS:
The City Council finds that it is in the best interests of the health and
safety of the citizens of the City for ambulance transport services to be
provided by the City Fire Department. In order for the ambulance service to be
self-supporting and in order to deliver the highest quality of patient care,
the Fire Department shall be authorized to charge the user of ambulance
services for the reasonable costs of providing those services, including those
paramedic services used in ambulance transport. The City Council also finds
that it is necessary to provide emergency and nonemergency ambulance services
as well as ambulance services outside of the corporate limits of the City in
order to operate a self-supporting ambulance service which will not require
subsidy from the General Fund.
(1979 Code 8.50.010; Ord. 91-34, 8-22-1991)
12-9-2: SERVICE ESTABLISHED:
The Fire Department shall provide ambulance services under the direction and
supervision of the Fire Chief.
(1979 Code 8.50.020; Ord. 91-34, 8-22-1991; amd. 1999 Code)
12-9-3: FIRE CHIEF; DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
The Chief of the City Fire Department shall be responsible for the management
and operation of ambulance services provided by the Department. All ambulance
services shall be provided in conformance with the rules and regulations
established by the State under the Emergency Medical Services System Act 1 .
(1979 Code 8.50.030; Ord. 91-34, 8-22-1991)
 
Notes
1 1. U.C.A. § 26-8-1 et seq.
12-9-4: RATES AND CHARGES:
The rates and charges for ambulance and paramedic transport services provided
by the Fire Department shall be those maximum rates and charges determined by
rule of the State Emergency Medical Services Committee under the provisions of
the Emergency Medical Services System Act which rates and charges reflect the
reasonable cost of providing ambulance services.
(1979 Code 8.50.040; Ord. 91-34, 8-22-1991)
CHAPTER 10
TRANSPORTATION OF FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS 1
SECTION:
12-10-1: Rules And Restrictions
12-10-2: Prohibited Acts
12-10-3: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. UCA §§ 10-8-56, 41-6-154.
12-10-1: RULES AND RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Entering City; Wall Avenue: Interstate and intrastate tank trucks and
trailers approaching the city from the north shall enter the city on Wall
Avenue and continue thereon through the city. Such vehicles approaching the
city from the south shall enter the city on Wall Avenue and continue thereon
through the city. At no time will any truck or trailers carrying flammable
liquid be allowed east of Wall Avenue within the city limits contrary to the
provisions of this chapter except by permission of the mayor.
(1979 Code § 8.36.020; amd. 1999 Code)
   B.   Tanks Securely Mounted: Tanks mounted on truck chassis shall be
securely attached thereto while such tank trucks or trailers are traveling upon
any street or streets in the city.
(1979 Code § 8.36.040)
12-10-2: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   Travel East Of Wall Avenue; Exception: Except when given special
permission by the mayor, tank trucks or trailers containing a flammable liquid
or liquids making deliveries to storage tanks at service stations, garages and
other places within the city shall be prohibited from traveling upon or
crossing any street or avenue east of Wall Avenue, except that such trucks and
trailers may make deliveries by the most direct route to storage tanks east of
Wall Avenue.
(1979 Code § 8.36.010; amd. 1999 Code)
   B.   Unnecessary Delay; Remaining In Buildings: Tank trucks or trailers
shall deliver their contents of flammable liquids into storage tanks without
unnecessary delay and, while fully or partially loaded, shall not be kept or
stored in buildings except those approved by the fire prevention division.
Fully or partially loaded tank trucks or trailers shall not come to rest upon
city streets except to make deliveries, effect minor repairs, or to comply with
traffic regulations. No fully or partially loaded tank truck or trailer
carrying flammable liquids shall remain in any building except for the purpose
of discharging its cargo or to effect temporary minor repairs.
(1979 Code § 8.36.030; amd. 1999 Code)
   C.   Loaded; Left Turns: No tank truck or trailer while fully or partially
loaded with flammable liquids shall make a left turn while traveling upon any
street in the business district of the city.
(1979 Code § 8.36.050)
12-10-3: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
class B misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to penalty as
provided in title 1, chapter 4, article A of this code.
(Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
CHAPTER 11
FLAGRANT PROPERTY VIOLATION SIGNS
SECTION:
12-11-1: Purpose
12-11-2: Definitions
12-11-3: Mayor Authorized To Post Signs In Public Street
12-11-4: Removing Or Defacing Sign Prohibited
12-11-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of posting a flagrant property violation sign is to secure
compliance with ordinances concerning the care and maintenance of property in
the City by:
   A.   Communicating to the community that the premises are not in compliance
with City ordinances and that the City is in the process of securing such
compliance;
   B.   Fostering community scrutiny and bringing to bear community pressure on
recalcitrant property owners to comply with City ordinances;
   C.   Eliminating impressions within the community that the applicable
condition of the noncompliant property meets existing standards established by
City ordinance; and
   D.   Improving the safety, aesthetic and economic values of the surrounding
property in the community.
(1979 Code § 8.29.010; Ord. 99-16, 3-16-1999)
12-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
FLAGRANT PROPERTY VIOLATION SIGN OR THE SIGN: A sign posted by the City in the
public that:
   A.   Describes the condition of the adjacent premises, which condition is
not in compliance with City ordinances;
   B.   Bears the name of the owner of such premises and the owner's address;
and
   C.   Recites that the owner has failed to bring the premises into compliance
with City ordinances.
OTHER RESPONSIBLE PERSON: Any owner, owner's agent, occupant or lessee of any
building who creates, or fails to correct after receipt of notice, any
condition that is contrary to the requirements of this Code and who may be held
responsible for the violation.
OWNER: For purposes of this Chapter, owner shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, or joint tenant of the whole or of a part of such
building or land.
OWNER'S ADDRESS: The address of the owner as it appears on the last assessment
roll of the County or as otherwise known by the responsible official.
RESPONSIBLE OFFICIAL: The City official charged with enforcing the applicable
ordinance as follows:
   A.   The Inspection Services Manager who as the Building Official is
responsible for enforcing:
      1.   The Ogden City Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, under
Title 16, Chapter 8 of this Code;
      2.   Unfit premises violations under Title 16, Chapter 12 of this Code;
   B.   An inspector appointed under Section
12-4-7 of this Title who is responsible for enforcing the provisions of Chapter
4, 5 or 8 of this Title.
(1979 Code § 8.29.020; Ord. 99-16, 3-16-1999)
12-11-3: MAYOR AUTHORIZED TO POST SIGNS IN PUBLIC STREET:
   A.   Authority: If any premises within the City meets the criteria described
in subsection B of this Section, the Mayor, or the Mayor's designee, may direct
that a flagrant property violation sign be posted in the public street adjacent
to the premises in violation.
   B.   Flagrant Property Violation; Conditions Constituting: Any premises
within the City which meets the following conditions shall constitute a
flagrant property violation:
      1.   The responsible official has determined that the premises are in
violation of any of the following provisions of this Code:
         a.   The Ogden City Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings,
under Title 16, Chapter 8 of this Code;
         b.   Unfit premises violations under Title 16, Chapter 12 of this
Code; or
         c.   Property maintenance violations under Chapters 4, 5 and 8 of this
Title;
      2.   The owner or other responsible person has been notified, in the
manner described in subsection G of this Section, more than once in a one-year
period, that the premises are in violation;
      3.   The owner or other responsible person has failed to correct the
violation after such notice; and
      4.   The determination by the responsible official that the premises are
in violation is not in the process of being appealed by the owner or other
responsible person, under the provisions of this Code.
   C.   Notice To Owner: Prior to the posting of a flagrant property violation
sign, the Mayor, or the Mayor's designee, shall notify the owner, by certified
or first class mail, at the owner's address, that:
      1.   The violations must be completely corrected within twenty one (21)
days; and
      2.   If the violations are not corrected within twenty one (21) days and
no alternative time period for correction has been agreed to between the owner
and the Mayor, or the Mayor's designee, the City will post a sign in the public
street adjacent to the premises determined to be in violation that describes
the condition of the property, bears the name of the owner and the owner's
address, and recites that the owner has failed to bring the premises into
compliance with the applicable City ordinances.
   D.   Removal: Once posted, the sign will be removed by the City upon
elimination of the violation, or following a signed agreement to do the same by
a date certain.
   E.   Posting Location: The sign will be posted in the parkway or landscaped
portion of the street. If no parkway or landscaped area exists, then the sign
shall be posted along the sidewalk or edge of the roadway.
   F.   Posting Not Preclude Securing Compliance: The posting of the sign shall
not preclude the responsible official from simultaneously securing compliance
by other lawful means.
   G.   Contents Of Notice: The prior notice required under subsection B2 of
this Section shall include any of the following:
      1.   A written notice imposing a civil penalty for failure to correct an
ordinance violation under Chapter 5 of this Title or Title 16, Chapter 12 of
this Code;
      2.   A citation or summons requiring the person to appear for a
misdemeanor violation of a City ordinance, unless the person was found not
guilty of such charge;
      3.   A notice and order under Section
16-8A-7 of this Code;
      4.   An order to show cause under Section
16-8A-15 of this Code; or
      5.   A notice under Section
12-8-3 of this Title.
(1979 Code § 8.29.030; Ord. 99-16, 3-16-1999)
12-11-4: REMOVING OR DEFACING SIGN PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or deface a flagrant property
violation sign which has been posted in accordance with the provisions of this
Chapter.
(1979 Code § 8.29.040; Ord. 99-16, 3-16-1999)
CHAPTER 12
COST RECOVERY FOR NEGLIGENTLY CAUSED FIRE EMERGENCIES
SECTION:
12-12-1: Purpose
12-12-2: Definitions
12-12-3: Recovery Authorization And Procedure
12-12-4: No Admission Of Liability
12-12-5: Action To Recover Costs
12-12-1: PURPOSE:
This Chapter shall provide procedures for recovering costs incurred by the City
for City assistance in negligently caused fire emergencies.
(Ord. 2000-7, 1-4-2000)
12-12-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Title the following terms shall have the meanings designated:
EXPENSES: The actual labor costs of government and volunteer personnel
including workers' compensation benefits, fringe benefits, administrative
overhead, costs of equipment, costs of equipment operation, costs of materials,
costs of disposal and the cost of any contract labor, equipment or materials,
and the similar cost incurred by the City or any assisting agency.
NEGLIGENTLY CAUSED FIRE EMERGENCY: A fire caused by the negligence of any
person which presents a direct and immediate threat to property or public
safety and requires immediate action to mitigate the threat.
(Ord. 2000-7, 1-4-2000)
12-12-3: RECOVERY AUTHORIZATION AND PROCEDURE:
The City is hereby empowered to recover expenses from any person whose
negligent act caused the City to incur expenses directly associated with
responding to a negligently caused fire emergency. These expenses may be
collected in accordance with the following procedures:
   A.   The City shall determine responsibility for the emergency and notify
responsible party in person or by mail (first class, postage prepaid) of the
City's determination of responsibility and the expenses to be recovered.
   B.   The notice shall specify that the determined responsible party may
appeal the City's decision to the Mayor, who may designate a hearing officer to
hear the appeal. Any appeal shall be filed, in writing, with the City
Recorder's office not more than thirty (30) days from the date of service of
notice. The date of service of notice shall be the date of personal delivery or
three (3) days after the date of mailing, as applicable.
   C.   In the event the determined responsible party appeals the
determination, the hearing officer shall hold a hearing to consider any issues
raised by the appeal, at which hearing the appealing party and the City shall
be entitled to present evidence in support of their respective positions.
   D.   The hearing officer shall, after the hearing, make a recommendation to
the Mayor who shall issue a final decision assessing responsibility and
expenses.
(Ord. 2000-7, 1-4-2000)
12-12-4: NO ADMISSION OF LIABILITY:
The payment of expenses determined owing under this Chapter does not constitute
an admission of liability or negligence in any legal action for damages.
(Ord. 2000-7, 1-4-2000)
12-12-5: ACTION TO RECOVER COSTS:
In the event any person determined to be responsible for the repayment of
negligently caused fire emergency expenses fails to make payment to the City
within thirty (30) days after a final determination of any appeal to the Mayor,
or thirty (30) days from the deadline for appeal in the event no appeal is
filed, the City may initiate legal action to recover from the determined
responsible party the expenses determined to be owing, including the City's
reasonable attorney fees and costs of such recovery.
(Ord. 2000-7, 1-4-2000)
CHAPTER 13
COST RECOVERY FOR HAZARDOUS MATERIALS EMERGENCIES
SECTION:
12-13-1: Purpose
12-13-2: Definitions
12-13-3: Recovery Authorization And Procedure
12-13-4: No Admission Of Liability
12-13-5: Action To Recover Costs
12-13-1: PURPOSE:
This Chapter shall provide procedures for recovering costs incurred by the City
for City assistance in a hazardous materials emergency pursuant to 53-2-105,
Utah Code Annotated.
(Ord. 2000-6, 1-4-2000)
12-13-2: DEFINITIONS:
A used in this Title the following terms shall have the meanings designated:
EXPENSES: The actual labor costs of government and volunteer personnel
including workers' compensation benefits, fringe benefits, administrative
overhead, costs of equipment, costs of equipment operation, costs of materials,
costs of disposal and the cost of any contract labor and materials.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS EMERGENCY: A sudden and unexpected release of any substance
that, because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical, or
infectious characteristics, presents a direct and immediate threat to public
safety or the environment, and requires immediate action to mitigate the
threat.
(Ord. 2000-6, 1-4-2000)
12-13-3: RECOVERY AUTHORIZATION AND PROCEDURE:
The City is hereby empowered to recover from any person whose negligent or
intentional act caused the City or any assisting agency to incur any expenses
directly associated with responding to a hazardous materials emergency. These
expenses may be collected in accordance with the following procedures:
   A.   The City shall determine responsibility for the hazardous materials
emergency and notify the responsible party in person or by mail (first class,
postage prepaid) of the City's determination of responsibility and the costs to
be recovered.
   B.   The notice shall specify that the determined responsible party may
appeal the City's decision to the Mayor, who may designate a hearing officer to
hear the appeal. Any appeal shall be filed, in writing, with the City
Recorder's office not more than thirty (30) days from the date of service of
notice. The date of service of notice shall be the date of personal delivery or
three (3) days after the date of mailing, as applicable.
   C.   In the event the determined responsible party appeals the
determination, the hearing officer shall hold a hearing to consider any issues
raised by the appeal, at which hearing the appealing party and the City shall
be entitled to present evidence in support of their respective positions.
   D.   The hearing officer shall, after the hearing, make a recommendation to
the Mayor who shall issue a final decision assessing responsibility and
expenses.
(Ord. 2000-6, 1-4-2000)
12-13-4: NO ADMISSION OF LIABILITY:
The payment of expenses determined owing under this Chapter does not constitute
an admission of liability or negligence in any legal action for damages.
(Ord. 2000-6, 1-4-2000)
12-13-5: ACTION TO RECOVER COSTS:
In the event any person determined to be responsible for the repayment of
hazardous materials emergency expenses fails to make payment to the City within
thirty (30) days after a final determination of any appeal to the Mayor, or
thirty (30) days from the deadline for appeal in the event no appeal is filed,
the City may initiate legal action to recover from the determined responsible
party the expenses determined to be owing, including the City's reasonable
attorney fees and costs of such recovery.
(Ord. 2000-6, 1-4-2000)
CHAPTER 14
NOISE
SECTION:
12-14-1: Purpose
12-14-2: Applicability
12-14-3: Definitions
12-14-4: Standards For Measuring Sound Levels
12-14-5: Sound Level Limitations
12-14-6: Restricted Uses Or Activities
12-14-7: Exceptions To Noise Ordinance
12-14-8: Special Permit
12-14-9: Motor Vehicle Noise
12-14-10: Enforcement
12-14-11: Other Code Provisions
12-14-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted to protect, preserve and promote the health, safety,
welfare, peace, quiet, and quality of life for the citizens of the city through
the reduction, control and prevention of excessive noise. It is the intent of
this chapter to establish standards that will eliminate and reduce unnecessary
and excessive traffic and community noise, which are physically harmful or
detrimental to individuals and the community in the enjoyment of life, property
and conduct of business.
(Ord. 2001-17, 3-27-2001, eff. 5-1-2001)
12-14-2: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this chapter apply to sound generated from real property
located within the city. It shall have no applicability to all aspects of the
employer-employee relationship concerning health and safety hazards within the
confines of a place of employment.
(Ord. 2001-17, 3-27-2001, eff. 5-1-2001)
12-14-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the
following meanings:
"A" WEIGHTING: The electronic filtering in sound level meters that models human
hearing frequency sensitivity.
AMBIENT SOUND LEVEL: The total sound pressure level in the area of interest
including the noise source of interest.
BACKGROUND SOUND LEVEL: The total sound pressure level in the area of interest
excluding the noise source of interest.
CLEARLY AUDIBLE: Any sound that can be detected by a person using his or her
unaided hearing faculties. As an example, if the sound source under
investigation is a sound amplification device, the detection of the rhythmic
bass component of the music is sufficient to verify clearly audible sound.
COMMERCIAL AREA, COMMERCIAL ZONE: Any area of the city with a zoning
designation of C-1, C-2, C-3, CBD, PI and PCR under title 15 of this code, and
the abutting public streets and public premises.
COMMERCIAL POWER EQUIPMENT: Any equipment or device rated at more than five (5)
horsepower and used for home or building repairs or grounds maintenance.
COMMERCIAL PREMISES: Any premises involving traffic in goods or furnishing of
services for sale or profit, including, but not limited to:
   A.   Banking and other financial institutions;
   B.   Dining establishments;
   C.   Establishments for providing retail services;
   D.   Establishments for recreation and entertainment;
   E.   Office buildings;
   F.   Transportation; or
   G.   Warehouses; and
   H.   Any other premises allowed in a commercial zone other than a use
categorized as a residential premises or industrial premises.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY: Any site preparation, assembly, erection, repair,
alteration or similar action, including demolition of buildings or structures,
which produces sound clearly audible at the property line of the premises from
which the sound originates.
CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT: Any equipment or device, such as, but not limited to,
pile drivers, power shovels, derricks, hoist tractors, loaders, rollers,
concrete hauling motor vehicles, pavement breakers, bulldozers, crawler-
tractors, rotary drills and augers, cranes, ditchers, trenchers, scrapers,
wagons, pumps, compressors and pneumatic power equipment, or other mechanical
apparatus operated by fuel or electric power in the construction, repair or
demolition of any building, structure, land, street, alley, waterways or
appurtenance thereto.
dBA: The A-weighted unit of sound pressure level.
DECIBEL (dB): The unit of measurement for sound pressure level at a specified
location. The symbol is "dB".
DEVICE: Any equipment or mechanism which is intended to produce or which
actually produces sound when operated or handled.
DOMESTIC POWER EQUIPMENT: Any equipment or device rated at five (5) horsepower
or less and used for home or building repairs or grounds maintenance,
including, but not limited to, power saw, sander, vacuum, lawn mower, leaf
blower, and garden equipment. "Domestic Power Equipment" does not include snow
blowers or other snow removal equipment.
EMERGENCY WORK: Any work or action necessary to deliver essential services
including, but not limited to, repairing water, gas, electric, telephone, sewer
facilities, or public transportation facilities, removing fallen trees on
public streets, or abating life-threatening conditions.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: A peace officer, or an officer or employee of the city
authorized by administrative order of the mayor to enforce all or part of the
provisions of this chapter.
IMPULSIVE SOUND: A sound having a duration of less than one second with an
abrupt onset and rapid decay.
INDUSTRIAL AREA: Any manufacturing zone.
INDUSTRIAL PREMISES: Any premises where manufacturing, processing, fabrication,
or production of goods or products takes place.
MANUFACTURING ZONE: Any area of the city with a zoning designation of M-1, M-2,
DDR, MRD, or OCIP, under the zoning ordinances of Ogden City, Utah, and the
abutting public streets and public premises.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which is
propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not
operated upon rails, except vehicles moved solely by human power and motorized
wheelchairs. "Motor vehicle" shall not include power equipment, auxiliary
equipment and sound amplification devices on or within motor vehicles, that are
not operated by or driven by the motor vehicle engine propelling system, or any
"motor vehicle" operated on private property for recreational or amusement
purposes.
MULTIPLE DWELLING UNITS: Any building where there are two (2) or more dwelling
units.
PREMISES: Any building, structure, land, utility or portion thereof, including
all appurtenances, and shall include yards, lots, courts, inner yards, common
areas and real properties without buildings or improvements, owned or
controlled by a person.
PROPERTY LINE: The real or imaginary line and its vertical extension which
separates one parcel of real property from another, or the vertical and
horizontal boundaries of a dwelling unit that is one in a multiple dwelling
unit.
PUBLIC PARK: All real property owned, operated or maintained by either the city
or other public governmental entity, and used as a park, playground, swimming
pool, golf course, waterway, nature center, or other recreational facility.
PUBLIC PREMISES: Any premises, which is owned, leased or controlled by any
public governmental entity.
PUBLIC STREET: All real property and improvements thereon used or dedicated as
a public right of way for vehicular or pedestrian traffic, including any
highway, boulevard, parkway, avenue, street, road, sidewalk, park strip, or
alley.
PURE TONE: Any sound that can be distinctly heard as a single pitch or set of
single pitches.
RESIDENTIAL AREA, RESIDENTIAL ZONE: Any area of the city with a zoning
designation of R-
1-5, R-
1-6, R-
1-8, R-
1-10, R-2, R-2A, R-2EC, R-3, R-3EC, R-4, R-5, and Rmh-1, and the abutting
public streets and public premises.
RESIDENTIAL PREMISES: Any premises located within a residential zone or
commercial zone where single or multiple dwelling units exist, or where public
parks, schools, churches, hospitals, nursing homes, homes for the aged, and
similar institutional facilities are located.
SOUND: An oscillation in pressure, stress, particle displacement and particle
velocity which induces auditory sensation.
SOUND AMPLIFICATION DEVICE: Any device for the amplification of the human
voice, music or any other sound, including, but not limited to, radios,
televisions, phonographs, stereos, record players, cassette players, compact
disc players, loud speakers, or sound amplifiers.
SOUND LEVEL: The instantaneous sound pressure level measured in decibels with a
sound level meter set for A-weighting on slow integration speed, unless
otherwise noted.
SOUND LEVEL METER (SLM): An instrument for the measurement of sound pressure
levels of a design and having the characteristics of a type 2 or better
instrument as established by the American national standards institute (ANSI),
publication S1.4-1983 entitled "Specification for Sound Level Meters", or the
latest version thereof.
SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL (SPL): Twenty (20) multiplied by the logarithm, to the
base 10, of the measured sound pressure divided by the sound pressure
associated with the threshold of human hearing, in units of decibels.
(Ord. 2001-17, 3-27-2001, eff. 5-1-2001)
12-14-4: STANDARDS FOR MEASURING SOUND LEVELS:
The following standards shall apply to the measurement of sound levels pursuant
to sections
12-14-5 and
12-14-9 of this chapter:
   A.   Insofar as practicable, sound will be measured while the source under
investigation is operating at normal, routine conditions and, as necessary, at
other conditions, including, but not limited to, design, maximum, and
fluctuating rates.
   B.   When a noise source can be identified and measured in more than one
type of premises, the limits of the most restrictive use shall apply at the
property line between different premises types.
   C.   All tests shall be conducted in accordance with the following
procedures:
      1.   The enforcement officer shall, to the extent practicable, identify
all sources contributing sound to the point of measurement.
      2.   Measurements shall be taken at or within the property line of the
receiving property; provided that whenever it is impossible or impractical to
measure at the property line, a greater distance from the noise source shall be
used to determine compliance with this chapter.
      3.   The SLM must be calibrated in accordance with manufacturer
specifications.
      4.   No outdoor measurements shall be taken:
         a.   During periods when wind speeds (including gusts) exceed fifteen
miles per hour (15 mph);
         b.   Without a windscreen, recommended by the SLM manufacturer,
properly attached to the SLM;
         c.   Under any condition that allows the SLM to become wet (e.g.,
rain, snow, or condensation); or
         d.   When the ambient temperature is out of the range of the tolerance
of the SLM.
   D.   The report for each measurement shall include:
      1.   The date, day of the week, and times at which measurements are
taken;
      2.   The times of calibration;
      3.   The weather conditions;
      4.   The identification of all monitoring equipment by manufacturer,
model number, and serial number;
      5.   The normal operating cycle of the sources in question with a
description of the sources;
      6.   The ambient sound level, in dBA, with the sources in question
operating;
      7.   The background sound level, in dBA, without the sources in question
operating; and
      8.   A sketch of the measurement site, including measurement locations
and relevant distances, containing sufficient information for another
investigator to repeat the measurements under similar conditions.
   E.   Prior to taking measurements the enforcement officer shall explore the
vicinity of the source in question to identify any other sound sources that
could affect measurements, to establish the approximate location and character
of the principal sound source, and to select suitable locations from which to
measure the sound from the source in question.
   F.   When measuring continuous sound, or sound that is sustained for more
than one second at a time, the SLM shall be set for A-weighting, slow meter
response speed, and the range (if the SLM is designed to read levels over
different ranges of SPLs) shall be set to that range in which the meter reads
closest to the maximum end of the scale. When the measured sound level is
variable or fluctuating over a range greater than +3 dBA, using the slow meter
response speed, the fast meter response speed shall be used. In either case,
both the minimum and maximum readings shall be recorded to indicate the range
of monitored values.
   G.   The SLM shall be placed at a minimum height of three feet (3') above
the ground or from any reflective surface. When handheld, the microphone shall
be held at arm's length and pointed at the source at the angle recommended by
the SLM manufacturer.
   H.   If extraneous sound sources, such as aircraft flyovers or barking dogs,
that are unrelated to the measurements increase the monitored sound levels, the
measurements should be postponed until these extraneous sounds have become of
such a level as not to increase the monitored sound levels of interest.
   I.   The monitoring session should last for a period of time sufficient to
ensure that the sound levels measured are typical of the source in question.
   J.   The background sound levels shall be subtracted from the measured sound
levels of the source of interest by using table 1 of this section to determine
the sound levels from the source of interest alone. If the ambient sound level
is less than 3 dBA higher than the background sound level, the source level
cannot be derived and a violation of this chapter cannot be substantiated.
   TABLE 1
   CORRECTION FOR BACKGROUND LEVELS
   (In dBA)
 
Difference Between Ambient And Correction Factor To Be Subtracted From
Background Sound Levels        Ambient Level For Source Level
3                              3
4, 5                           2
6 – 9                        1
10 or more                     0
 
(Ord. 2001-17, 3-27-2001, eff. 5-1-2001)
12-14-5: SOUND LEVEL LIMITATIONS:
   A.   No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the operation of any
sound source in such a manner as to create a sound level that exceeds the
background sound level by at least ten (10) dBA during daytime hours (7:00 A.M.
to 10:00 P.M.) and by at least five (5) dBA during nighttime hours (10:00 P.M.
to 7:00 A.M.) when measured at or within the property line of the receiving
property, except as otherwise provided in subsection B of this section.
   B.   If the background sound level cannot be determined, the absolute sound
level limits set forth in table 2 of this section shall be used.
   C.   If the sound source in question is a pure tone, the limits of table 2
of this section shall be reduced by five (5) dBA.
TABLE 2
MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE SOUND LEVELS
 
Type Of Premises                 Maximum
Where Noise Received Time Period Allowable
                                 Sound Level
   Residenti7:00 A.M. to 10:00 P.M. 55 dBA
              10:00 P.M. to 7:00 A.M. 50 dBA
   Commercia7:00 A.M. to 10:00 P.M. 65 dBA
              10:00 P.M. to 7:00 A.M. 60 dBA
   Industria7:00 A.M. to 10:00 P.M. 80 dBA
              10:00 P.M. to 7:00 A.M. 75 dBA
   Public   7:00 A.M. to 10:00 P.M. 75 dBA
              10:00 P.M. to 7:00 A.M. 70 dBA
 
   D.   Nonrepetitive impulsive sound sources shall not exceed ninety (90) dBA
at or within the property line of a residential premises, using the fast meter
response speed.
   E.   In multiple dwelling units, if the background sound level cannot be
determined, the daytime limit is forty five (45) dBA and the nighttime limit is
thirty five (35) dBA for sound originating in another dwelling within the same
building.
(Ord. 2001-17, 3-27-2001, eff. 5-1-2001)
12-14-6: RESTRICTED USES OR ACTIVITIES:
   A.   Horns And Signaling Devices: No person shall, at any time, sound any
horn or audible signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus, streetcar, or
other vehicle, except as a danger signal or traffic warning as provided under
the Utah motor vehicle act; create by means of any such signaling device any
unreasonably loud or harsh sound; or sound any such device for an unnecessary
or unreasonable period of time.
   B.   Truck Idling: No person shall operate an engine of any standing motor
vehicle with a weight in excess of ten thousand (10,000) pounds' manufacturer's
gross vehicle weight (GWA) for a period in excess of ten (10) minutes when such
vehicle is parked on a residential premises, on a premises next to a
residential premises, or on a public street next to a residential premises;
provided, however, that vehicles confined and operated within an enclosed
structure, or vehicles being used directly in construction activity or the
operation of construction equipment shall not be subject to the provisions of
this subsection.
   C.   Motor Vehicle Operation: No person shall operate or cause to be
operated any motor vehicle unless the exhaust system of the vehicle is:
      1.   Free from defects that affect sound reduction;
      2.   Equipped with a muffler or other noise dissipative device; or
      3.   Not equipped with any cutout, bypass, or similar device.
   D.   Sound Amplification Devices; Musical Instruments:
      1.   Affecting Residential Premises: No person shall operate a sound
amplification device or musical instrument:
         a.   Between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock
(7:00) A.M. in a way that is clearly audible at the property line of a
residential premises; or
         b.   In a way that at any time is clearly audible inside of a
residential premises, when all exterior doors and windows of such dwelling unit
are closed.
      2.   Operation In A Motor Vehicle: No person shall operate a sound
amplification device within a motor vehicle parked or operated on a public
street, which is clearly audible or which causes a person to be aware of
vibration accompanying the sound either:
         a.   At a distance of thirty feet (30') from the motor vehicle; or
         b.   Within another motor vehicle on a public street, at any distance,
when all doors and windows of such other vehicle are closed.
      3.   Public Parks: No person shall operate a sound amplification device
within a public park, which is clearly audible at a distance of seventy five
feet (75') from the device, unless operated pursuant to permit issued under
section
12-14-8 of this chapter.
      4.   Commercial Operation On Public Street Without Permit: No person
shall operate a sound amplification device in a fixed or movable position or
mounted upon any vehicle, in or upon a public street, for the purpose of
commercial advertising, giving instructions, directions, talks, addresses,
lectures, or transmission of music to any persons or assemblages of persons in
violation of other sound levels/restrictions, unless a permit is first obtained
as provided in section
11-5-6 of this code.
      5.   Projection From Building On Public Street: No person shall maintain
and operate in any building a sound amplification device or musical instrument
where the sound therefrom is cast directly upon a public street and where such
device is maintained and operated for advertising purposes or for the purpose
of attracting the attention of the passing public.
   E.   Construction Equipment Or Activity: The operation of construction
equipment or the performance of construction activity, except as required for
emergency work, shall only be allowed between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00)
A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. on weekdays or between the hours of eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. on weekends (Saturday and
Sunday).
   F.   Commercial Power Equipment: The operation of any commercial power
equipment shall only be allowed between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M., and only when in compliance with noise levels
established in section
12-14-5 of this chapter.
   G.   Domestic Power Equipment: The operation of any domestic power equipment
shall only be allowed between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M.
   H.   Refuse Collection And Compacting: Garbage, refuse or other solid waste
collection and compacting, including recyclables collection, street sweeping,
and similar activities, shall only be allowed between the hours of six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M., when such activity takes place on any
residential premises or on any premises next to, or across the street or alley
from, a residential premises.
   I.   Loading/Unloading Operations: Except as otherwise provided for solid
waste collection in subsection H of this section, loading, unloading, opening,
closing, or otherwise handling boxes, crates, containers, building materials,
liquids, garbage cans, refuse, or similar objects, or the pneumatic or pumped
loading or unloading of bulk materials in liquid, gaseous, powder, or pellet
form or the compacting of refuse by persons engaged in the business of
scavenging or garbage collection, whether private or public, shall not be
allowed between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00)
A.M., when the sound therefrom is clearly audible across the property line of a
residential premises.
   J.   Mufflers Required For Engine Exhaust: No person shall discharge into
the open air the exhaust of any stationary internal combustion engine,
motorboat, or motor vehicle, except through a muffler or other device, which
will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
   K.   Firing Ranges: The operation of a firing range shall only be allowed
between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.,
Monday through Saturday, where the sound therefrom is clearly audible at the
property line of the premises of the firing range.
   L.   Fireworks: No person shall discharge fireworks at any time when the
sound therefrom is clearly audible across the property line of a residential
premises unless a permit is first obtained or not otherwise required as
provided in section
11-6-2 of this code. Fireworks include, but are not limited to, any rocket,
squib, firecracker, Roman candle, or other device containing pyrotechnic
composition that produces audible and/or visual effects through combustion.
(Ord. 2009-45, 6-23-2009)
12-14-7: EXCEPTIONS TO NOISE ORDINANCE:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following uses and
activities:
   A.   Noises of safety signals, warning devices, and emergency pressure
relief valves.
   B.   Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle when responding
to an emergency call or in time of emergency.
   C.   Noises resulting from emergency work.
   D.   Loudspeakers or other sound amplification device operated by a peace
officer or member of the fire department in the performance of official duties.
   E.   Any other noise resulting from activities of a temporary duration
permitted by law and for which a license or permit therefor has been granted by
the city in accordance with section
12-14-8 of this chapter.
   F.   Any aircraft or railroad equipment operated in conformity with, or
pursuant to, state statute, federal law or federal regulations, and traffic
control instruction used pursuant to and within the duly adopted state or
federal regulations. Any aircraft operating under technical difficulties, in
any kind of distress, under emergency orders of air traffic control or being
operated pursuant to and subsequent to the declaration of an emergency under
federal air regulations shall also be exempt.
   G.   Noise from an exterior alarm system of any building or vehicle provided
such alarm shall terminate its operation within five (5) minutes of its
activation.
   H.   Sound from any bell or chime from any building clock, school or church,
or sound from unamplified music or song emanating from any church or school.
   I.   Noise from construction equipment provided all motorized equipment used
in such activity is equipped with functioning mufflers, except as provided in
subsection 12-14-6E of this chapter.
   J.   Noise from domestic power tools, when operated between seven o'clock
(7:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
   K.   Noise from snowblowers, snow throwers, and snowplows when operated with
a muffler for the purpose of snow removal.
   L.   Lawful and properly permitted organized athletic activities on school
grounds, and officially designated playgrounds used for recreation by children
under supervision, and parks or places wherein athletic contests take place
between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
   M.   Noise resulting from lawful fireworks and noisemakers used for
celebration of an official holiday except when prohibited under section
11-6-2 of this code.
   N.   Noise generated from city sponsored celebrations or special events.
(Ord. 2009-45, 6-23-2009)
12-14-8: SPECIAL PERMIT:
   A.   Applications for a permit for relief from the noise level designated in
this section may be made to the mayor or the mayor's designee.
   B.   Applications for a permit shall supply information including, but not
limited to:
      1.   The nature and location of the noise source for which such
application is made;
      2.   The reason for which the permit is requested, including the hardship
that will result to the applicant, his/her client, or the public if the permit
is not granted;
      3.   The level of noise that will occur during the period of the permit;
      4.   The ordinance provision for which the permit shall apply;
      5.   A description of interim noise control measures to be taken for the
applicant to minimize noise and the impacts occurring therefrom; and
      6.   A specific schedule of the noise control measures that shall be
taken to bring the source into compliance with this chapter within a reasonable
time.
   C.   Any permit granted under this section shall contain all conditions upon
which said permit has been granted and shall specify a reasonable time that the
permit shall be effective, which shall be no longer than one year.
   D.   No permit shall be approved unless the applicant presents adequate
proof that:
      1.   Compliance with this chapter would impose an undue hardship on the
applicant without equal or greater benefits to the public and additional time
is necessary for the applicant to alter or modify his activity or operation to
comply with this chapter; or
      2.   The activity, operation or noise source will be of temporary
duration, and cannot be done in a manner that would comply with this section;
and
      3.   No other reasonable alternative is available to the applicant; and
      4.   Noise levels occurring during the period of the permit will not
constitute a danger to public health.
   E.   In making the permit determination, the mayor, or the mayor's designee,
shall consider:
      1.   The character and degree of injury to, or interference with, the
health and welfare or the reasonable use of property that is caused or
threatened to be caused;
      2.   The social and economic value of the activity for which the permit
is sought; and
      3.   The ability of the applicant to apply the best practical noise
control measures.
   F.   The mayor, or the mayor's designee, in granting such a special permit,
may prescribe any conditions or requirements he/she deems necessary to minimize
adverse effects upon the community or the surrounding neighborhood.
   G.   The permit may be revoked by the mayor, or the mayor's designee, if
there is:
      1.   Violation of one or more conditions of the permit;
      2.   Material misrepresentation of fact in the permit application; or
      3.   Material change in any of the circumstances relied on by the mayor,
or the mayor's designee, in granting the permit.
(Ord. 2001-17, 3-27-2001, eff. 5-1-2001)
12-14-9: MOTOR VEHICLE NOISE:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit the operation
of any motor vehicle or combination of motor vehicles at any time or place when
such operation exceeds the following noise sound pressure levels for the
category of motor vehicle and for the designated time period as specified in
table B of this section. The standards in table B of this section shall apply
to all noise emitted from motor vehicles including any and all equipment
thereon, under any condition of acceleration, deceleration, idle, grade or load
and whether or not in motion.
   TABLE B
   Maximum Allowable Noise Sound Pressure Levels For Motor Vehicles
 
                                                 Maximum         Measurement
Type Of Vehicle          Time Period             Allowable Sound Distance From
                                                 Pressure Level  Motor Vehicle
Motor vehicle weighing
less than 10,000 pounds, At any time             80 dBA          25 feet
manufacturer's gross
vehicle weight
Motor vehicle weighing
more than 10,000 pounds, 7:00 A.M. to 10:00 P.M. 88 dBA          25 feet
manufacturer's gross
vehicle weight
Motor vehicle weighing
more than 10,000 pounds, 10:00 P.M. to 7:00 A.M. 80 dBA          25 feet
manufacturer's gross
vehicle weight
 
   B.   The provisions of this section shall not be construed as limiting or
precluding the enforcement of any other provisions of this code relating to
motor vehicle mufflers.
(Ord. 2001-17, 3-27-2001, eff. 5-1-2001)
12-14-10: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   A violation of this chapter is a class B misdemeanor, subject to the
penalties provided under title 1, chapter 4 of this code.
   B.   As an additional remedy, the operation or maintenance of any device,
instrument, vehicle or machinery in violation of any provisions of this
chapter, or which causes discomfort or annoyance to reasonable persons of
normal sensitiveness or which endangers the comfort, repose, health or peace of
residents in the area shall be deemed, and is declared to be, a public nuisance
and may be subject to abatement as provided by law.
   C.   Any peace officer is authorized to enforce the provisions of this
section; provided that the mayor may by administrative order authorize other
officers or employees of the city to enforce all or part of the provisions of
this section.
   D.   The content of the sound will not be considered in determining a
violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 2001-17, 3-27-2001, eff. 5-1-2001)
12-14-11: OTHER CODE PROVISIONS:
   A.   Noise made by animals shall be controlled and enforced as provided in
title 13, chapter 2 of this code.
   B.   Noise emitted by unamplified human voices shall be enforced pursuant to
the prohibitions against disorderly conduct, as provided in state law or other
provisions of this title.
   C.   No provision of this section shall be construed to impair any common
law or statutory cause of action, or legal remedy therefrom, of any person for
injury or damage arising from any violation of this chapter or from other law.
(Ord. 2001-17, 3-27-2001, eff. 5-1-2001)
CHAPTER 15
EMERGENCY PLANNING AND RESPONSE
SECTION:
12-15-1: Purpose
12-15-2: Definitions
12-15-3: Local Emergency; Proclamation
12-15-4: Mayor's Powers During Local Emergency
12-15-5: Penalty For Violation Of Emergency Proclamation, Rule Or Order
12-15-6: Emergency Program Manager; Duties
12-15-7: Emergency Operations Plan
12-15-8: Additional Duties Of The Emergency Program Manager
12-15-9: Emergency Procurements
12-15-10: Emergency Interim Succession To City Offices
12-15-11: Declaring Emergency Seat Of Government
12-15-12: Official Acts At Emergency Seat Of Government; Validity
12-15-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted to set out and clarify the authority of the city and
its officers and employees with regard to emergency and disaster situations. It
is intended to grant as broad a power as permitted by statutory and
constitutional authority.
(Ord. 2001-65, 11-20-2001, eff. 12-9-2001)
12-15-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms shall have the following meanings:
ABSENT: Not physically present or not able to be communicated with for twelve
(12) hours. "Absent" does not include a person who can be communicated with via
telephone, radio, or telecommunications.
ATTACK: A nuclear, conventional, biological, or chemical warfare action against
the United States of America or this state.
CITY OFFICER: The elected and appointed officers of the city, including the
members of the city council, council chair, council vice chair, mayor, chief
administrative officer, fire chief, police chief, city attorney, and department
directors. It shall also include those officers of the city vested by statute
or ordinance with certain powers and duties that may be required in the event
of an emergency, including, but not limited to, the city recorder, the city
treasurer, the city engineer, the finance officer, the purchasing agent, and
the building official.
DISASTER: A situation causing, or threatening to cause, widespread damage,
social disruption, or injury or loss of life or property resulting from attack,
internal disturbance, natural phenomenon, or technological hazard.
EMERGENCY INTERIM SUCCESSOR: A person designated under this chapter to exercise
the powers and discharge the duties of a city office when the person legally
exercising the powers and duties of such office is unavailable.
INTERNAL DISTURBANCE: A riot, prison break, disruptive terrorism, or strike.
NATURAL PHENOMENON: Any earthquake, tornado, storm, flood, landslide,
avalanche, forest or range fire, drought, epidemic, or other catastrophic
event.
PLACE OF GOVERNANCE: The physical location where the powers of an office are
being exercised.
SEAT OF GOVERNMENT: The Ogden City municipal building.
TECHNOLOGICAL HAZARD: Any hazardous materials accident, mine accident, train
derailment, air crash, radiation incident, pollution, structural fire, or
explosion.
UNAVAILABLE: Absent from the place of governance during a disaster that
seriously disrupts normal governmental operations, whether or not that absence
or inability would give rise to a vacancy under existing constitutional or
statutory provisions.
(Ord. 2001-65, 11-20-2001, eff. 12-9-2001)
12-15-3: LOCAL EMERGENCY; PROCLAMATION:
   A.   Notwithstanding any provision of this code to the contrary, a "local
emergency" may be declared by the mayor if the mayor finds a disaster has
occurred or the occurrence or threat of disaster is imminent. It shall not be
continued or renewed for a period in excess of thirty (30) days except by or
with the consent of the city council. Any order or proclamation declaring,
continuing, or terminating a "local emergency" shall be filed promptly with the
city recorder.
   B.   A declaration of a "local emergency" is official recognition that a
disaster situation exists within the city and provides a legal basis for
requesting and obtaining county, state or federal government disaster
assistance. The declaration activates the response and recovery aspects of the
emergency operations plan and authorizes the furnishing of aid and assistance
pursuant thereto.
   C.   A "local emergency" proclamation issued under this chapter shall state:
      1.   The nature of the "local emergency";
      2.   The area or areas threatened; and
      3.   The conditions which caused the emergency.
(Ord. 2001-65, 11-20-2001, eff. 12-9-2001)
12-15-4: MAYOR'S POWERS DURING LOCAL EMERGENCY:
   A.   In addition to any other powers provided by state law or the provisions
of this code, the mayor during a declared local emergency is authorized and
empowered to exercise, with the assistance of the emergency program manager and
in consultation with the city attorney, all emergency powers, including, but
not limited to, all of the following:
      1.   The power to direct emergency response activities by city
departments including, but not limited to, the police and fire departments, and
by such emergency services personnel as the mayor may designate or appoint.
      2.   The power to execute contracts for the emergency construction or
repair of public improvements, when the delay of advertising and public bidding
might cause serious loss or injury to the city, upon following the procedures
of section
12-15-9 of this chapter.
      3.   The power to purchase or lease goods and services that the mayor
deems necessary to the city's emergency response or for the repair of city
facilities, or both, upon following the procedures of section
12-15-9 of this chapter.
      4.   The power to lease real property, or structures, or both, that the
mayor deems necessary for the continued operation of city government.
      5.   The power to promulgate rules and orders to implement and clarify
the mayoral proclamation exercising emergency power.
      6.   The power to delegate any or all of these duties to the chief
administrative officer.
   B.   All orders, rules, and regulations promulgated by the mayor, not in
conflict with existing laws except as specifically provided herein, shall have
the full force and effect of law during the local emergency, when filed in the
office of the city recorder.
(Ord. 2001-65, 11-20-2001, eff. 12-9-2001)
12-15-5: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF EMERGENCY PROCLAMATION, RULE OR ORDER:
The violation of a proclamation declaring a local emergency, a subsequent
proclamation exercising emergency powers, a rule, or order, which proclamation,
rule or order is issued pursuant to the provisions of section
12-15-4 of this chapter, or the violation of any order or directive given by
emergency services personnel pursuant to authority resulting from section
12-15-4 of this chapter, is a class B misdemeanor and punishable as provided in
title 1, chapter 4 of this code.
(Ord. 2001-65, 11-20-2001, eff. 12-9-2001)
12-15-6: EMERGENCY PROGRAM MANAGER; DUTIES:
The mayor shall designate an officer of the city to serve as the city's
emergency program manager. If no such designation has otherwise been made, the
Ogden City fire chief shall serve as the emergency program manager.
(Ord. 2001-65, 11-20-2001, eff. 12-9-2001)
12-15-7: EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN:
The emergency program manager shall, under the direction of the mayor, and with
the assistance of all city officers, departments and divisions, prepare and
maintain an emergency operations plan for the city and recommend to the mayor
and city council mutual aid plans and interlocal agreements which are deemed
essential for the plan. The emergency program manager shall make or recommend
continuing studies of the need for revisions and improvements in such plans.
The emergency program manager shall provide a copy of the plan, and any
amendments thereto, to the city council, and, by October 31 of each year, brief
the city council on the plan and any revisions or improvements made thereto.
(Ord. 2001-65, 11-20-2001, eff. 12-9-2001)
12-15-8: ADDITIONAL DUTIES OF THE EMERGENCY PROGRAM MANAGER:
In addition to the duties prescribed in section
12-15-7 of this chapter, the emergency program manager shall:
   A.   Request the mayor when appropriate to declare a local emergency as
provided in section
12-15-3 of this chapter.
   B.   Assist the mayor, or the mayor's designee, in the exercise of emergency
powers under section
12-15-4 of this chapter.
   C.   Consult with the city attorney in the planning and exercise of
emergency powers.
   D.   Marshal, after the declaration of a local emergency, all necessary
personnel, equipment and supplies from any department of the city to aid in
carrying out the emergency operations plan.
   E.   Act in coordination with the state, the county and other governmental
agencies as may be necessary to plan and implement joint jurisdictional
emergency planning and disaster services, and the development of mutual aid
arrangements.
   F.   Plan and direct emergency training activities.
   G.   Maintain a liaison with other municipal, state, county, regional and
federal disaster services agencies.
   H.   Assume other emergency responsibilities as assigned by the mayor.
(Ord. 2001-65, 11-20-2001, eff. 12-9-2001)
12-15-9: EMERGENCY PROCUREMENTS:
Notwithstanding any provision of this code to the contrary, the mayor, upon
declaration of a local emergency by proclamation as provided in section
12-15-3 of this chapter, may authorize the chief administrative officer and
his/her designees, to procure by purchase or lease, such goods and services as
are deemed necessary for the city's emergency response effort. This emergency
procurement of goods or services may be made in the open market for immediate
delivery or furnishing, without filing a requisition or estimate and without
advertisement or competitive bid. A full written account of all emergency
procurements made during this emergency, together with a requisition for the
required materials, supplies, equipment, or services, shall be submitted to the
director of management services within thirty (30) days after their
procurement, and shall be open to public inspection for a period of at least
one year subsequent to the date of the emergency purchases. The mayor, or the
mayor's designee, shall, within three (3) months of the conclusion of the
emergency, formally communicate these emergency expenditures in a full written
account to the city council.
(Ord. 2001-65, 11-20-2001, eff. 12-9-2001)
12-15-10: EMERGENCY INTERIM SUCCESSION TO CITY OFFICES:
   A.   Each city officer shall designate three (3) emergency interim
successors and specify their order of succession. The list of designated
successors, and any updates thereto, shall be provided to the emergency program
manager by June 15 of each year for inclusion in the emergency operations plan
and timely submission to the comprehensive emergency management division of the
state of Utah.
   B.   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, if any city officer or the
officer's legal deputy, if any, is unavailable, a designated emergency interim
successor shall exercise the powers and duties of the office according to the
order of succession specified by the city officer. An emergency interim
successor shall exercise the powers and duties of the city office only until:
      1.   The vacancy is filled in accordance with the state law; or
      2.   The city officer, the officer's deputy, or an emergency interim
successor earlier in the order of succession becomes available to exercise the
powers and duties of the city office.
   C.   At the time an individual is appointed as an emergency interim
successor, the emergency interim successor shall sign prospectively whatever
oath is required to enable them to exercise the powers and duties of the office
to which they may succeed. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no
person is required to comply with any other provision of law relative to taking
office as a prerequisite to the exercise of the powers or discharge of the
duties of an office to which he or she succeeds.
   D.   Persons authorized to act as emergency interim successors shall
exercise the powers and duties of the office to which they succeed only when a
disaster has occurred. Until the persons designated as emergency interim
successors succeed to the exercise of the powers and duties of an office, they
shall serve as emergency interim successors at the pleasure of the designating
authority and may be removed and replaced by the designating authority at any
time, with or without cause.
   E.   Except for factual disputes concerning the office of mayor, the mayor
shall adjudicate any dispute concerning a question of fact arising under this
section and the mayor's decision shall be final.
(Ord. 2001-65, 11-20-2001, eff. 12-9-2001)
12-15-11: DECLARING EMERGENCY SEAT OF GOVERNMENT:
Whenever, due to an emergency resulting from the effects of a disaster, it
becomes imprudent, inexpedient, or impossible to conduct the affairs of city
government at the seat of government, the mayor may by proclamation, declare an
emergency temporary location for the city's seat of government.
(Ord. 2001-65, 11-20-2001, eff. 12-9-2001)
12-15-12: OFFICIAL ACTS AT EMERGENCY SEAT OF GOVERNMENT; VALIDITY:
During the time when the seat of government remains at an emergency location,
all official acts required by law to be performed at the seat of government by
any officer, agency, department, or authority of the city, including the
convening and meeting of the city council in regular or special meetings, shall
be as valid and binding as when performed at the normal location of the seat of
government.
(Ord. 2001-65, 11-20-2001, eff. 12-9-2001)
CHAPTER 16
LANDLORD TRAINING PROGRAM 1
SECTION:
12-16-1: Landlord Training Program Established
12-16-2: Good Landlord Incentive Program
 
Notes
1 1. Prior ordinance history: Ord. 2004-72, 10-12-2004; Ord. 2005-28, 5-17-
  2005; Ord. 2005-56, 10-18-2005.
12-16-1: LANDLORD TRAINING PROGRAM ESTABLISHED:
Ogden City shall develop, in conjunction with its community policing program, a
program to be known as the "landlord training program", which program may be
developed independently by the Ogden police department or modeled after the
"crime free multihousing program" developed by Campbell Resources, Inc., in a
joint effort with the Portland police bureau, the Portland fire bureau, and the
neighborhood crime prevention program, office of neighborhood associations,
funded through the bureau of justice assistance. The purpose of the landlord
training program is to address aspects of property management that may be
important to the control and prevention of illegal activity on rental property.
It is also the city's purpose in establishing such program to encourage the
elimination of code violations on rental properties that affect the quality of
life within our neighborhoods. Each individual participating in the city's
landlord training program shall pay the fee established in subsection 4-6-1D of
this code.
(Ord. 2007-5, 1-16-2007)
12-16-2: GOOD LANDLORD INCENTIVE PROGRAM:
   A.   In conjunction with the landlord training program, the city shall
establish a good landlord incentive program that provides discounts toward the
payment of certain business licensing fees to landlords who actively implement
those aspects of the landlord training program determined by the mayor to be
related to the control and prevention of illegal activity on rental properties,
and who keep their properties free of code violations that affect the quality
of life within our neighborhoods. All applicants for business licenses for
rental dwelling units shall be informed of the availability of the program.
   B.   No discount shall be provided to any landlord unless and until the city
certifies that the requirements of this section and all other requirements of
the good landlord incentive program have been met.
   C.   Except as otherwise allowed in subsection F of this section for the
first year of the program, no landlord shall qualify for discounts under the
good landlord incentive program unless all of the following minimum
requirements are met:
      1.   The landlord, or the landlord's bona fide agent for all aspects of
property management, and all managers of the landlord responsible for the day
to day management of the properties, must attend and complete once every two
(2) years either the landlord training program offered by the Ogden police
department or a comparable landlord training program approved by the Ogden
police department; provided that the mayor may require that each landlord,
agent or manager must complete the program offered directly by the Ogden police
department at least once every four (4) years.
      2.   The landlord must implement and maintain those aspects of property
management determined by the mayor to be related to the control and prevention
of illegal activity on rental property.
         a.   If a discount was granted for the licensing term of January 2,
2006 to January 31, 2007, the requirements of the program must be met during
the twelve (12) month period immediately preceding certification in order to
qualify for the discount for the licensing term of February 1, 2007 to January
30, 2008.
         b.   For a rental dwelling license issued for a licensing term
commencing on or after February 1, 2007, the requirements of the program must
be met during the term of the license.
      3.   The rental dwellings and the surrounding premises must be owned and
maintained in compliance with city ordinances affecting the use, care or
maintenance of real property (zoning ordinances, property maintenance
regulations, fit premises regulations, property maintenance code, housing
codes, health codes, etc.), and the premises kept free of any public nuisance
as defined by city ordinance or state law; provided, however, that a landlord
will be considered to be in compliance with this requirement if violations are
corrected in the time frame required under any notice of violation.
         a.   If a discount was granted for the licensing term of January 2,
2006 to January 31, 2007, the above requirement must be met during the twelve
(12) month period immediately preceding certification in order to qualify for
the discount for the licensing term of February 1, 2007 to January 30, 2008.
         b.   For a rental dwelling license issued for a licensing term
commencing on or after February 1, 2007, the above requirement must be met
during the term of the license.
         c.   Notwithstanding the above requirement, the mayor may establish
guidelines whereby the discount may be extended to an otherwise qualifying
landlord who has subsequently brought the rental dwelling into compliance with
such codes, and either:
            (1)   Good cause existed for the failure to correct such violations
in a timely manner; or
            (2)   It has been determined that the current landlord could not
reasonably be held responsible for the failure to correct.
      4.   The landlord must have obtained all business licenses and paid all
licensing fees applicable to the landlord's rental dwellings for the prior
year.
      5.   The landlord must have paid any outstanding civil penalty assessed
against the landlord for failing to correct a notice of violation applicable to
the landlord's rental dwelling.
   D.   The annual discount allowed under the program against the payment of
business licensing fees attributable to disproportionate costs for rental
dwellings due under subsection
5-1B-2C of this code shall be:
 
Number Of Rental  Annual              Prorated Per Unit Discount
Dwelling Units    Discount            For New Businesses1
Per Building                          3 Quarters    2 Quarters   1 Quarter
1                    $143.00 per un      $1      $      $35.75
2                    64.00 per unit      48      3      16.00
2 owner occupied2    32.00 per unit      24      1      8.00
3 and above          75.00 per unit      56      3      18.75
Mobile home park     52.00 per unit      39      2      13.00
 
   Notes:
      1.   Pursuant to section
5-1A-13 of this code, disproportionate fees may be prorated quarterly. If
applicable, the discount will also be prorated as shown above.
      2.   Applicable to duplexes already accorded the 50 percent discount for
owner occupied.
   E.   Effective for business licenses due on or after January 2, 2006, the
annual discount allowed under the program against the payment of business
licensing fees attributable to regulatory costs for rental dwellings due under
subsection 5-1B-2B3 of this code shall be seventy three dollars ($73.00) per
qualifying building, provided that the full regulatory fee shall be paid for at
least one of the licensed buildings.
   F.   Effective February 1, 2007, the discount provided herein is granted
conditioned upon the landlord's compliance with the requirements of the program
during the term of the licensing year for which the discount is granted. If it
is determined that a landlord, or a landlord's rental dwelling, is not in
compliance with the requirements of the landlord incentive program during any
portion of the licensing period for which a discount was provided, the discount
shall be disallowed in accordance with the provisions of subsection
5-1A-13C of this code for the entirety of the term of such license and the
landlord required to pay the full disproportionate impact fee for that year.
After disqualification, the landlord or rental dwelling may qualify for the
program in the next licensing year only if the landlord has corrected the
problems leading to the disqualification and paid all amount disallowed in the
prior year.
   G.   Any person denied admission to or disqualified under the program may
appear before a hearing officer by filing a written application in the office
of the city recorder for a hearing and present and contest such denial or
disqualification before a hearing officer. Such application shall be filed
within thirty (30) days of the denial or disqualification and shall be
accompanied by a twenty five dollar ($25.00) filing fee. The hearing shall be
conducted as provided in title 4, chapter 4, article A, "Administrative
Hearings", of this code. The burden of proving qualifications or compliance
shall be on the appellant.
   H.   The discount provided under the landlord incentive program may be
applied retroactively under the following conditions:
      1.   The landlord obtained a rental dwelling license immediately after
acquiring a new rental property and was not an owner of another rental dwelling
during the same or immediately preceding licensing year;
      2.   The landlord qualifies for the landlord incentive program either
within six (6) months of obtaining such license or before the end of the
licensing year, whichever occurs first; and
      3.   The landlord applies for the retroactive application of the discount
and a refund of the excess payments within six (6) months of obtaining the
license or before the end of the licensing year, whichever occurs first.
(Ord. 2007-5, 1-16-2007)
CHAPTER 17
CARBON MONOXIDE DETECTORS
SECTION:
12-17-1: Purpose
12-17-2: Definitions
12-17-3: Responsibilities
12-17-4: CO Detector Installation Requirements
12-17-5: Prohibitions
12-17-6: Enforcement Responsibility
12-17-7: Penalties And Remedies For Violations
12-17-1: PURPOSE:
Exposure to carbon monoxide (CO), a colorless, odorless gas, can cause
headaches, dizziness, nausea, faintness, and, at high levels, death. Carbon
monoxide (CO) may be present in residential occupancies as a result of sources
of heat or energy created by fossil fuel or by the use of machinery or vehicles
powered by fossil fuel, causing a significant risk to their occupants, as well
as emergency services personnel who may come to their aid. This chapter is
enacted for the purpose of protecting the health and safety of the residents of
the city, its visitors and employees, by requiring operable carbon monoxide
detectors in existing residential occupancies and residential dwellings thereby
hopefully reducing the number of injuries and fatalities resulting from carbon
monoxide (CO) poisoning.
(Ord. 2012-8, 2-7-2012)
12-17-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms as used in this chapter shall have the indicated meaning:
ATTACHED GARAGE: An enclosed space for the parking or storage of one or more
motor vehicles, which is physically a part of a residential occupancy by means
of a common roof or wall. It shall not include any parking structure separated
by an approved firewall without openings of any kind to the residential
occupancy, including doors.
BUILDING CODES: The building, fire and other technical codes adopted pursuant
to title 16, chapter 2 of this code.
CO DETECTOR: A device sensing invisible particles of carbon monoxide that is
either battery powered or AC powered with battery backup that has been
installed in accordance with its manufacturer's recommendations, which, when
activated, will provide some form of visual or audible detector, and which has
been either UL (Underwriters Laboratories, Inc.) listed or CSA (Canadian
Standards Association) approved.
CENTRALIZED FUEL FIRED APPLIANCE: A fuel fired appliance, such as a hot water
heater or boiler, that serves more than one dwelling unit or sleeping room
within a multiple dwelling.
DWELLING UNIT: Any building or portion thereof designed, occupied, or intended
as a residence, with complete and independent living facilities for one or more
persons including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking
and sanitation.
FOSSIL FUEL: Includes coal, natural gas, kerosene, oil, propane and wood.
FUEL FIRED APPLIANCES: Any appliance that burns a fossil fuel of any type
including, but not limited to, boilers, furnaces, heaters, fireplaces, stoves,
ranges, clothes dryers, barbecues and engines.
OCCUPANT: An individual in lawful occupancy of a residential dwelling or
dwelling unit, which shall be the owner in the case of an owner occupied
residential dwelling, or the tenant, where such tenant is the primary lessee or
renter of a residential dwelling or dwelling unit.
RESIDENTIAL DWELLING: Any building or portion thereof containing one or more
dwelling units occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a
residence by one or more families, including single-family dwellings, two-
family dwellings, and multiple- family dwellings as such terms are defined in
title 15 of this code.
RESIDENTIAL OCCUPANCIES: A. Any of the following uses as such terms are defined
in title 15 of this code:
      1.   Residential facilities for elderly persons or residential facilities
for persons with a disability;
      2.   Mobile homes, manufactured homes;
      3.   Hotels, motels, boarding houses, residential vacation rentals, bed
and breakfast inns, single room occupancies;
      4.   Fraternity or sorority houses, bachelor or bachelorette dwelling
units, educational institutions with housing;
      5.   Assisted living facilities, nursing homes, retirement homes;
      6.   Protective housing facilities, rehabilitation treatment facilities,
whether licensed or unlicensed, transitional housing facilities, shelters for
the homeless; and
      7.   Adult daycare facilities, daycare centers, nurseries for children.
   B.   Any residential occupancy or any institutional occupancy with sleeping
units as such terms are defined in the building codes.
   C.   Any other occupancy used for sleeping purposes.
SEPARATE SLEEPING AREA: Bedrooms or sleeping rooms separated by other use
areas, such as a kitchen or living room, but not including bathrooms.
SLEEPING UNIT: A room or space in which people sleep, which can also include
permanent provisions for living, eating, and either sanitation or kitchen
facilities but not both.
(Ord. 2016-61, 12-20-2016)
12-17-3: RESPONSIBILITIES:
   A.   All existing residential occupancies and residential dwellings,
containing fuel fired appliances or having attached garages, shall be equipped
with CO detectors in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
   B.   The owner of a residential occupancy shall be responsible to:
      1.   Install and maintain required CO detector(s) in such residential
occupancy in accordance with the requirements of this chapter;
      2.   Test and replace all batteries necessary for operation of a required
CO detector; and
      3.   Immediately repair or replace any defective CO detector required
under the provisions of this chapter.
   C.   The occupant of a residential dwelling or dwelling unit constructed
prior to 2005 shall:
      1.   Install and maintain CO detector(s) in such residential dwelling in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
      2.   Test and replace all batteries necessary for operation of a required
CO detector; and
      3.   Immediately repair or replace any defective CO detector required
under the provisions of this chapter.
   D.   The owner of a residential dwelling or dwelling unit constructed after
2004 shall install and maintain CO detector(s) in accordance with the
requirements of the building codes.
   E.   A tenant in possession of a residential dwelling or dwelling unit
constructed after 2004 shall be responsible for:
      1.   Testing and replacing any batteries necessary for operation of a
required CO detector;
      2.   Informing the owner of a CO detector malfunction; and
      3.   Repairing or replacing a defective CO detector in the event that the
defective condition was caused by the tenant, the tenant's family, or the
tenant's guests or invitees, by inappropriate use or misuse of the dwelling or
dwelling unit during the rental term or any extension of it.
(Ord. 2012-8, 2-7-2012)
12-17-4: CO DETECTOR INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   CO detector(s) shall be centrally located outside of each separate
sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of the bedrooms or sleeping rooms.
Residential occupancies and residential dwellings shall be considered to be in
compliance with this requirement if CO detectors are installed as follows:
      1.   Within a dwelling unit, on the ceiling or wall outside of each
separate sleeping area within twenty feet (20') of any door leading to a
bedroom or sleeping room;
      2.   Where sleeping units, or more than six (6) dwelling units, share a
common hallway, on the ceiling or wall of the common hallway within forty feet
(40') of any door leading to a dwelling unit or a sleeping unit; and
      3.   Within any sleeping unit where a CO detector is not located in the
adjacent common hallway in accordance with subsection A2 of this section.
   B.   A residential occupancy or residential dwelling shall be considered to
be in compliance with subsection A of this section, if CO detectors are
installed and located in accordance with building codes in effect on January 1,
2007.
   C.   It is the intention of this chapter to implement the requirements of
the existing building codes, including NFPA 720, effective February 7, 2005, to
the greatest extent practicable for existing residential occupancies and
residential dwellings. The building official or the fire marshal may approve
alternative locations or methods for the installation of CO detectors, if the
result would meet the spirit and intent of the building codes and NFPA 720. The
building official, in coordination with the fire marshal, may also adopt
written guidelines illustrating or describing required locations of CO
detectors, and any approved alternative locations or methods for bringing
residential occupancies and residential dwellings into compliance with the
requirements of this chapter.
   D.   A CO detector is deemed approved for purposes of this chapter if it
complies with all applicable state and federal regulations, and bears the label
of a nationally recognized standard testing laboratory and meets the revised
standard of at least UL 2034 dated October 1, 1995, and subsequent revision or
its equivalent.
   E.   Each CO detector will be mounted in accordance with the manufacturer's
instructions, though ceiling mounting is preferred. CO detectors will not be
mounted in areas of low air movement (dead air spaces).
   F.   If a CO detector is required to be installed in a common hallway:
      1.   Any CO detector found to be tampered with shall be replaced with a
hard wired device (missing or inoperable batteries shall not constitute
tampering).
      2.   Any CO detector found to be missing a battery shall be replaced with
a tamperproof CO detector with a sealed battery.
(Ord. 2012-8, 2-7-2012)
12-17-5: PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any owner or tenant of a residential occupancy
or residential dwelling to fail to install and maintain an operable CO detector
when required under the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or render ineffective a
CO detector installed to satisfy the requirements of this chapter. This
provision shall not apply to a building owner, manager, tenant, or his/her
agent in the normal procedure of repairing or replacing a CO detector.
   C.   No person shall, without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface,
damage, destroy or otherwise improperly tamper with a CO detector required to
be installed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter so as to destroy or
diminish its effectiveness or availability for its intended purpose.
(Ord. 2012-8, 2-7-2012)
12-17-6: ENFORCEMENT RESPONSIBILITY:
The building official and the fire chief, or their designees, shall monitor
compliance with this chapter and may perform enforcement inspections upon, but
not limited to, the following instances: when notified of a change in
occupancy; when reviewing or inspecting the construction, repair,
rehabilitation or renovation of the interior of a residential occupancy
pursuant to a required permit; when inspecting for the purpose of compliance
with the good landlord incentive program; when inspecting for any other purpose
under the provisions of this code; or when on the premises for any lawful
purpose, including, but not limited to, such purposes as responding to a fire
or other request for fire department services.
(Ord. 2012-8, 2-7-2012)
12-17-7: PENALTIES AND REMEDIES FOR VIOLATIONS:
   A.   Infraction: A violation of the provisions of this chapter is an
infraction and upon conviction shall be punishable as set forth in title 1,
chapter 4, article A of this code.
   B.   Civil Penalties: Owners and tenants who fail to correct a violation of
the provisions of this chapter applicable to them after notice of violation and
expiration of the warning period shall be subject to a civil penalty in the
amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) pursuant to title 1, chapter 4, article B of
this code; provided that such penalty will be suspended if the responsible
party shows evidence of compliance within thirty (30) days of issuance of the
civil citation.
   C.   Other Remedies: This chapter may also be enforced by injunction,
mandamus, judicial abatement or any other appropriate action in law or equity.
   D.   Daily Violations: Each day that any violation of this chapter continues
shall be considered a separate offense for purposes of the penalties and
remedies available to the city.
   E.   Compliance: Accumulation of penalties for violations, but not the
obligation for payment of penalties already accrued, shall stop on correction
of the violation.
   F.   Cumulative: Any one, all, or any combination of the foregoing penalties
and remedies may be used to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   G.   Civil Actions: A violation of this chapter shall not be deemed by
virtue of such violation to constitute evidence of negligence or contributory
negligence or comparative negligence in any civil action or proceeding for
damages. A violation of this chapter shall also not constitute a defense in any
civil action or proceeding involving a claim on an insurance policy.
(Ord. 2012-8, 2-7-2012)
CHAPTER 18
ODOR NUISANCE CONTROL AND ABATEMENT
SECTION:
12-18-1: Purpose
12-18-2: Definitions
12-18-3: Prohibited Activities
12-18-4: Exempt Activities
12-18-5: Objectionable Odor Determination
12-18-6: Observation And Measurement Procedures
12-18-7: Abatement Of Objectionable Odors
12-18-8: Trade Secrets And Proprietary Information
12-18-9: Affirmative Defense
12-18-10: Enforcement; Violations; And Penalties
12-18-11: Conflict With Other Ordinances
12-18-12: Effective Date
12-18-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to assure the comfort, convenience, safety,
health and welfare of the residents of the city, to promote the development of
an economically sound and stable community, and to provide for the prevention,
control, and abatement of public odor nuisance. The city council finds and
concludes that because most odorous pollutants have a complex chemical
composition and may elicit a broad spectrum of responses by the receptors, both
analytical and sensory data are useful to measure and characterize odors and to
determine the necessary degree of odor control.
(Ord. 2007-14, 5-1-2007)
12-18-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the indicated meaning:
AMBIENT AIR: That portion of the atmosphere, external to buildings, to which
the general public has access.
ANIMAL AND MARINE MATTER: Any product or derivative of animal life.
BEST AVAILABLE CONTROL TECHNOLOGY ("BACT"): The utilization of those
technologies, processes, procedures, or operating methods or alterations by an
industry or other source which results in the elimination or the maximum
achievable reduction of odor pollution from an odor emission point source.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: The duly appointed building official of the city, or
the building official's duly authorized representative.
FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT: Any fixed or mobile restaurant, coffee shop,
cafeteria, short order cafe, luncheonette, grill, tea room, sandwich shop, soda
fountain, tavern, bar, cocktail lounge, nightclub, private club, roadside
stand, private, public, nonprofit organization or institution routinely serving
food, catering kitchen, commissary or similar place in which food is prepared,
served and sold for human consumption on or off the premises; and any other
eating or drinking establishment or operation where food is served or provided
for public consumption, with or without charge.
ODOR: That property of an emission which stimulates the sense of smell.
PROCESS: Any action, operation, or treatment and the equipment used in
connection therewith, and all methods or forms of manufacturing or processing
that may emit smoke, particulate matter or gaseous matter.
RENDERING: Any heating process, including cooking, drying, dehydrating,
digesting, evaporating and protein and/or oil concentrating of animal or marine
matter.
(Ord. 2007-14, 5-1-2007)
12-18-3: PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES:
No person shall within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city:
   A.   Cause or allow the emission of odorous air contaminants from any source
such as to result in objectionable odors at or beyond the lot line of the
source;
   B.   Cause the erection, continuance or use of any building or place for any
business, trade, employment or manufacture which, by noxious exhalations or
offensive smells, annoys, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, or
safety of three (3) or more persons and creates a public nuisance as defined in
section 76-10-803 of the Utah code;
   C.   Do any process, rendering or operation, or use any device, machine,
equipment, or other contrivance for the rendering of animal or marine matter
unless all gases, vapors and gas entrailed effluents from these processes are
controlled in such a manner as to effectively abate any objectionable odor by
utilizing the best available control technology.
(Ord. 2007-14, 5-1-2007)
12-18-4: EXEMPT ACTIVITIES:
   A.   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any device, machine,
equipment, or other contrivance that is used exclusively for the processing of
food for a food service establishment.
   B.   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any device, machine,
equipment, or other contrivance that manufactures food for human consumption,
but not exclusively for a food service establishment, unless such device,
machine, equipment, or other contrivance emits odors deemed objectionable
pursuant to subsection 12-18-5C of this chapter.
   C.   No odor source, land use, activity, or person shall be exempt from this
chapter because of grandfathering or because of being an existing use or
activity at the time this chapter is enacted. This chapter applies to all
existing and future odor sources, land use, activities and persons in the city,
except as otherwise provided herein.
(Ord. 2007-14, 5-1-2007)
12-18-5: OBJECTIONABLE ODOR DETERMINATION:
An odor will be deemed objectionable and is a public nuisance when any of the
following occur:
   A.   An odor creates a public nuisance at common law; or
   B.   The erection, continuance or use of any building or place for the
exercise of a trade, employment or manufacture which, by noxious exhalations or
offensive smells, becomes injurious and dangerous to the health, comfort or
property of individuals, or of the public; or
   C.   All the members of a panel consisting of the code enforcement officer
and three (3) residents of the city appointed by the mayor to assist the code
enforcement officer to investigate complaints and who are not aggrieved by the
source determine following concurrent, personal observation, that the odor at
or beyond the property line of the source, or on or adjacent to residential,
recreational, institutional, retail sales, hotel or educational premises, is
objectionable taking into account its character, intensity, duration,
frequency, and location, and are able to identify the source; or
   D.   The ambient air at or beyond the property line of the source, or on or
adjacent to residential, recreational, institutional, retail sales, hotel or
educational premises, has an odor reading equal to or greater than seven (7) D/
T (dilution to threshold).
(Ord. 2007-14, 5-1-2007)
12-18-6: OBSERVATION AND MEASUREMENT PROCEDURES:
   A.   For the purpose of this chapter, two (2) odor observations and/or
measurements shall be made within a period of one hour, these measurements
being separated by at least fifteen (15) minutes.
   B.   Odor observations and/or measurements taken to arrive at a
determination that an objectionable odor exists shall be made at or beyond the
property line of the source or at or near places where people live or work.
   C.   The nasal ranger field olfactometer, or other instrument, device, or
technique designated by the code enforcement officer, may be used in the
evaluation of an odor and may be used as a measuring device in the enforcement
of this chapter.
   D.   Personnel using the nasal ranger field olfactometer or other approved
device shall be trained to operate such device.
   E.   The "dilution to threshold" ratio is a measure of the number of
dilutions needed to make the odorous ambient air nondetectable. Field
olfactometry calculates the dilution to threshold (D/T) ratio as:
      D/T = Volume of carbon filtered air
         Volume of odorous air
(Ord. 2007-14, 5-1-2007)
12-18-7: ABATEMENT OF OBJECTIONABLE ODORS:
The code enforcement officer or any court may order the abatement of
objectionable odors by ordering:
   A.   Any person who operates or uses any device, machine, equipment or other
contrivance for the rendering of animal matter to provide that all gases,
vapors, and gas entrailed effluents from such facility are incinerated at a
temperature of not less than one thousand two hundred degrees Fahrenheit
(1,200°F) for a period not less than 0.3 second, or processed by condensation
or such manner which will provide the best available control technology.
   B.   Any person incinerating or processing gas, vapor, or gas entrailed
effluents to provide, properly install, and maintain in good working order and
in operation, devices to monitor temperature, pressure, or other operating
conditions.
   C.   Effective new or existing odor control devices, systems, or measures be
installed and operated such that no vent, exhaust pipe, blowoff pipe, or
opening of any kind shall discharge into the ambient air any odorous matter,
vapor, gases, or dust, or any combination thereof, which create objectionable
odors.
   D.   Odor producing materials to be stored, transported, and handled in a
manner that:
      1.   Odors produced from materials are confined, abated or treated using
the best available control technology and that accumulation of such materials
resulting from spillage or other escape is prevented.
      2.   Whenever dust, fumes, gases, mist, odorous matter, vapors, or any
contamination thereof escapes from a building used for rendering animal or
marine matter in such a manner and amount as to cause an objectionable odor,
the code enforcement officer or court may require that the building or
buildings in which rendering, handling, and storage are done be tightly closed
and ventilated in such a manner that all airborne effluent materials leaving
the building be treated by an effective means using the best available control
technology to treat odorous matter before release to the ambient air.
(Ord. 2007-14, 5-1-2007)
12-18-8: TRADE SECRETS AND PROPRIETARY INFORMATION:
When determining compliance to any of the terms of this chapter, the city may
take whatever acts are necessary to protect trade secrets and/or proprietary
information to the extent permitted by the laws of the state of Utah.
(Ord. 2007-14, 5-1-2007)
12-18-9: AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE:
It shall be a defense to a violation of this chapter when the operator of an
agricultural or manufacturing process, other than those using rendering
processes, demonstrates that the best available control technology is being
utilized on a continual basis in order to control the emission of objectionable
odorous gases created by such agricultural or manufacturing process.
(Ord. 2007-14, 5-1-2007)
12-18-10: ENFORCEMENT; VIOLATIONS; AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Enforcement: The code enforcement officer shall be responsible to
administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. The code enforcement
officer, upon finding that any provision of this chapter is being violated, is
authorized to issue notices of violations, orders to correct, schedules to
correct, to enter into administrative consent decrees and agreements and to
request the city attorney to commence criminal proceedings or institute other
legal proceedings to enjoin and/or abate violations of this chapter. Such
proceedings may be in the name of the city and on the behalf of, and as
representative of and as a party with individual residents of the city, who are
aggrieved by the violations and to recover penalties and costs for the city.
   B.   Misdemeanor: A violation of this chapter is a class B misdemeanor,
subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4, article A of this code.
   C.   Judicial Remedies: This title may also be enforced by injunction,
mandamus, abatement, or any other appropriate judicial action in law or equity,
including abatement of public nuisances pursuant to title 1, chapter 4, article
C of this code.
   D.   Civil Penalties: Failure to correct a violation of this chapter after
notice of violation and expiration of the warning period may be enforced by
imposition of the following civil penalties pursuant to title 1, chapter 4,
article B of this code:
      1.   The first civil citation issued after expiration of the warning
period shall subject the responsible party to the initial civil penalty of one
hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00).
      2.   The second civil citation issued after expiration of the warning
period and the prior imposition of the initial penalty shall subject the
responsible party to the intermediate penalty of two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00).
      3.   Any subsequent civil citation issued after expiration of the warning
period and the prior imposition of the intermediate penalty, or any reoccurring
violation under section
1-4B-6 of this code, shall subject the responsible party to the maximum penalty
of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
   E.   Every Day Constitutes Separate Offense: Every day that a violation of
this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense or violation for
purposes of the penalties and remedies available herein.
   F.   Remedies Not Exclusive: Any one, all, or any combination of the
foregoing penalties and remedies may be used to enforce the provisions of this
title.
(Ord. 2007-14, 5-1-2007)
12-18-11: CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES:
Whenever the requirements of this chapter are inconsistent with the
requirements of any other ordinance, code or statute, the more restrictive
requirement shall apply.
(Ord. 2007-14, 5-1-2007)
12-18-12: EFFECTIVE DATE:
The requirements of this chapter go into effect on July 25, 2007.
(Ord. 2007-14, 5-1-2007)
CHAPTER 19
EMPLOYMENT DISCRIMINATION
SECTION:
12-19-1: Purpose
12-19-2: Administration
12-19-3: No Private Right Of Action; No Special Rights
12-19-4: Severability
12-19-5: Definitions
12-19-6: Exemptions
12-19-7: Unlawful Employment Practices
12-19-8: Procedures For Filing Complaints
12-19-9: Investigation
12-19-10: Conciliation
12-19-11: Disposition Of A Complaint
12-19-12: Offenses And Penalties
12-19-1: PURPOSE:
Every individual in the city has the right to work and earn wages through
gainful employment. Discriminatory employment practices are detrimental because
they impede the social and economic progress of the city by preventing all of
the city's citizens from contributing to or fully participating in the
cultural, spiritual, social and commercial life of the community, which is
essential to the growth and vitality of the city's neighborhoods and
businesses. The Utah antidiscrimination act, Utah code section 34A-5-101 et
seq., provides civil relief for employment related discrimination based on
race; color; sex; pregnancy; childbirth, or pregnancy related conditions;
religion; national origin; age (if 40 years of age or older); and disability,
but does not address discrimination based on sexual orientation or gender
identity.
The city has determined that discrimination in employment on the basis of
sexual orientation and gender identity must be addressed. The denial or
deprivation of employment rights because of an individual's sexual orientation
or gender identity is detrimental to the health, safety, and welfare of the
city's citizens and damages the city's economic well being. The purpose of this
chapter is to provide a clear and comprehensive mandate for the prevention and
elimination of discrimination in employment in the city against individuals
based upon sexual orientation or gender identity.
(Ord. 2011-11, 3-15-2011)
12-19-2: ADMINISTRATION:
The mayor is responsible for administering and implementing this chapter.
(Ord. 2011-11, 3-15-2011)
12-19-3: NO PRIVATE RIGHT OF ACTION; NO SPECIAL RIGHTS:
This chapter does not create a private cause of action, nor does it create any
right or remedy that is the same or substantially equivalent to the remedies
provided under federal or state law. This chapter does not create a protected
group of persons or any special rights or privileges which would not be
available to all of the city's citizens because every person has a sexual
orientation and a gender identity. Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted
to require any person to grant preferential treatment to any person based on
sexual orientation or gender identity.
(Ord. 2011-11, 3-15-2011)
12-19-4: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, sentence, paragraph, term, definition or provision of this
chapter is for any reason determined to be illegal, invalid, superseded by
other authority or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, or
by the civil rights act of 1968 or the Utah antidiscrimination act, or by any
state or federal regulatory authority having jurisdiction thereof, such portion
shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such
determination shall have no effect on the validity of any other section,
sentence, paragraph, term, definition or provision of this chapter, all of
which will remain in full force and effect.
(Ord. 2011-11, 3-15-2011)
12-19-5: DEFINITIONS:
In this chapter:
ADMINISTRATOR: The person designated by the mayor to receive, investigate, and
conciliate complaints under this chapter and includes the administrator's
designated representatives.
CITY: The city of Ogden City, Utah.
COMPLAINANT: A person, including the administrator, who files a complaint under
this chapter.
CONCILIATION: The attempted resolution of issues raised in a complaint filed
under this chapter, or raised in the investigation of the complaint, through
informal negotiations involving the complainant, the respondent, and the
administrator.
CONCILIATION AGREEMENT: A written agreement setting forth the resolution of
issues by conciliation under this chapter.
DISCRIMINATION: Any direct or indirect exclusion, distinction, segregation,
limitation, refusal, denial, or other differentiation in the treatment of a
person because of a person's actual or perceived sexual orientation or gender
identity or because of a person's association with any such person.
Discrimination shall not be interpreted to require or to grant or accord
preferential treatment to any person because of that person's sexual
orientation or gender identity.
EMPLOYEE: Any individual applying with or employed by an employer. The term
does not include an elected official.
EMPLOYER: Any person employing fifteen (15) or more employees in the city for
each working day in each of twenty (20) or more calendar weeks in the current
or preceding calendar year, and includes any agent of such a person.
EMPLOYMENT AGENCY: Any person, and any agent of a person, undertaking to
procure employees or opportunities to work for any other person in the city or
holding itself out to be equipped to procure employees or opportunities to work
for any other person in the city.
GENDER IDENTITY: A person's actual or perceived sense of being male, female or
transgendered, without regard to the person's physiology.
LABOR ORGANIZATION: Any organization that exists for the purpose in whole or in
part of collective dealing with employers concerning grievances, terms or
conditions of employment; or other mutual aid or protection in connection with
employment.
MAYOR: The duly elected or appointed and qualified mayor of Ogden City.
OTHERWISE QUALIFIED: A person who possesses the following required by an
employer for any particular job, job classification, or position:
   A.   Education;
   B.   Training;
   C.   Ability;
   D.   Moral character;
   E.   Integrity;
   F.   Disposition to work;
   G.   Adherence to reasonable rules and regulations; and
   H.   Other job related qualifications required by an employer.
PERSON: One or more individuals, partnerships, associations, corporations,
legal representatives, trusts or trustees, receivers and the city.
RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATION: A religious corporation, association, educational
institution, society, trust or any entity or association which is a wholly
owned or controlled subsidiary or agency of any religious corporation,
association, society, trust or corporation sole.
RESPONDENT: A person alleged in a complaint as having committed an unlawful
practice under this chapter.
SEXUAL ORIENTATION: A person's actual or perceived orientation as heterosexual,
homosexual, or bisexual.
UNLAWFUL PRACTICE: A discriminatory act or practice relating to employment that
is prohibited under this chapter.
(Ord. 2011-11, 3-15-2011)
12-19-6: EXEMPTIONS:
This chapter does not apply to:
   A.   A religious organization;
   B.   An expressive association whose employment of a person protected by
this chapter would significantly burden the association's rights of expressive
association under Boy Scouts Of America v. Dale, 530 U.S. 640 (2000); the
United States government, any of its departments or agencies, or any
corporation wholly owned by it; or
   C.   The United States government, any of its departments or agencies, or
any corporation wholly owned by it; or the state of Utah or any of its
departments, agencies, or political subdivisions.
(Ord. 2011-11, 3-15-2011)
12-19-7: UNLAWFUL EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES:
   A.   Employers: An employer may not refuse to hire, promote, discharge,
demote, or terminate any person, and may not retaliate against, harass, or
discriminate in matters of compensation or in terms, privileges, and conditions
of employment against any person otherwise qualified because of a person's
sexual orientation or gender identity.
   B.   Employment Agencies: An employment agency may not refuse to list and
properly classify for employment, or refuse to refer a person for employment,
in a known available job for which the person is otherwise qualified because of
a person's sexual orientation or gender identity.
   C.   Labor Organizations: A labor organization may not exclude any person
otherwise qualified from full membership rights in the labor organization,
expel the person from membership in the labor organization, or otherwise
discriminate against or harass any of the labor organization's members in full
employment of work opportunity, or representation, because of a person's sexual
orientation or gender identity.
   D.   Training Programs: An employer, labor organization, joint
apprenticeship committee, or vocational school, providing, coordinating, or
controlling apprenticeship programs, or providing, coordinating, or controlling
on the job training programs, instruction, training, or retraining programs may
not deny to, or withhold from, any qualified person, the right to be admitted
to, or participate in any apprenticeship training program, on the job training
program, or other occupational instruction, training or retraining program
because of a person's sexual orientation or gender identity.
   E.   Notices And Advertisements: Unless based upon a bona fide occupational
qualification, or required by and given to an agency of government for security
reasons, an employer, employment agency, or labor organization may not print,
or circulate, or cause to be printed or circulated, any statement,
advertisement, or publication, use any form of application for employment or
membership, or make any inquiry in connection with prospective employment or
membership that expresses, either directly or indirectly any limitation,
specification, or discrimination because of a person's sexual orientation or
gender identity.
It is unlawful for a joint labor-management committee controlling
apprenticeship or other training or retraining (including on the job training
programs) to print or publish, or cause to be printed or published, any notice
or advertisement relating to admission to, or employment in, any program
established to provide apprenticeship or other training by the joint labor-
management committee that indicates any preference, limitation, specification,
or discrimination based on sexual orientation or gender identity.
Nothing in this chapter prohibits a notice or advertisement from indicating a
preference, limitation, specification, or discrimination based on sexual
orientation or gender identity when sexual orientation or gender identity is a
bona fide occupational qualification for employment.
   F.   No Preferential Treatment: Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted
to require any employer, employment agency, labor organization, vocational
school, joint labor-management committee, or apprenticeship program subject to
this chapter to grant preferential treatment to any person because of the
person's sexual orientation or gender identity on account of an imbalance which
may exist with respect to the total number or percentage of persons of any
sexual orientation or gender identity employed by any employer, referred or
classified for employment by an employment agency or labor organization,
admitted to membership or classified by any labor organization, or admitted to
or employed in, any apprenticeship or other training program, in comparison
with the total number or percentage of persons of that sexual orientation or
gender identity available in the city's available work force.
   G.   Expression Of Religious And Other Beliefs: A person's actual or
symbolic religious or other deeply held beliefs, shall not be the sole basis
for a finding of discrimination under this chapter. Expressions of religious or
other deeply held beliefs are exempt from this chapter, provided they do not
become so pervasive or severe as to alter the terms, conditions or privileges
of employment. Religious or other deeply held beliefs may not, however, excuse
conduct that otherwise violates this chapter. This chapter is intended to
prohibit discriminatory conduct, not punish beliefs or the expression thereof.
(Ord. 2011-11, 3-15-2011)
12-19-8: PROCEDURES FOR FILING COMPLAINTS:
   A.   Any person who claims to have been injured by an unlawful employment
practice subject to the city's jurisdiction under this chapter may file a
complaint with the administrator. A complaint may also be filed by the
administrator if the administrator has reasonable cause to believe that a
person has committed an unlawful employment practice. A complaint must be filed
within one hundred eighty (180) calendar days after an alleged unlawful
employment practice has occurred. Any complaint dismissed for insufficiency
pursuant to this chapter may be amended and refiled at any time within filing
deadline set forth in this subsection.
   B.   A complaint must be in writing on a form provided by the administrator,
made under oath or affirmation, and contain the following information:
      1.   The complainant's name, address, and signature;
      2.   The date the alleged unlawful employment practice occurred;
      3.   A detailed statement of the facts upon which the allegation of an
unlawful employment practice is based; and
      4.   The respondent's name and address.
   C.   After the filing of a complaint, the administrator shall review the
complaint to determine sufficiency. A complaint shall be deemed sufficient if
it alleges detailed facts that, if presumed to be true, would constitute a
violation of this chapter. An insufficient complaint may be dismissed by the
administrator. If upon review the complaint is deemed sufficient, the
administrator shall promptly:
      1.   Provide the respondent named in the complaint written notice that a
complaint alleging the commission of an unlawful employment practice has been
filed against the respondent;
      2.   Furnish a copy of the complaint to the respondent; and
      3.   Advise the respondent of the respondent's procedural rights and
obligations, including the right to file a written, signed, and verified
informal answer to the complaint within fifteen (15) days after service of
notice of the complaint.
   D.   Not later than the fifteenth day after service of the notice and copy
of the complaint, a respondent may file an answer to the complaint. The answer
must be in writing, made under oath or affirmation, and contain the following
information:
      1.   The respondent's name, address, telephone number, and signature of
the respondent or the respondent's attorney, if any; and
      2.   A concise statement of facts in response to the allegations in the
complaint, including facts of any defense or exception.
(Ord. 2011-11, 3-15-2011)
12-19-9: INVESTIGATION:
   A.   Upon the filing of a complaint, the administrator shall commence an
investigation to determine the facts behind the complaint and whether there is
reasonable cause to believe the respondent committed an unlawful employment
practice, except that no investigation may commence if, after reviewing the
allegations of the complaint, the administrator determines that the complaint
does not come within the scope of this chapter. Upon determining that a
particular complaint does not come within the scope of this chapter, the
administrator shall dismiss the complaint, notify the complainant and
respondent and take no further action.
   B.   In connection with any investigation of a complaint filed under this
chapter, the administrator shall seek the voluntary cooperation of any person
to:
      1.   Obtain access to premises, records, documents, individuals, and any
other possible source of information;
      2.   Examine, record, and copy necessary materials; and
      3.   Take and record testimony or statements of any person reasonably
necessary for the furtherance of the investigation.
   C.   The administrator may request issuance of an executive branch subpoena
to compel the attendance of a witness or the production of relevant materials
or documents pursuant to title 4, chapter 4, article B of this code.
   D.   The administrator may dismiss a complaint at any time during the
investigation if the administrator determines that:
      1.   The complaint was not filed within the required time period;
      2.   The location of the alleged unlawful employment practice is not
within the city's jurisdiction;
      3.   The employer does not employ a sufficient number of employees in the
city to meet this chapter's jurisdictional requirements;
      4.   The facts are insufficient to initiate a proceeding for the
administrative imposition of civil penalties;
      5.   The alleged unlawful employment practice is not a violation of this
chapter;
      6.   The complainant refuses to cooperate with the administrator in the
investigation of the complaint or enforcement of an executed conciliation
agreement;
      7.   The complainant cannot be located after the administrator has
performed a reasonable search; or
      8.   A conciliation agreement has been executed by the complainant and
respondent.
   E.   To avoid duplication of enforcement actions, the administrator may, but
is not required to, dismiss the complaint if the administrator determines that
the alleged unlawful practice, if proven, violates existing federal or state
law. If dismissed, the administrator will refer complainant to appropriate
federal or state enforcement agencies.
(Ord. 2011-11, 3-15-2011)
12-19-10: CONCILIATION:
   A.   During or after the investigation, but subsequent to the mailing of the
notice of the complaint to the respondent, the administrator shall, if the
respondent appears to have committed an unlawful employment practice, attempt
to conciliate the complaint. In conciliating a complaint, the administrator
shall try to achieve a just resolution and obtain assurances that the
respondent will satisfactorily remedy any violation of the complainant's rights
and take action to ensure the elimination of both present and future unlawful
employment practices. A conciliation agreement may include: sensitivity
training for the respondent and/or the respondent's employees; the respondent's
agreement to adopt and pursue a policy of nondiscrimination in employment
practices; and the respondent's agreement to not engage in discriminatory
practices in the future. Respondent's acknowledgment of a violation of this
chapter shall not be a prerequisite to entering into a conciliation agreement.
   B.   A conciliation agreement executed under this section must be in writing
in a form approved by the city attorney and must be signed and verified by the
respondent and the complainant, subject to approval of the administrator who
shall indicate approval by signing the agreement.
   C.   If a respondent voluntarily enters into a conciliation agreement, the
administrator shall immediately dismiss the complaint.
(Ord. 2011-11, 3-15-2011)
12-19-11: DISPOSITION OF A COMPLAINT:
If, upon completion of an investigation of a complaint, the administrator
determines that an unlawful employment practice has occurred and is unable to
secure an acceptable conciliation agreement from the respondent, then the
administrator is authorized to initiate a proceeding for the administrative
imposition of civil penalties pursuant to chapter 12 of this title, by issuing
a notice of violation to respondent. No warning period shall apply prior to the
imposition of a civil penalty pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 2011-11, 3-15-2011)
12-19-12: OFFENSES AND PENALTIES:
A person violates this chapter if the person engages in any action made
unlawful by this chapter. An offense committed under this chapter by an
employer is punishable by a civil penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(Ord. 2011-11, 3-15-2011)
CHAPTER 20
HOUSING DISCRIMINATION
SECTION:
12-20-1: Purpose
12-20-2: Administration
12-20-3: No Private Right Of Action; No Special Rights
12-20-4: Severability
12-20-5: Definitions
12-20-6: Exemptions
12-20-7: Unlawful Housing Practices
12-20-8: Procedures For Filing Complaints
12-20-9: Investigation
12-20-10: Conciliation
12-20-11: Disposition Of A Complaint
12-20-12: Offenses And Penalties
12-20-1: PURPOSE:
Every individual in the city has the right to seek housing. Discriminatory
housing practices are detrimental because they impede the social and economic
progress of the city by preventing all of the city's citizens from contributing
to or fully participating in the cultural, spiritual, social and commercial
life of the community, which is essential to the growth and vitality of the
city's neighborhoods and businesses.
The Utah fair housing act, Utah code section, 57-21-1 et seq., addresses
housing related discrimination based on race; color; religion; sex; national
origin; familial status; source of income; and disability, but does not address
discrimination based on sexual orientation or gender identity.
The city has determined that discrimination in housing on the basis of sexual
orientation and gender identity must be addressed. The denial or deprivation of
access to housing because of an individual's sexual orientation or gender
identity is detrimental to the health, safety, and welfare of the city's
citizens and damages the city's economic well being. The purpose of this
chapter is to provide a clear and comprehensive mandate for the prevention and
elimination of discrimination in housing in the city against individuals based
upon sexual orientation or gender identity.
(Ord. 2011-10, 3-15-2011)
12-20-2: ADMINISTRATION:
The mayor is responsible for administering and implementing this chapter.
(Ord. 2011-10, 3-15-2011)
12-20-3: NO PRIVATE RIGHT OF ACTION; NO SPECIAL RIGHTS:
This chapter does not create a private cause of action, nor does it create any
right or remedy that is the same or substantially equivalent to the remedies
provided under federal or state law. This chapter does not create a protected
group of persons or any special rights or privileges which would not be
available to all of the city's citizens because every person has a sexual
orientation and a gender identity. Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted
to require any person to grant preferential treatment to any person based on
sexual orientation or gender identity.
(Ord. 2011-10, 3-15-2011)
12-20-4: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, sentence, paragraph, term, definition or provision of this
chapter is for any reason determined to be illegal, invalid, superseded by
other authority or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, or
by the civil rights act of 1968 or the Utah fair housing act, or by any state
or federal regulatory authority having jurisdiction thereof, such portion shall
be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such
determination shall have no effect on the validity of any other section,
sentence, paragraph, term, definition or provision of this chapter, all of
which will remain in full force and effect.
(Ord. 2011-10, 3-15-2011)
12-20-5: DEFINITIONS:
In this chapter:
ADMINISTRATOR: The person designated by the mayor to receive, investigate, and
conciliate complaints under this chapter and includes the administrator's
designated representatives.
CITY: The city of Ogden City, Utah.
COMPLAINANT: A person, including the administrator, who files a complaint under
this chapter.
CONCILIATION: The attempted resolution of issues raised in a complaint filed
under this chapter, or raised in the investigation of the complaint, through
informal negotiations involving the complainant, the respondent, and the
administrator.
CONCILIATION AGREEMENT: A written agreement setting forth the resolution of
issues by conciliation under this chapter.
DISCRIMINATION: Any direct or indirect exclusion, distinction, segregation,
limitation, refusal, denial, or other differentiation in the treatment of a
person or persons because of a person's actual or perceived sexual orientation
or gender identity or because of a person's association with any such person.
Discrimination shall not be interpreted to require or to grant or accord
preferential treatment to any person because of that person's sexual
orientation or gender identity.
DWELLING: Any building or structure, or a portion of a building or structure,
occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence of one or
more families inside the city and vacant land that is offered for sale or lease
for the construction or location of a dwelling inside the city.
GENDER IDENTITY: A person's actual or perceived sense of being male, female or
transgendered, without regard to the person's physiology.
MAYOR: The duly elected or appointed and qualified mayor of Ogden City.
PERSON: Includes one or more individuals, corporations, limited liability
companies, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal
representatives, mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts,
unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in cases under the United
States bankruptcy code, receivers, and fiduciaries.
REAL ESTATE BROKER OR SALESPERSON: A principal real estate broker, an associate
real estate broker, or a real estate sales agent as those terms are defined in
Utah code section 61-2-2 or any successor provision.
RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATION: A religious corporation, association, educational
institution, society, trust, or any entity or association which is a wholly
owned or controlled subsidiary or agency of any religious corporation,
association, society, trust or corporation sole.
RENT: To lease, sublease, let, or otherwise grant for a consideration the right
to occupy premises not owned by the occupant.
RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE RELATED TRANSACTION: The making or purchasing loans or
providing other financial assistance for purchasing, constructing, improving,
repairing, or maintaining a dwelling; or secured by residential real estate; or
selling, brokering, or appraising residential real property inside the city.
RESPONDENT: A person alleged in a complaint as having committed an unlawful
housing practice under this chapter.
SEXUAL ORIENTATION: A person's actual or perceived orientation as heterosexual,
homosexual, or bisexual.
UNLAWFUL PRACTICE: A discriminatory act or practice relating to housing that is
prohibited under this chapter.
(Ord. 2011-10, 3-15-2011)
12-20-6: EXEMPTIONS:
This chapter does not apply to a temporary or permanent residence facility
operated by a nonprofit organization; a charitable organization; or a person in
conjunction with a religious organization, association, or society, including
any dormitory operated by a public or private educational institution, or the
rental by any person of shared living space within a single unit of a dwelling
under separate contracts to two (2) or more individuals, if any of the above
discrimination is based on sexual orientation or gender identity for reasons of
tenants' personal modesty or privacy or in the furtherance of a religious
organization's sincerely held religious beliefs.
This chapter does not prohibit or restrict a religious organization or any
nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised, or controlled by or
in conjunction with a religious organization from limiting the sale, rental, or
occupancy of dwellings it owns or operates for primarily noncommercial purposes
to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons.
This chapter does not prohibit distinctions based on a person's inability or
failure to fulfill the terms and conditions, including financial obligations,
of a lease, rental agreement, contract of purchase or sale, mortgage, trust
deed, or other financing agreement. This chapter does not apply to: a) the
United States government, any of its departments or agencies, or any
corporation wholly owned by it; or b) the government of the state of Utah or
any of its departments, agencies, or political subdivision.
(Ord. 2011-10, 3-15-2011)
12-20-7: UNLAWFUL HOUSING PRACTICES:
   A.   Discriminatory Practices: It is a discriminatory housing practice for a
real estate broker, salesperson, or owner of a dwelling, or their agents or
employees, to do any of the following:
      1.   Refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, refuse
to negotiate for the sale or rental, or otherwise deny or make unavailable any
dwelling from any person because of the person's sexual orientation or gender
identity;
      2.   Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or
privileges of the sale or rental of any dwelling or in providing facilities or
services in connection with the dwelling because of the person's sexual
orientation or gender identity;
      3.   Represent to any person that any dwelling is not available for
inspection, sale, or rental when in fact the dwelling is available;
      4.   To make a representation orally or in writing or make, print,
circulate, publish, post, or cause to be made, printed, circulated, published,
or posted any notice, statement, or advertisement, or to use any application
form for the sale or rental of a dwelling, that directly or indirectly
expresses any preference, limitation, or discrimination based on sexual
orientation or gender identity, or expresses any intent to make any such
preference, limitation, or discrimination;
      5.   To induce or attempt to induce, for profit, any person to buy, sell,
or rent any dwelling by making representations about the entry or prospective
entry into the neighborhood of persons of a particular sexual orientation or
gender identity;
      6.   Engage in any discriminatory housing practices because of sexual
orientation or gender identity based upon a person's association with another
person;
      7.   Retaliate against a person for availing themselves of the
protections of this chapter.
   B.   Additional Discriminatory Practices: It is a discriminatory housing
practice for a real estate broker or salesperson to do any of the following
because of a person's sexual orientation or gender identity:
      1.   To discriminate against any person in making available a residential
real estate transaction, or in the terms or conditions of the transaction,
inside the city, because of a person's sexual orientation or gender identity;
      2.   To deny any person access to, or membership or participation in, any
multiple listing service, real estate brokers' organization, or other service,
organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or renting
dwellings inside the city or to discriminate against any person in the terms or
conditions of access, membership, or participation in the organization,
service, or facility inside the city because of a person's sexual orientation
or gender identity; or
      3.   Engage in any discriminatory housing practices inside the city
because of sexual orientation or gender identity based upon a person's
association with another person.
   C.   Exceptions: This chapter does not apply to the following:
      1.   The sale or rental of any single-family dwelling, if the owner:
         a.   Does not own an interest in or title to four (4) or more single-
family dwellings held for lease or sale at one time located inside the city;
         b.   Has not sold two (2) or more single-family dwellings inside the
city in which the owner did not reside in the dwelling within the twenty four
(24) month period preceding the sale or rental of the dwelling; and
         c.   Does not use the services or facilities of any real estate
broker, agent, or salesperson, or of any other person in the business of
selling or renting dwellings, in connection with the sale or rental of the
dwelling inside the city.
      2.   The rental of a dwelling that is occupied or intended to be occupied
by no more than four (4) families living independently of each other, when the
owner actually maintains and occupies part of the dwelling as a residence.
      3.   Nothing in this chapter prohibits conduct against a person because
of the person's conviction by a court of competent jurisdiction of the illegal
manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance under state or federal
law.
      4.   A person's actual or symbolic religious or other deeply held
beliefs, shall not be the sole basis for a finding of discrimination under this
chapter. Expressions of religious or other deeply held beliefs are exempt from
this chapter, provided they do not become so severe or pervasive as to alter
the terms, conditions or privileges of renting a dwelling unit. Religious or
other deeply held beliefs may not, however, excuse conduct that otherwise
violates this chapter. This chapter is intended to prohibit discriminatory
conduct, not punish beliefs or the expression thereof.
(Ord. 2011-10, 3-15-2011)
12-20-8: PROCEDURES FOR FILING COMPLAINTS:
   A.   Any person who claims to have been injured by an unlawful housing
practice may file a complaint with the administrator. A complaint may also be
filed by the administrator if the administrator has reasonable cause to believe
that a person has committed an unlawful housing practice. A complaint must be
filed within one hundred eighty (180) calendar days after an alleged unlawful
housing practice has occurred. Any complaint dismissed for insufficiency
pursuant to this chapter may be amended and refiled at any time within filing
deadline set forth in this subsection.
   B.   A complaint must be in writing on a form provided by the administrator,
made under oath or affirmation, and contain the following information:
      1.   The complainant's name, address, and signature;
      2.   The date the alleged unlawful housing practice occurred;
      3.   A detailed statement of the facts upon which the allegation of an
unlawful practice is based; and
      4.   The respondent's name and address.
   C.   After the filing of a complaint, the administrator shall review the
complaint to determine sufficiency. A complaint shall be deemed sufficient if
it alleges detailed facts that, if presumed to be true, would constitute a
violation of this chapter. An insufficient complaint may be dismissed by the
administrator. If upon review the complaint is deemed sufficient, the
administrator shall promptly:
      1.   Provide the respondent named in the complaint written notice that a
complaint alleging the commission of an unlawful housing practice has been
filed against the respondent;
      2.   Furnish a copy of the complaint to the respondent; and
      3.   Advise the respondent of the respondent's procedural rights and
obligations, including the right to file a written, signed, and verified
informal answer to the complaint within fifteen (15) days after service of
notice of the complaint.
   D.   Not later than the fifteenth day after service of the notice and copy
of the complaint, a respondent may file an answer to the complaint. The answer
must be in writing, made under oath or affirmation, and contain the following
information:
      1.   The respondent's name, address, telephone number, and signature of
the respondent or the respondent's attorney, if any; and
      2.   A concise statement of facts in response to the allegations in the
complaint, including facts of any defense or exception.
(Ord. 2011-10, 3-15-2011)
12-20-9: INVESTIGATION:
   A.   Upon the filing of a complaint, the administrator shall commence an
investigation to determine the facts behind the complaint and whether there is
reasonable cause to believe the respondent committed an unlawful housing
practice, except that no investigation may commence if, after reviewing the
allegations of the complaint, the administrator determines that the complaint
does not come within the scope of this chapter. Upon determining that a
particular complaint does not come within the scope of this chapter, the
administrator shall dismiss the complaint, notify the complainant and the
respondent and take no further action.
   B.   In connection with any investigation of a complaint filed under this
chapter, the administrator shall seek the voluntary cooperation of any person
to:
      1.   Obtain access to premises, records, documents, individuals, and any
other possible source of information;
      2.   Examine, record, and copy necessary materials; and
      3.   Take and record testimony or statements of any person reasonably
necessary for the furtherance of the investigation.
   C.   The administrator may request issuance of an executive branch subpoena
to compel the attendance of a witness or the production of relevant materials
or documents pursuant to title 4, chapter 4, article B of this code.
   D.   The administrator may dismiss a complaint at any time during the
investigation if the administrator determines that:
      1.   The complaint was not filed within the required time period;
      2.   The location of the alleged unlawful housing practice is not within
the city's jurisdiction;
      3.   The alleged unlawful housing practice is not a violation of this
chapter;
      4.   The facts are insufficient to initiate a proceeding for the
administrative imposition of civil penalties;
      5.   The complainant refuses to cooperate with the administrator in the
investigation of the complaint or enforcement of an executed conciliation
agreement;
      6.   The complainant cannot be located after the administrator has
performed a reasonable search; or
      7.   A conciliation agreement has been executed by the complainant and
respondent.
   E.   To avoid duplication of enforcement actions, the administrator may, but
is not required to, dismiss the complaint if the administrator determines that
the alleged unlawful practice, if proven, violates existing federal or state
law. If dismissed, the administrator will refer complainant to appropriate
federal or state enforcement agencies.
(Ord. 2011-10, 3-15-2011)
12-20-10: CONCILIATION:
   A.   During or after the investigation, but subsequent to the mailing of the
notice of the complaint to the respondent, the administrator shall, if it
appears that the respondent has committed an unlawful housing practice, attempt
to conciliate the complaint. In conciliating a complaint, the administrator
shall try to achieve a just resolution and obtain assurances that the
respondent will satisfactorily remedy any violation of the complainant's rights
and take action to ensure the elimination of both present and future unlawful
housing practices. A conciliation agreement may include: sensitivity training
for the respondent and/or the respondent's employees; the respondent's
agreement to adopt and pursue a policy of nondiscrimination in its practices;
and the respondent's agreement to not engage in discriminatory practices in the
future. Respondent's acknowledgment of a violation of this chapter shall not be
a prerequisite to entering into a conciliation agreement.
   B.   A conciliation agreement executed under this section must be in writing
in a form approved by the city attorney and must be signed and verified by the
respondent and the complainant, subject to approval of the administrator who
shall indicate approval by signing the agreement.
   C.   If a respondent voluntarily enters into a conciliation agreement, the
administrator shall immediately dismiss the complaint.
(Ord. 2011-10, 3-15-2011)
12-20-11: DISPOSITION OF A COMPLAINT:
If, upon completion of an investigation of a complaint, the administrator
determines that an unlawful housing practice has occurred and is unable to
secure an acceptable conciliation agreement from the respondent, then the
administrator is authorized to initiate a proceeding for the administrative
imposition of civil penalties pursuant to this chapter, by issuing a notice of
violation to respondent. No warning period shall apply prior to the imposition
of a civil penalty pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 2011-10, 3-15-2011)
12-20-12: OFFENSES AND PENALTIES:
A person violates this chapter if the person intentionally or knowingly
violates a provision of this chapter. An offense committed under this chapter
is punishable by a civil penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(Ord. 2011-10, 3-15-2011)
TITLE 13
ANIMALS
CHAPTER 1
ANIMAL SERVICES ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
13-1-1: Animal Services; Animal Services Coordinator
13-1-2: Reserved
13-1-3: Interference Prohibited
13-1-4: Penalty
13-1-1: ANIMAL SERVICES; ANIMAL SERVICES COORDINATOR:
   A.   Created; Appointment: The animal services functions of the city shall
be located within the police department. The police chief may designate an
employee to serve as the animal services coordinator who shall supervise the
animal services officers and other animal services staff.
   B.   Oath: The animal services coordinator and any person employed by the
police department as an animal services officer, shall, before assuming the
duties of his/her office, take and subscribe the oath of office. The animal
services coordinator and any other employee of the department in whose hands
any public funds may come in the regular discharge of their duties, shall be
bonded under title 2, chapter 5 of this code.
   C.   Powers And Authority:
      1.   Animal Services Officers: The animal services coordinator and the
animal services officers are hereby authorized to investigate violations of
laws and ordinances concerning animals, issue citations in accordance with Utah
law, and take custody of animals as appropriate in enforcing the provisions of
this title and all other laws pertaining to animals.
      2.   Impoundment; Duty: The animal services coordinator, his/her
assistants, animal services officers and the police officers of the city are
hereby authorized and empowered to apprehend and take with them and impound any
animal found in violation of this title.
      3.   Right Of Entry: In the enforcement of this title, any peace officer
or the animal services coordinator, his/her assistants or any animal services
officer are authorized to enter onto the open premises of any property within
the city to take possession of any animal in violation of this title. It is not
the intent of this subsection to authorize any entry onto property which is in
violation of state or federal constitutional restrictions regarding search and
seizure.
      4.   Entering Vehicles: Any peace officer, the animal services
coordinator or the coordinator's assistants, or any animal services officer,
who has probable cause to believe that subsection 13-3-1O of this title is
being violated, shall have authority to enter a vehicle in which an animal is
being confined illegally, by any reasonable means under the circumstances after
making a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other responsible person, in
order to protect the health and safety of an animal.
   D.   Duties And Responsibilities:
      1.   Enforcement: It shall be the responsibility of the animal services
coordinator, his/her assistants and any animal services officer, to enforce the
provisions of this title and the provisions of all other laws and ordinances
pertaining to animals and to perform such other duties as may be provided by
law.
      2.   Aid Of Animals: In addition to the performance of his/her regular
and ordinary duties, the animal services coordinator, his/her assistants and
any animal services officer, shall have the authority to go to the aid of any
or all animals at large, in distress or danger and render them such aid as lies
within their power.
      3.   Reports; Monies Collected: The animal services coordinator shall
keep an accurate account of all monies paid directly to the department for any
services as provided in this title and he/she shall file on each business day a
verified report of all sums collected and from whom collected. All monies
collected by the animal services coordinator shall be deposited in a city
account within three (3) business days following collection with a receipt
provided to the city treasurer for same. Monthly reports shall be filed on the
numbers and species of animals handled and their disposition during the
previous month.
   E.   Mayoral Authority To Adopt Regulations: The mayor, or the chief of
police, if so delegated, may adopt such reasonable rules and regulations as may
be necessary to implement the provisions of this title.
(Ord. 2013-44, 10-15-2013)
13-1-2: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2013-44, 10-15-2013)
13-1-3: INTERFERENCE PROHIBITED:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to use force, violence, intimidation, or
to engage in any other unlawful act, with a purpose to interfere with the
animal services coordinator or any animal services officer or any peace
officer, in the lawful discharge of their duties, as prescribed in this title.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to intentionally or knowingly give false
or misleading information to the animal services coordinator or any animal
services officer or any peace officer regarding the ownership, breed, identity
or location of an animal.
   C.   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly give a false name, birth
date, or address with the intent of misleading the animal services coordinator
or any animal services officer or any peace officer as to the person's
identity.
   D.   It is unlawful for any person to take any animal, or any evidence of a
violation of this title, out of the custody of the animal services coordinator
or his/her assistants, any animal services officer or any peace officer by
stealth, fraud or force.
(Ord. 2013-44, 10-15-2013)
13-1-4: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this title shall be guilty of a
class B misdemeanor, unless a different penalty is provided under state law,
and shall be punished as set forth in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. If any
violation be continued, each day's violation shall be deemed a separate
offense.
(Ord. 2013-44, 10-15-2013)
CHAPTER 2
LICENSING AND REGULATIONS
SECTION:
13-2-1: Definitions
13-2-2: Licensing Provisions
13-2-3: Service And License Fees
13-2-4: Kennels And Catteries
13-2-5: Rabies Control
13-2-6: Restraint/Tethering; Rules And Regulations
13-2-7: Public Nuisances
13-2-8: Dangerous Or Potentially Dangerous Dogs
13-2-9: Protective Custody
13-2-10: Unlawful Acts
13-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this title, the following terms mean:
ABANDONMENT: Placing an animal at risk in an unsafe or dangerous environment
where the animal is unable to fend for itself or where the animal is
unsupervised for a period of longer than twenty four (24) hours without
ensuring the animal of basic needs such as food, water, shelter or necessary
medical attention. Abandonment shall also include the failed promise of
reclaiming an animal seventy two (72) hours beyond the due date to pick up the
animal in agreement with a kennel, grooming service, veterinary hospital or
animal shelter, including owners who refuse to reclaim the pet or sign
relinquishment authorization.
ALTERED: Surgically neutered male animal or surgically spayed female animal
incapable of procreating or certified by a licensed veterinarian to be
physically incapable of procreating.
ANIMAL: Any living nonhuman creature, both domestic and wild, male and female,
singular and plural.
ANIMAL SERVICES COORDINATOR: The Animal Services Coordinator who supervises the
animal control officers and other animal services staff within the City's
Police Department.
ANIMAL SERVICES OFFICER: Any person designated by the City and sworn as a law
enforcement officer to perform the duties as described in this title.
ANIMAL SHELTER: The Weber County Animal Shelter which is utilized for the
purpose of protective custody for animals held under the authority of this
title or State law.
AT LARGE: Any animal off the premises of the owner and either not under control
of the owner or his/her agent by leash or not confined within a vehicle; or any
animal on the premises of the owner and not securely confined by a leash,
building or fenced area.
ATTACK: To set upon with violent force.
BITE: Any injury caused by an animal's teeth which results in a break in the
skin.
CAT: A domestic feline, either male or female of any age.
CATTERY: The land or building used in the keeping of seven (7) or more cats at
least six (6) months old.
CUSTODY: Ownership, possession of, harboring, or exercising control over any
animal.
DANGEROUS DOG: As defined in subsection 13-2-8A of this chapter.
DEPARTMENT: The City's Police Department.
DIVISION: The Support Services Division of the City's Police Department.
DOG: A domestic canine, either male or female of any age.
EUTHANASIA: The humane destruction of an animal accomplished by an approved
method that involves unconsciousness and immediate death or by a method that
causes painless loss of consciousness and death during such loss of
consciousness.
FERRET: The domesticated ferret commonly known as the European ferret or
Mustela putorius furo, either male or female of any age, but not including the
black footed ferret or any other type of undomesticated ferret.
FIERCE: Violently hostile or aggressive in temperament.
HANDLER: Any person who has control, charge, care, custody of, or
responsibility for, an animal at any given time.
HARBORING: Performing any act involving the provision of care, shelter,
protection, refuge, food or nourishment in such manner as to extend control
over the animal, and includes permitting a stray or lost animal or an animal
belonging to another person, to be kept, fed or lodged within or upon a
person's property.
HUMANE TREATMENT: The act or manner of treating an animal with compassion and
consideration and protecting an animal from dangers, mistreatment or abuse.
HYBRID: Any animal, however domesticated, that has been crossbred with a wild
animal or hybrid thereof.
KEEPER: A person in charge, possession, control, care, or keeping of an animal,
regardless of ownership.
KENNEL: The land or building used in the keeping of three (3) or more dogs at
least six (6) months old.
LEASH: Any chain, rope or device used to restrain an animal that does not
endanger or harm its physical well being as defined under the definition of
restraint/tethering.
LIVESTOCK: Animals that are domesticated and normally kept on farm or range
lands including, but not limited to, horses, cattle, swine, sheep and goats,
including dwarf varieties.
OWNER: Any person, partnership or corporation harboring, keeping, possessing,
maintaining, having an ownership interest in or having control or custody of an
animal.
PET SHOP: Any person, partnership or corporation, whether operated separately
or in connection with another business enterprise except for a licensed kennel
or cattery that acquires live animals and sells or offers to sell or rent such
live animals to the public or to retail outlets.
PROTECTIVE CUSTODY: Having been received into the care of the Support Services
Division of the City's Police Department or any authorized agent or
representative thereof, including seizure due to violation of the law or to
come into compliance with the law, to be held as evidence, or for the
protection of the animal.
PROVOCATION: As defined in subsection 13-2-8A of this chapter.
PUBLIC NUISANCE: Any animal which violates the provisions of this title as
described in section
13-2-7 of this chapter.
QUARANTINE: The isolation of an animal in a substantial, properly ventilated
enclosure that does not harm or endanger the animal, so that it is not subject
to contact with other animals or unauthorized persons.
RESIDENT ANIMAL: Any animal kept, harbored, or sheltered in the City for thirty
(30) days or more.
RESIDENTIAL CHICKEN: A female domesticated fowl of the genus Gallus, commonly
referred to as a hen chicken.
RESTRAINT/TETHERING: Securing any animal by a leash, tether or enclosing the
animal in a secured building or fenced area adequately constructed and
maintained to keep the animal from running at large. "Humane restraint" shall
mean and require that when a dog is chained or tied outdoors, the chain or
material the animal is tied with shall be so placed or attached that it cannot
become entangled with the chains or ties of other dogs or with any other
object. Such restraint should be adequate to the breed and dog's abilities and
of a humane nature. Such chains or ties shall be at least three (3) times the
length of the dog as measured from the top of its nose to the base of its tail
and shall allow the dog convenient access to shelter and shall be no longer
than twenty five feet (25').
TEMPORARY ANIMAL: Any animal kept, harbored, or sheltered in the City for less
than thirty (30) days.
VETERINARIAN: Any person legally licensed to practice veterinary medicine.
VETERINARY HOSPITAL: Any establishment maintained and operated by a licensed
veterinarian for surgery, diagnosis and treatment of diseases and injuries of
animals.
VICIOUS ANIMAL: Any animal which is dangerously aggressive, including an animal
which has bitten or in any other manner attacked any person or animal. Dogs
which are vicious are defined as "dangerous dogs" in subsection 13-2-8A of this
chapter.
WILD ANIMALS: Any animal which is not commonly domesticated, or which,
irrespective of geographic origin, is of a wild or predatory nature, or any
other animal which because of its size, growth propensity, vicious nature or
other characteristics, would constitute an unreasonable danger to human life,
health or property if not kept, maintained or confined in a safe and secure
manner, and animals which, as a result of their natural or wild condition
cannot be vaccinated effectively for rabies. These animals, however
domesticated, shall include, but are not limited to:
   A.   Alligators, caiman and crocodiles.
   B.   Bears (Ursidae); all bears including grizzly bear, brown bear, black
bear, etc.
   C.   The cat family (Felidae); all except the commonly accepted domestic
cats, and including cheetah, cougar, leopard, lion, lynx, panther, mountain
lion, tiger, wildcat, etc., and any hybrids.
   D.   The dog family (Canidae); all except domesticated dogs, and including
wolf, fox, coyote, etc., and any hybrids.
   E.   Porcupines (Erethizontidae).
   F.   Primates (Hominidae); all nonhuman primates.
   G.   Raccoons (Procyonidae); all raccoons including the eastern raccoon,
desert raccoon, ring tailed cat, etc.
   H.   Skunks.
   I.   Venomous fish and piranha.
   J.   Venomous snakes and lizards, and any snake exceeding nine feet (9') in
length.
   K.   The weasel family (Mustelidae); all, including weasel, marten,
wolverine, black footed ferret (but not including other domesticated ferrets as
defined herein), badger, otter, ermine, mink, mongoose, etc., except those
humanely raised for their pelts.
   L.   Any animal of a species that is susceptible to the rabies virus for
which there is no Federally approved vaccine.
WORRY: To harass or intimidate by barking or baring of teeth, growling, biting,
shaking or tearing with the teeth, or approaching any person in apparent
attitude of attack or any aggressive behavior which would cause a reasonable
person to feel they were in danger of immediate physical attack.
(Ord. 2017-50, 12-19-2017)
13-2-2: LICENSING PROVISIONS:
   A.   Dogs, Cats, Residential Chickens And Ferrets; Parents Of Minors Keeping
Or Harboring Animals:
      1.   Required: All dogs, cats, residential chickens and ferrets which are
harbored, owned, kept, possessed or maintained in the City shall be licensed
and registered as provided in this section.
         a.   No person shall keep, harbor or maintain within the City any dog,
cat or ferret six (6) months of age and over or any residential chicken which
is not licensed as required herein.
         b.   License fees shall be paid as set forth in section
13-2-3 of this chapter.
         c.   No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall apply for or
obtain a pet license or permit.
         d.   All dogs, cats, residential chickens and ferrets must be licensed
by an adult, who shall be responsible for compliance with the requirements of
this title.
         e.   No person shall harbor, own, keep, possess or maintain any dog,
cat or ferret six (6) months of age and over that has not been spayed or
neutered unless that person holds a valid unaltered pet license for the animal.
      2.   Minors; Parent Responsible: The parent or guardian of any minor
keeping or harboring an animal shall be considered the owner and be responsible
for compliance with the requirements of this title. See also subsection 13-2-
8C4 of this chapter.
      3.   Number Restricted: No person or persons at any residence shall at
any one time own, possess, harbor or license more than:
         a.   Two (2) dogs over six (6) months old;
         b.   Three (3) dogs over six (6) months old if one or more dog is a
trained therapy dog currently providing service, or a qualified service dog in
accordance with the Americans With Disabilities Act, or where the owner is in
the process of training one or more dogs as a therapy dog or service dog.
Verification of the owner's qualifications as a trainer, or in the case of a
service dog, a statement that the dog has been trained to mitigate the owner's
disability, or certification of at least one therapy dog, is required for
licensing and will be kept on file with Animal Services;
         c.   Three (3) dogs over six (6) months old if one or more dog belongs
to an owner who is deployed to active duty military service, or is a government
law enforcement or military service dog. A copy of the owner's deployment
order, or certification of at least one dog, is required for licensing and will
be kept on file with Animal Services;
         d.   Six (6) cats over six (6) months old, except that such maximum
number of cats shall be reduced by one cat for each dog or ferret over six (6)
months old owned, possessed, harbored or licensed at the residence; or
         e.   Two (2) ferrets over six (6) months old.
      4.   Grandfather Provision: The requirement to reduce the maximum number
of cats by one cat for each dog or ferret over six (6) months old under
subsection A3d of this section shall not be applicable to any cat actually
owned, possessed, harbored or licensed at the residence as of February 28,
2006, if:
         a.   Prior to June 1, 2006, the owner establishes to the satisfaction
of the Animal Services Coordinator that:
            (1)   All such cats, and the dogs or ferrets requiring such
reduction of the maximum number of cats, were owned, possessed, harbored or
licensed at the owner's residence as of February 28, 2006, and
            (2)   All such cats, dogs or ferrets owned, possessed or harbored
at the residence are currently licensed in accordance with the provisions of
this title; and
         b.   All such cats, dogs or ferrets owned, possessed or harbored at
the residence continue to be licensed and maintained in accordance with the
provisions of this title during their lifetime.
      5.   Residential Chickens: In addition to the number of household pets
allowed by this section, a person may keep up to six (6) residential chickens
where the person is able to comply with the requirements of section
15-13-41 of this Code.
   B.   Application; Forms: The owner shall state at the time application is
made for such license, and upon printed forms provided for such purpose, the
owner's name, address, electronic mail address and telephone number, the name,
breed, color, sex and age of each dog, ferret or cat owned or kept, the number
of residential chickens kept, and the address where such animal is usually kept
if different from the address of the owner. The owner shall provide written
proof that the owner is at least eighteen (18) years of age, or at least sixty
(60) years of age, if applying for a discount. The provisions of this section
are not to apply to dogs or cats whose owners are temporarily within the City
for less than thirty (30) days, nor to dogs or cats brought into the City for
the purpose of participating in any dog or cat show, nor to commercial pet
shops, kennels or catteries licensed as a business within the City. However,
any dog or cat residing on the premises of a commercial kennel or cattery must
be individually licensed by the owner of the kennel, unless the animal is being
temporarily housed or boarded for less than thirty (30) days. If there is a
violation involving a temporary animal, the animal shall be treated as a
resident animal and subject to enforcement as provided in this title.
   C.   Term; Renewal: Pet licenses will be valid for a term of one year from
the date of issuance, or less than one year, concurrent with the date of the
rabies inoculation, if the inoculation expires within the licensing year,
except as provided in subsection J of this section. There shall be no proration
of any license fees. All licenses shall be obtained on or before the expiration
of the prior license.
   D.   Spayed And Neutered; Certificate Required: No female dog, ferret or cat
shall be licensed as spayed nor male dog, ferret or cat licensed as neutered
except upon certificate of a veterinarian.
   E.   Rabies Inoculations; Required: No license shall be issued for any dog
or cat four (4) months of age or over, or any ferret three (3) months of age or
over which has not been inoculated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian in
accordance with the requirements for rabies control set forth in section
13-2-5 of this chapter. Written proof of that inoculation shall be presented at
the time the license is applied for.
   F.   Issuance Of License: Pet licenses shall be issued by the Support
Services Division and by the City Treasurer or the Treasurer's authorized
agents. The City Treasurer may authorize licenses to be issued by participating
veterinarians, kennels, catteries, pet shops, animal shelters and other
approved locations under written agreement with the City, approved by the City
Treasurer.
   G.   Tags:
      1.   Issuance: Upon acceptance of the license application, confirmation
of rabies inoculation, and receipt of fee, the City shall issue a durable tag,
stamped with an identifying number. Tags should be designed so that they may be
conveniently fastened or riveted to the dog's, ferret's or cat's collar or
harness.
      2.   Display: License tags shall be worn by dogs, ferrets and cats at all
times, except when a cat or dog is participating in a dog or cat show or during
approved, supervised training. Any ferret licensed pursuant to this title shall
also be identified by an approved microchip implanted in the neck or shoulder
area, with a number issued or registered by the division.
      3.   Removal: No person other than the Animal Services Coordinator or
his/her assistants or officers, a police officer or medical personnel shall
remove or cause to be removed the collar or metal tag from any licensed dog,
ferret or cat without the consent of the owner or authorized agent.
   H.   Exemptions; Compliance: The following dogs shall be exempt from the
payment of license fees under this section, but shall still be required to
comply with licensing and registration requirements: qualified service animals
in accordance with the Americans With Disabilities Act; government law
enforcement and military service dogs; and guide dogs, temporarily housed in
the City under a recognized guide dog program.
   I.   Senior Citizen Discount: Persons sixty (60) years of age or older, who
exhibit proof of age, shall qualify for the discount established under
subsection 13-2-3A of this chapter for any dog, ferret or cat which is spayed
or neutered and is owned by and residing with the qualifying senior citizen.
Such discount shall not be applicable to late fees, impound fees, or boarding
fees associated with animal impounds. Any special permanent license issued to a
person sixty five (65) years or older prior to July 1, 2002, shall continue to
be honored as a special permanent license under subsection J of this section.
   J.   Altered Dogs, Ferrets And Cats; Lifetime License, Three Year License:
Any person, eighteen (18) years of age or older, who exhibits proof of age, may
purchase a lifetime license for a ferret or cat which is spayed or neutered,
which license shall remain in effect for the lifetime of the animal. A three
(3) year license can be purchased for an altered dog, ferret or cat upon proof
of a three (3) year rabies inoculation. Such persons who have purchased a
lifetime license shall still continue to be required to obtain an annual or
three (3) year license without fee and provide verification of rabies
vaccination thereafter. This subsection shall not be construed to relieve any
person from meeting all licensing requirements not specifically exempted,
including late fees and required vaccinations, nor is any license issued
hereunder transferable to any animal other than that for which the license was
issued or to any other owner.
   K.   License Regulations:
      1.   Record Of Identification: The City shall maintain a record of the
identifying numbers of all tags issued and shall make this record available to
the public.
      2.   Transfer Prohibited: No person may use any license for any dog,
ferret, residential chicken, or cat other than the dog, ferret, residential
chicken, or cat for which it was issued. Licenses are not transferable to a new
owner.
      3.   Transfers; Other Jurisdiction: Owners of dogs, ferrets and/or cats
which hold valid licenses from other jurisdictions and who move into the City
may transfer the license by paying a transfer fee. Such license shall maintain
the original expiration date, subject to an unexpired transfer term not to
exceed one year. A license from another city or county for a residential
chicken is not transferable.
      4.   Sale Or Transfer; Unlicensed: No person shall sell or transfer
ownership of any dog, ferret or cat, subject to licensing under this chapter,
which is not licensed as required herein. The division shall be notified of the
name, address and telephone number of the new owner by the person who sold or
transferred ownership of the animal.
   L.   Late Penalty; Exemption: All license fees shall be increased by twenty
five dollars ($25.00) each if not paid on or before the date due. No late
penalty shall be charged on new license applications, if the owner submits
proof of purchase or acquisition of the animal within the preceding two (2)
weeks; the owner or animal has moved in the City within the preceding two (2)
weeks; the animal is currently or has been within the preceding two (2) weeks,
under the age which requires a license; or the owner purchases the license
voluntarily, prior to an in person field contact or impoundment, or issuance of
a summons or complaint by the City.
   M.   Denial Or Revocation: The Animal Services Coordinator may deny or
revoke any license or permit issued herein for nonpayment of a returned check
used to pay fees required for issuance of such license or permit. Notice of
such denial or revocation shall be sent to the applicant, licensee or
permittee, by mail, to the address listed on the license or permit application.
The decision to deny or revoke such license or permit may be appealed under
title 4, chapter 4, article A of this Code.
(Ord. 2017-50, 12-19-2017; amd. Ord. 2018-12, 6-26-2018)
13-2-3: SERVICE AND LICENSE FEES:
The following fees shall be imposed by the division for services rendered by
the division and for licenses required under this title:
 
   License Fees (Dogs, Cats, Residential Chickens, And Ferrets) (See
A. Also Subsection
   13-2-2A Of This Chapter):
   1. Unaltered:                                                         
       Dog                                                              $50.00
       Cat or ferret                                                    35.00
   2. Altered:                                                           
       Dog                                                              10.00
       Cat or ferret                                                    5.00
   3. 3 year license for altered dog, cat or ferret upon proof of 3      
      year rabies vaccination:
       Dog                                                              25.00
       Cat or ferret                                                    10.00
   4. Lifetime license for altered European ferret or cat under          
      subsection 13-2-2J of this chapter:
       Cat or ferret                                                    35.00
   5. Senior citizen owner discount under subsection 13-2-2I of this    20% off
      chapter
   6. Transfer fee under subsection                                      
      13-2-2K3 of this chapter:
       Altered                                                          $  5.00
       Unaltered                                                        15.00
   7. Replacement tag                                                   5.00
   8. Dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog (registration fee)     100.00
   9. Residential chicken, per chicken                                  5.00
B. Quarantined Animals; Charges To Owner (Not Including Applicable
   Impound Fees):
   1. Preparation and transportation of animal to State laboratory for  75.00
      rabies testing
   Disposal Only Of A Dead, Owned Animal: An owner or person
C. responsible for a domestic animal that dies shall bury or dispose of
   such animal pursuant to section
   13-3-5 of this title.
D. Pick Up Charge For Owned Animals: At the discretion of the
   Coordinator, pick up services may be provided:
   1. Pick up charges per trip                                          35.00
      Ogden City shall collect at the time of pick up or otherwise,
   2. such other fees as will be charged by Weber County for additional  
      concurrent services, such as a relinquish fee, or euthanasia fee
E. Microchip:                                                            
      Microchip identification (unless previously implanted)            15.00
 
(Ord. 2017-50, 12-19-2017; amd. Ord. 2018-12, 6-26-2018)
13-2-4: KENNELS AND CATTERIES:
   A.   Permit Required: Any person who keeps dogs or cats on his/her own
property for the purpose of a kennel or a cattery shall obtain a permit paying
the licensing fees required by subsection D1 of this section. Kennels and
catteries are only permitted in certain manufacturing zones, and are subject to
the requirements set forth in title 15 of this Code.
   B.   Inspections: It shall be a condition of the issuance and maintenance of
any permit that the City or the County Health Department shall be permitted to
inspect all animals and the premises where animals are kept at any time and
may, if permission for such inspection is refused, revoke the permit or license
of the refusing owner. The County Health Department is hereby authorized and
empowered to close such place of business and keep it closed until conditions
complying with laws governing the protection and keeping of animals are met.
   C.   Term: The permit period shall begin with the calendar year and shall
run for one year. Renewal application for permits shall be made thirty (30)
days prior to, and up to sixty (60) days after the start of the calendar year.
Application for a permit to establish a new kennel or cattery under the
provisions of this title may be made at any time prior to opening.
   D.   Fees:
      1.   Enumerated: Annual kennel and cattery permits shall be issued upon
payment of the applicable fee:
 
a. Authorized to house between 3 and 15 dogs and between 7 and 15 cats $ 50.00
b. Authorized to house between 16 and 30 animals                       75.00
c. Authorized to house 31 or more animals                              100.00
 
      2.   Exemptions: An incorporated, nonprofit animal welfare organization
shall be exempt from the payment of the above fees, although permits shall be
required.
      3.   Animal Hospitals: A fee shall be required by any veterinary hospital
acting as a kennel, cattery or animal shelter.
   E.   Permit Regulations:
      1.   Facilities; Individual Permits: Every facility regulated by this
title shall be considered a separate enterprise and requires an individual
permit.
      2.   Posting; Nontransferable: A valid permit shall be posted in a
conspicuous place in each establishment, and this permit shall be considered as
appurtenant to the premises and not transferable to another location. The
permittee shall notify the City within thirty (30) days of any change in his/
her establishment, or of a change in ownership of the establishment or
operation, which may affect the status of the permit. Permits are
nontransferable.
   F.   Reclassification: Any person who has a change in the category under
which a permit was issued shall be subject to reclassification and appropriate
adjustment of the permit fee for any subsequent year.
   G.   Cruelty To Animals Conviction; Permit Prohibited: No person who has
been convicted of cruelty to animals shall be issued a permit to operate a
commercial animal establishment within five (5) years of conviction.
   H.   Revocation:
      1.   False Information: If the applicant has withheld or falsified any
information on the application, the city shall refuse to issue a permit or may
revoke a present permit.
      2.   Disposition Of Animals: The city or agency responsible for the
revocation of a permit shall, within ten (10) days thereafter, oversee the
humane adoption, euthanasia or relinquishment for scientific or educational
purposes of all animals owned or kept by the person whose permit has been
revoked. No part of the permit shall be refunded.
      3.   Reapplication; Fee: Any person having had a permit revoked may not
reapply for a period of one year. Each reapplication shall be accompanied by a
ten dollar ($10.00) fee.
(Ord. 2013-44, 10-15-2013)
13-2-5: RABIES CONTROL:
   A.   Vaccination Required: The owner or person having the charge, care,
custody or control of any dog, cat or other animal, except for ferrets, four
(4) months of age or over, or any ferret three (3) months of age or over, for
which a federally approved vaccine is available, shall have such animal
vaccinated by a licensed veterinarian within thirty (30) days after it reaches
such age. Any person permitting any such animal to habitually be on or remain,
or be lodged or fed within such person's house, yard or premises shall be
responsible for the vaccination. Unvaccinated animals, over the age required to
be vaccinated, that have been acquired by the owner or moved into the
jurisdiction must be vaccinated within ten (10) days of acquisition or arrival.
Thereafter valid protection must be maintained. All vaccinations shall be
performed in accordance with the standards contained in the "Compendium Of
Animal Rabies Control", as amended, published by the National Association Of
State Public Health Veterinarians, Inc. Every dog, ferret and cat shall be
revaccinated as required based upon the requirements of the specific vaccine
administered. It shall be the responsibility of the administering veterinarian
to specify the date of vaccination, the type of vaccine used and the date when
revaccination is required. Revaccination shall be required prior to licensing
or renewal of license if the previous vaccination will expire within the term
of the license.
      1.   Exemptions To Rules:
         a.   These provisions shall not apply to veterinarians, animal welfare
organizations, kennels, catteries and grooming services temporarily maintaining
on their premises animals owned by others.
         b.   These provisions shall not apply to animals whose owners are
nonresidents temporarily remaining within the jurisdiction for fourteen (14)
days or less.
      2.   Compliance With State/Federal Law: It is unlawful to bring an animal
into the city which does not comply with state and federal animal health laws
and import regulations.
   B.   Clinics: The city shall be empowered at its discretion and in
cooperation with licensed veterinarians to establish rabies clinics.
   C.   Certificate: It shall be the duty of each veterinarian and/or rabies
clinic when vaccinating an animal for rabies, to complete a certificate of
rabies vaccination, approved by the division and recommended by the National
Association Of State Public Health Veterinarians, Inc., in duplicate which
includes the following information:
      1.   Information:
         a.   Owner's name, address and telephone number;
         b.   Description of animal (breed, sex, color, age, name, altered/
unaltered);
         c.   Date of vaccination;
         d.   Rabies vaccination tag number;
         e.   Type of rabies vaccine administered;
         f.   Manufacturer's serial number of the vaccine;
         g.   Date revaccination is required.
      2.   Distribution: A copy of the certificate shall be distributed to the
owner and the original shall be retained by the issuing veterinarian or rabies
clinic. The veterinarian or rabies clinic and the owner shall retain their
copies for the interval between vaccinations specified in this chapter.
Additionally, the veterinarian or rabies clinic shall issue a metal or plastic
vaccination tag, serially numbered to be worn by the animal at all times,
except when participating in an animal show or approved training.
   D.   Tags: It shall be the duty of the owner to attach the rabies tag
securely to the collar or harness of the animal.
      1.   Any animal not wearing a current rabies tag shall be treated as
unvaccinated, pursuant to this title.
      2.   Vaccination tags are not transferable from one animal to another.
   E.   Bites; Duty To Report: Any person having knowledge of any individual or
animal having been bitten by an animal of a species subject to rabies shall
report the incident, within twenty four (24) hours, to the support services
division of the police department. This requirement pertains, but is not
limited to, the owner of the biting animal, the person bitten, a physician or
medical aide rendering service to a bitten person. Reportable information shall
include:
      1.   The name, sex, and address of the bitten person or the name and
address of the owner of the bitten animal, the type and location of the bite,
the location of the incident, a complete description of the biting animal and
any available facts on the immunization status of the inflicting animal, and if
known, the name and address of the owner of such inflicting animal, or the name
and address at the location where the inflicting animal is usually kept, if
different from that of the owner of the inflicting animal; and
      2.   In addition, any person having knowledge of the whereabouts of any
animal known to have or suspected of having rabies should report the facts
immediately, upon knowledge of the bite, to the support services division of
the police department. The division shall report the facts to the county health
department.
   F.   Seizure; Confinement: Any animal of a species subject to rabies that
bites or is suspected to have bitten a person or animal, or is suspected of
having rabies, or that has been bitten by an animal subject to or suspected of
having rabies, shall be seized and securely confined. The owner shall turn over
the animal to the division or any official, authorized by law, upon demand. The
animal shall be quarantined for a period of not less than ten (10) days, or
longer if so advised by a qualified veterinarian, determined from the date of
the bite. The owner of such a quarantined animal shall, whenever possible, be
notified within a reasonable time of the animal's condition and location.
      1.   At the discretion of the animal services coordinator, a currently
vaccinated animal may be restrained at the home of the owner, subject to daily
inspection, which may be by an officer and/or by a licensed veterinarian at the
owner's expense. Release from confinement must be made by the animal services
coordinator, his/her assistant or officer or a licensed veterinarian. If
previous bites have occurred, the animal services coordinator may require that
the animal be quarantined at the animal shelter.
      2.   Any unvaccinated animal must be isolated and confined in a shelter
or veterinary hospital. Daily observation may be made by a trained attendant on
duty. A licensed veterinarian or the animal services coordinator or his/her
assistant or officer shall make the observation or the recommendation either if
the animal becomes ill or completes the ten (10) day holding period and becomes
eligible for release. Any unvaccinated animal must be duly immunized and
licensed at the expense of the owner prior to release. Permission for release
must be given by a licensed veterinarian or the animal services coordinator or
his/her officer or assistant. The owner shall bear the cost of confinement and
all related expenses to be paid at the time of release from impoundment.
      3.   Any animal clinically diagnosed to be rabid shall be promptly
euthanized by the division or veterinarian.
      4.   If an animal services officer or authorized official, during the
investigation of a bite case, is unable to contact the owner immediately, the
officer or official may enter upon private property to remove the animal that
has bitten, to take the animal into protective custody until such reasonable
time as the owner can be contacted.
      5.   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove a quarantined animal
whether previously vaccinated or not from the place of quarantine without a
written release from the division or a licensed veterinarian. Any animal
quarantined for rabies observation shall be implanted with microchip
identification at the cost of the owner prior to release from said quarantine.
   G.   Exposure; Special Circumstances: Special circumstances for animals
exposed to rabies:
      1.   Unvaccinated Animal: In the case of an unvaccinated animal
susceptible to rabies, which has been bitten by a known rabid animal, said
exposed animal should be immediately euthanized except as follows: if the owner
is unwilling to euthanize the exposed animal, the animal shall be immediately
isolated, vaccinated, and quarantined for six (6) months under veterinary
supervision, the cost of such confinement to be paid by the owner. All payments
shall be made in advance unless other arrangements are made with the animal
services coordinator. The animal shall be euthanized if the owner does not
comply herewith.
      2.   Vaccinated Animal: If the exposed animal has been vaccinated, the
animal should be revaccinated within twenty four (24) hours and shall be
quarantined for a period of forty five (45) days following vaccination. If the
animal is not revaccinated within twenty four (24) hours, it shall be isolated
and quarantined under veterinary supervision for six (6) months. Veterinary
fees and confinement costs must be paid in advance unless other arrangements
are made with the animal services coordinator. The animal shall be euthanized
if the owner does not comply herewith.
   H.   Quarantined Animals; Duty To Report: Any person who has custody of any
animal under quarantine shall immediately notify the division if the animal
shows signs of sickness, abnormal behavior, dies or if the animal escapes
confinement. In the event of escape, the animal shall be placed under
quarantine at either the animal shelter or a veterinary hospital. It shall be
unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to allow a health or animal services
officer to make an inspection or examination during the period of quarantine.
If the animal dies within the ten (10) days from the date of the bite, the
person having custody shall immediately notify the division and surrender the
body for appropriate examination. Any related fees for preparation and
transportation of the rabies specimen shall be paid in advance by the owner.
   I.   Proclamation; Mayor Authority: The mayor is authorized, upon reasonable
apprehension of danger from dogs or other animals with rabies, to issue a
proclamation forbidding all dogs and other animals from running at large within
the city limits. All dogs and other animals must be securely confined or on a
sufficient leash or chain to hold the animal. Any animals running loose while
the proclamation is in force shall be taken into protective custody. The
proclamation shall take effect upon publication in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city.
(Ord. 2013-44, 10-15-2013)
13-2-6: RESTRAINT/TETHERING; RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   Animals At Large Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any animal to run
at large, except:
      1.   Animals may be at large while participating in field trials and
obedience classes.
      2.   Animals properly controlled by a participant as part of a recognized
dog club.
      3.   Animals assisting a peace officer engaged in law enforcement duties,
or while being trained for the same.
      4.   Animals on the owner's private property so long as such animals are
under the direct and effective sound or gesture control, and within sight of
owners or such individuals noted above, to assure that such animals do not
violate any provisions of this title.
   B.   Livestock Running At Large Prohibited: No livestock shall be allowed to
run at large or be picketed or staked out or driven upon any street, sidewalk,
airport or any other public place within the limits of the city, except by
permission of the chief of police and all such animals so found running at
large, picketed or staked out without the owner thereof having first secured a
permit from the chief of police may be impounded and taken to the shelter.
Permits shall be issued by the chief of police only after he has determined
that the health, safety, peace and quiet, and property of the citizens of the
city will not be endangered or damaged by such animals.
   C.   Animals In Vehicles: No driver of a motor vehicle shall transport or
carry on any public highway or street any dog in a motor vehicle unless the
animal is safely enclosed within the vehicle or protected by a shell,
container, cage or other device that will prevent the dog from falling from,
being thrown from or jumping from the motor vehicle.
   D.   Confinement Of Female Dogs Or Cats: Any owner or person having charge,
care, custody or control of any female dog or cat in estrus shall, in addition
to restraining such dog or cat from running at large, cause such a dog or cat
to be constantly confined in a humane manner in a building or secure enclosure
so as to prevent it from attracting by scent or coming into contact with other
dogs or cats and creating a nuisance, except for a planned breeding.
   E.   Vicious Or Dangerous Or Potentially Dangerous Animals: Any known
vicious, dangerous, potentially dangerous, or threatening animal shall be
restrained on the owner's premises in such a way as to protect any person
lawfully entering or passing such premises. Every vicious or dangerous or
potentially dangerous animal shall be muzzled or caged whenever off the
premises of its owner.
   F.   Unlawful Attacks: The owner, keeper or harborer of any animal that
attacks, bites, chases or threatens any person, any domestic animal or any
species of wildlife shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor.
   G.   Unlawful Restraining: In addition to the provisions regarding tethering
of dogs on private property set forth in subsection L of this section, it is
unlawful for any person to chain, stake out or tether any animal on any
unenclosed premises in such a manner that the animal may go beyond the property
line or onto the premises of another person, unless the owner or lessee of the
affected property has given permission. No animals shall be chained, staked out
or tethered along alleys, sidewalks or along public streets or easements.
   H.   Fowl Running At Large: It is unlawful for the owner of any domestic
fowl, such as turkeys, ducks, geese, chickens, peacocks, pigeons and any game
fowl to permit such fowl to trespass or go upon the premises of another or to
run at large within the limits of the city.
   I.   Unlawful Straying: It is unlawful for any person, owning or having the
custody, possession or control of any animal of a class of livestock to allow,
either negligently or with specific intent, the animal to run at large in or
about a public property or roadway, where such is not otherwise permitted by
law, or to otherwise permit the animal to be herded, pastured or to go upon the
land of another without permission.
   J.   Fencing: All fencing of property, where a class of livestock are kept,
shall be of sufficient construction to prevent the escape of or injury to the
animals being confined, within the fencing. The fencing shall be maintained so
that no part of such fence, absent extraordinary circumstances, may be broken,
damaged or in any way create the possibility of injury to the confined animal
or to allow escape thereof.
   K.   Liability: The owner or person charged with responsibility for any
animal running at large or otherwise improperly restrained shall be strictly
liable for any violation under this section, regardless of whether or not such
owner or person knows that the animal is running at large or that is otherwise
in violation.
   L.   Unlawful Tethering Of Dogs On Private Property:
      1.   At all times, dogs shall be humanely restrained, as defined in
section
13-2-1 of this chapter.
      2.   As used in this subsection, "tether" means to restrain a dog by
tying the dog to any object or structure including, without limitation, a
house, tree, fence, post, garage, or shed, by any means, including, without
limitation, a chain, rope, cord, leash or running line. Tethering shall not
include using a leash to walk a dog.
      3.   It shall be unlawful for any person to tether a dog while outdoors
on private property, except when all of the following conditions are met:
         a.   The tether is connected to the dog by a buckle type collar or a
body harness made of nylon or leather, and of an appropriate size for the
breed.
         b.   The tether has the following properties: it terminates at both
ends with a swivel; it does not weigh more than one- eighth (1/8) of the dog's
weight; and it is free of tangles.
         c.   The dog is at least six (6) months of age.
         d.   The dog is not sick or injured.
         e.   Pulley, running line, or trolley systems are at least fifteen
feet (15') in length and are less than seven feet (7') above the ground.
         f.   If there are multiple dogs, each dog is tethered separately so as
not to become tangled.
         g.   The dog shall be tethered for a maximum of ten (10) hours in a
twenty four (24) hour period.
   M.   Restraining Animals And Leash Law: It is unlawful for any person owning
or having the custody, possession, or control of any animal to, either
negligently or with specific intent, improperly restrain or fence the animal in
a manner that allows the animal to escape or to run at large. Dogs are to be
restrained on a proper leash at all times on the public right of way and in
public places.
(Ord. 2013-44, 10-15-2013)
13-2-7: PUBLIC NUISANCES:
   A.   Care And Control Required: All persons harboring, owning, keeping,
possessing, maintaining or having custody of any animal shall exercise proper
care and control of his/her animal in order to prevent them from becoming a
public nuisance. Any owner or possessor of an animal who maintains a public
nuisance in a manner contrary to the provisions of this chapter, and/or the
owner of the property upon which the animal is usually maintained (if the
violation is of the nature of a property maintenance violation under other
provisions of this code), shall be subject to enforcement as provided in this
title. Any animal shall be deemed a public nuisance if the animal:
      1.   Causes damage to the property of anyone other than its owner.
      2.   Causes unreasonable odors.
      3.   Causes unsanitary conditions.
      4.   Barks, whines, howls or makes other disturbing noises for an
extended period of time.
      5.   Chases vehicles.
      6.   Is a "vicious animal", as defined herein.
      7.   Is a "dangerous dog", as defined herein.
      8.   Is a "potentially dangerous dog", as defined herein.
      9.   Is an animal which has been impounded for being at large, or its
owner or possessor has been convicted for the animal being at large, on three
(3) separate occasions within a twelve (12) month period.
      10.   Worries domestic animals, persons, or wildlife.
      11.   Is an animal which has been found to be in violation of this title
on three (3) or more different occasions during any twelve (12) month period.
   B.   Abatement: When it reasonably appears to the animal services
coordinator or officer that any animal is a "public nuisance", as defined in
subsection A of this section, and that such nuisance should be abated, the
animal services coordinator or officer shall first attempt to obtain the
written consent of the animal's owner to abate the animal. "Abatement" shall be
defined to include either relocating or euthanizing the animal. If the animal
owner's consent cannot be readily obtained, the animal services coordinator or
officer may file with the justice court a charge of the maintenance of a
nuisance. The charge shall set forth the facts according to the best of the
animal services coordinator or officer's information and belief, indicating
that the owner is maintaining a nuisance and that the nuisance should be
abated. The court may then order that the animal be impounded pending
disposition and shall then order that the owner be summoned into court to
answer to the charge. If the charge is denied, a hearing shall be set upon not
less than three (3) days' notice to the owner. If the court finds that the
charge of maintaining a nuisance has been proven, the court shall issue an
order to the animal services coordinator or officer setting out the method of
abatement. Abatement should not be by relocation if the animal represents a
continuing threat of serious harm. If relocation is ordered, the court may set
whatever conditions are necessary to guarantee that said animal shall not
constitute a nuisance in the future. If the animal is determined to be a
nuisance, the court may order that the owner pay the cost of impoundment of the
animal during the court proceedings. Any animal determined to be a dangerous
dog or a vicious animal shall be implanted with microchip identification and/or
tattooed before final release or relocation. Any other animal determined to be
a nuisance may be required by the court to be implanted with microchip
identification and/or tattooed before final release or relocation, if the court
determines that the ability to identify the animal in the future is in the
public interest.
   C.   Licensing Restrictions: In addition to the remedies and penalties
provided above, if the court orders that the person charged with maintaining a
nuisance be restricted in the person's right to own or maintain an animal, the
court may revoke any existing dog or cat license issued to such person and
order that no dog or cat license be issued to such person, under the provisions
of this title, during the subsequent twelve (12) month period. Upon the
issuance of such order, the city shall not issue any new dog or cat license or
permit to that person during the subsequent twelve (12) month period.
(Ord. 2013-44, 10-15-2013)
13-2-8: DANGEROUS OR POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS:
   A.   Definitions:
   DANGEROUS DOG: As used in this chapter, shall mean any dog:
      1.   Which has exhibited a propensity, tendency or disposition to attack,
to cause injury or to otherwise threaten the safety of human beings or domestic
animals; or
      2.   Which, without provocation, chases or approaches a person upon the
streets, sidewalks or any public or private property in a menacing fashion or
apparent attitude of attack; or
      3.   Which has severely injured or killed a domestic animal, without
provocation, while not properly restrained on the owner's or possessor's
property; or
      4.   Which has attacked, bitten or inflicted a physical injury on a human
being without provocation; or
      5.   Which, with or without provocation, has inflicted severe injury upon
or caused the death of a human being; or
      6.   Which is owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of
dogfighting or any dog used for dogfighting. A dog shall not be found to be
owned or harbored for the purpose of dogfighting solely on the basis of an
exercise program or the use of exercise equipment.
   POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG: As used in this chapter, shall mean any dog:
      1.   Which has been found running at large and impounded, or whose owner
has received citations for violations of this title concerning the dog in
question, two (2) or more times within any twelve (12) month time period; or
      2.   Which, without provocation, acts in a highly aggressive manner
within a fenced yard/enclosure and appears to a reasonable person able to jump
over or escape; or
      3.   Which, without provocation, has tried to attack a person or domestic
animal if it is restrained by a leash, fence or other means and it is clear
that only the presence of the leash, fence or other means of restraint
prevented the dog from immediate attack.
   PROVOCATION: Any act toward a dog done with the intent to tease, torment,
abuse, assault or otherwise cause a reaction by the dog; provided however, that
any act by a person done in self-defense shall not be considered to be a
provocation. "Provocation" shall also include any act by a dog in defense of a
litter while the dog was properly confined on the owner's property.
   B.   Determination; Abatement:
      1.   Options: If the animal services coordinator determines that a dog is
a "dangerous dog", as defined herein, the animal services coordinator shall
either proceed to abate the animal under subsection 13-2-7B of this chapter,
attempt to obtain the written consent of the dog's owner to euthanize the dog,
or require the owner to register and restrain the dog in accordance with this
chapter. If the animal services coordinator determines that a dog is a
"potentially dangerous dog" as defined herein, the animal services coordinator
shall provide written notice to the owner or keeper of the dog, and shall
require the owner to register, pay applicable fees, and restrain the dog in
accordance with this chapter.
      2.   Aggravating Circumstances: If aggravating circumstances are
determined to exist, the animal services coordinator shall immediately proceed
with abatement proceedings and shall not provide the owner with the option of
registration. Aggravating circumstances may include any of the following
circumstances:
         a.   That the unprovoked attack resulted in the death or severe injury
of a human being. "Severe injury" means any injury that results in fractured
bones, extensive medical care, or maiming.
         b.   That the dog in question has previously, without provocation,
attacked, bitten or inflicted physical injury on a human being or domestic
animal.
         c.   That the dog has previously been registered to be a dangerous dog
or potentially dangerous dog and either repeats the same or similar behavior or
whose owner fails to comply with the ordinances pertaining to registration or
control of dangerous dogs or potentially dangerous dogs.
      3.   Exceptions: No dog shall be considered dangerous or potentially
dangerous if the finding is based solely on the fact that the dog attacked, bit
or menaced a person committing a crime against person or property at the time
of the attack.
      4.   Owner Knowledge: It shall not be necessary, in order to sustain a
charge of maintaining a nuisance to prove that the owner knew that such
dangerous dog possessed the propensity to attack, cause injury or threaten
persons or other animals where the owner continues to maintain the dangerous
dog.
      5.   Hearing: An owner or keeper of a dog that is determined to be a
"potentially dangerous dog" pursuant to this subsection may appeal such
decision before a hearing officer by filing a written application in the office
of the city recorder for a hearing and present and contest such determination
before a hearing officer. Such application shall be filed within ten (10)
calendar days of the date of the notice of decision and shall be accompanied by
a twenty five dollar ($25.00) filing fee. The hearing shall be conducted as
provided in title 4, chapter 4, article A, "Administrative Hearings", of this
code. The burden of proving that a dog should not be considered a "potentially
dangerous dog" shall be on the appellant.
   C.   Registration:
      1.   Required: It is unlawful for an owner to have a dangerous dog or
potentially dangerous dog within the limits of the city without a certificate
of registration issued by the animal services coordinator. This action shall
not apply to dogs used by law enforcement officials for police work.
      2.   Requirements: A dangerous dog, or potentially dangerous dog, shall
not be registered by the animal services coordinator unless the owner shall
meet the following requirements:
         a.   The owner shall, on or prior to the effective date of such
registration, have an enclosure, as described in subsection D1 of this section,
for the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog on the property where the
dog will be kept or maintained. The "effective date" shall be determined at the
time of the bite or aggressive behavior causing the "dangerous dog"
requirements to be imposed.
         b.   The owner shall display a sign on the premises warning that there
is a dangerous or vicious dog on the premises. The sign shall be clearly
visible and capable of being read from the closest public thoroughfare or
highway. In addition, the owner shall conspicuously display a sign with a
warning symbol that informs children of the presence of a dangerous dog.
         c.   The owner shall, at his own expense, have the animal licensed and
microchipped.
         d.   The owner may, at the owner's expense, have the licensing number
assigned by the city to such dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog
permanently tattooed upon the dog by a licensed veterinarian or person trained
by profession as a tattooist. The tattoo shall be placed on the upper left rear
thigh of the dog. The animal services coordinator may otherwise designate the
particular location of the tattoo.
         e.   The owner shall at all times cause the dangerous dog or
potentially dangerous dog to wear a collar with a tag of a color and type
designated by the animal services coordinator so that the dog is readily
identifiable as a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog.
         f.   The owner shall, at his own expense, have the dangerous dog or
potentially dangerous dog spayed or neutered by a licensed veterinarian.
         g.   The owner shall sign a statement attesting that:
            (1)   The owner shall abide by the requirements of registration and
the ordinances as they pertain to the control of dangerous dogs or potentially
dangerous dogs within the limits of the city;
            (2)   The owner or keeper shall notify the division immediately if
a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog is on the loose, is unconfined, or
has attacked another animal or a human being. If the dangerous dog has died,
been sold or given away, the owner or keeper shall notify the animal services
coordinator by the end of the next business day and shall also provide the
division with name, address and telephone number of the new owner of the
dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog;
            (3)   The owner or keeper shall maintain and not voluntarily cancel
the liability insurance required by subsection C2i of this section during the
twelve (12) month period for which licensing is sought, unless the owner or
keeper shall cease to own or keep the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous
dog prior to expiration of such license; and
            (4)   The owner shall agree to inspection of the premises in order
to ensure compliance with the ordinance controlling dangerous dogs or
potentially dangerous dogs.
            (5)   In the event the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog
is usually kept on premises owned by someone other than the owner of the dog,
the owner of the dog must obtain written permission from the landlord or
property owner to keep the dog on such premises, a copy of which shall be filed
with the city at the time of licensing.
         h.   The owner shall pay an annual registration fee as specified in
subsection 13-2-3A8 of this chapter. Said fee shall be over and above regular
license fees.
         i.   The owner or keeper shall present to the division proof that the
owner or keeper has procured liability insurance in the amount of at least
fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), covering any damage or injury that may be
caused by such dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog during the twelve
(12) month period for which licensing is sought, which policy shall contain a
provision requiring Ogden Animal Services, 2186 Lincoln Avenue, Ogden, UT
84401, to be named as an "other interested party" for the sole purpose that
Ogden Animal Services shall be notified by the insurance company of any
cancellation, termination or expiration of the liability insurance policy. Such
proof of insurance shall be in such form as approved by the city's risk manager
or city attorney, and shall be provided annually upon license renewal.
      3.   Inspections And Seizure; Authority: The animal services coordinator
is hereby empowered to make whatever inquiry is deemed necessary to ensure
compliance with the provisions regarding dangerous dogs or potentially
dangerous dogs, including inspection of premises in which a dangerous dog or
potentially dangerous dog is kept, and any animal control officer or peace
officer is hereby authorized to seize and impound any dangerous dog or
potentially dangerous dog whose owner fails to comply with the provisions
hereof.
      4.   Minors; Parent Responsible: If the actual owner of the dangerous dog
or potentially dangerous dog is under the age of eighteen (18), the parent or
guardian of that minor shall be responsible for compliance with requirements of
this chapter regarding registration and control of dangerous dogs or
potentially dangerous dogs.
   D.   Control:
      1.   Confinement: While on the owner's property, a dangerous dog or
potentially dangerous dog shall be securely confined indoors or in a securely
enclosed and locked pen or structure, suitable to prevent the entry of young
children and designed to prevent the dog from escaping. Such pen or structure
must have minimum dimensions of five feet by ten feet (5' x 10'). The pen or
structure must have a cement floor with secure sides attached to the bottom and
a secure top attached to the sides. The enclosure must also provide protection
from the elements for the dog.
      2.   Off Premises: A dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog may be
off the owner's premises, or outside of an enclosure as described above, only
if it is muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash not exceeding
three feet (3') in length and under the control of a person capable of
completely restraining the dog and under the direct supervision of the owner or
if enclosed in an airline approved dog shipping crate. The muzzle must be a
commercial muzzle appropriate to the breed, made in a manner that will not
cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration, but must
prevent it from biting any person or animal.
(Ord. 2013-44, 10-15-2013)
13-2-9: PROTECTIVE CUSTODY:
   A.   Authority To Enter Premises: Any police officer, the animal services
coordinator or his/her assistants and officers are authorized to enter the open
premises of any person to take possession of any fierce, dangerous or
potentially dangerous, vicious or at large animal when in fresh pursuit of such
animal at the time it goes onto private property.
   B.   Confinement; Provisions Authorizing: The animal services coordinator
shall place all animals which he/she takes into custody in the Weber County
Animal Shelter. Weber County ordinances and regulations pertaining to the
shelter shall apply. Animals shall be taken into protective custody in the
following cases:
      1.   Any animal being kept or maintained contrary to the provisions of
this title.
      2.   Any sick or injured animals whose owners cannot be immediately
located or whose owner requests impoundment for euthanasia.
      3.   Any abandoned, neglected or distressed animal whose health or safety
may be threatened should the animal not be readily placed into protective
custody.
      4.   Any animal running at large contrary to the provisions of this
title, with any reasonable means to immobilize or capture such animal.
      5.   Any animal which is by this title required to be licensed and is not
licensed.
      6.   Any animal which is not vaccinated for rabies in accordance with
requirements of this title.
      7.   Any animal to be held for quarantine.
      8.   Any vicious animal not properly confined as required.
      9.   Any dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog not properly confined
as required.
      10.   Any animal in the custody of any person who is arrested or
otherwise detained by any law enforcement officer, in the event another
responsible party cannot be immediately located by the owner.
   C.   Notification To Owner: If by license tag, microchip or other means the
owner of a sheltered or injured animal can be identified, the division shall,
upon taking the animal into protective custody, make reasonable efforts to
notify the owner by telephone, personal contact or mail sent to the last known
address of the listed owner if identified.
   D.   Disposition If Unreclaimed: Any animal voluntarily relinquished or any
animal taken into protective custody which is not reclaimed by its owner within
five (5) working days (excluding Sundays and holidays) shall become the
property of the county.
   E.   Citation In Lieu Of Custody: In lieu of placing an animal found at
large in protective custody, the animal services officer may issue a citation
of ordinance violation to the owner.
   F.   Animal Rescue Organizations: At the discretion of the animal services
coordinator, and consistent with the city's agreement with the Weber County
Animal Shelter, an animal surrendered by its owner may be taken to an
appropriate rescue organization.
   G.   Medical Attention: Any animal in protective custody having or suspected
of having serious injury or a contagious disease requiring medical attention
may be examined and may receive appropriate medical attention at the discretion
of the animal services coordinator, or his/her assistants and officers.
   H.   Extensive Injuries Or Disease: When in the judgment of the animal
services coordinator or his/her assistants and officers, it is determined that
an animal should be euthanized for humane reasons, such as extensive or
irreparable injuries or disease, that animal may be euthanized upon obtaining
the judgment of a veterinarian, or of two (2) witnesses called by the officer
to view the animal in the officer's presence, or upon obtaining consent to the
destruction from the owner or keeper of the animal, or as otherwise provided by
law.
   I.   Redemption; Approval: The owner of any animal taken into protective
custody or his/her authorized representative may redeem such animal while still
in the care of the Weber County Animal Shelter according to the county's fee
schedule and regulations, and at such time as the animal's release is approved
by the division.
   J.   Records Required: The division shall keep records showing:
      1.   Complete description of the animal, including tag numbers and
license records.
      2.   The manner and date of protective custody.
      3.   Where the animal was picked up and the identification of the officer
involved.
      4.   The name and address of any person relinquishing or surrendering an
animal.
      5.   The location where an animal is brought, if other than the Weber
County Animal Shelter.
      6.   All fees received by the division.
(Ord. 2013-44, 10-15-2013)
13-2-10: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
   A.   Concealment: It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally
conceal or shelter an animal from its rightful owner or the division or to
cause the same to be done.
   B.   False Claim Of Ownership: It shall be unlawful to claim ownership and
to relinquish such animal to the division when not the rightful owner.
   C.   Release Without Owner Permission: It shall be unlawful for any person,
except personnel of a law enforcement agency, the county health department or
the division, to intentionally release from humane restraint any animal from
its rightful owner, without permission from the owner.
(Ord. 2013-44, 10-15-2013)
CHAPTER 3
CARE AND OFFENSES
SECTION:
13-3-1: Cruelty To Animals
13-3-2: Molesting Animals
13-3-3: Transfer Or Abandonment In Public Places
13-3-4: Places Prohibited
13-3-5: Responsibilities Of Persons
13-3-6: Wild Animals
13-3-7: Killing Of Animals; Defenses
13-3-8: Arrest Of Violator; Animals Seized
13-3-9: Keeping Of Diseased Or Painfully Crippled Animals
13-3-1: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
A person commits cruelty to animals when he/she:
   A.   Animal Fighting: Causes one animal or fowl to fight with another. It is
unlawful for any person to participate in animal fighting exhibitions and
related activities in violation of Utah Code Annotated section 76-9-301 et
seq., as amended. Violators shall be subject to the penalties and enforcement
provisions specified in Utah Code Annotated section 76-9-301 et seq., as
amended.
   B.   Poisons Or Toxic Drugs: Intentionally or carelessly administers or
applies any poisonous or toxic drugs or any material injurious to tissues or
organs to any animal or livestock, or procures or permits the same to be done,
whether the animals be his/her own property or that of another. No person shall
administer a medication or remedies not usually recommended by common
veterinary practices, including the administration of injectable drugs or
vaccines not approved by the food and drug administration or recommended by the
American Veterinary Medical Association. This provision shall not be
interpreted so as to prohibit the use of poisonous substances for the control
of vermin in furtherance of public health when applied in such a manner as to
reasonably prohibit access to other animals.
   C.   Pain And Suffering: By act or omission causes pain, suffering, terror
or torment, or if she/he injures, mutilates or causes disease or death to any
animal or fowl.
   D.   Trapping; Exception: Administers or applies or procures or permits the
administration or application of any trapping mechanism, other than a live
capture trap or exposes such a trapping mechanism to animals or livestock, with
the intent to harm or take the animal, whether the animal be his/her own
property or that of another. All set live capture traps shall be checked and
emptied daily. All traps must have owner identification permanently affixed to
them. Any person capturing a dog or cat in a live capture trap within the city
is hereby required to turn the animal over, within twenty four (24) hours of
its capture, to an Ogden City animal services officer, the Weber County Animal
Shelter, or the animal's owner.
   E.   Neglects Adequate Care: It is unlawful for any person to intentionally,
knowingly, recklessly, or with criminal negligence fail to provide necessary
food, water, care, or shelter for an animal in the person's custody in
violation of Utah Code Annotated section 76-9-301 et seq., as amended.
   F.   Fowl; Fighting: Raises, trains, purchases or sells any animal or fowl
for fighting or harbors fowl for fighting purposes, which has the comb clipped
or the spur altered or who is in possession of cock spurs, slashers, gaffs, or
other tools, equipment, devices or training facilities for the purpose of
training and/or engaging an animal in combat with another animal.
   G.   Spectator At Contest: Is present as a spectator at any animal contest
or rents any building, shed, room, yard, ground or premises for the purpose of
holding such a contest between animals, or knowingly suffers or permits the use
of any building, shed, room, yard, ground, or premises belonging to him/her or
under his/her control for any of these purposes.
   H.   Abandonment: Abandons an animal.
   I.   Operations: Performs or causes to be performed any of the following
operations:
      1.   Inhumanely removed any portion of the beak of any bird, domestic or
wild.
      2.   Alters the gait or posture of any animal, by surgical, chemical,
mechanical or any other means, including soring.
      3.   Crops or cuts the ears, removes an animal's claws or sterilizes a
dog or cat and is not a licensed veterinarian.
      4.   Inhumanely docks the tail of an animal or removes an animal's
dewclaws.
   J.   Artificially Colored: Sells, purchases, owns or has custody of any
animals or fowl that have been dyed, painted, or otherwise artificially
colored.
   K.   Fowl; Advertising Devices:
      1.   Under Eight Weeks Of Age: Sells or offers for sale, raffle, prizes,
a premium or an advertising device any chicks, goslings, ducklings or other
fowl younger than eight (8) weeks of age in quantities of less than six (6)
birds to an individual recipient.
      2.   Brooders And Heating Devices: Offers chicks, ducklings, goslings or
other fowl for sale, raffles, offers as a prize, a premium or an advertising
device, or displays chicks, ducklings, goslings or other fowl to the public
without providing and operating brooders or other heating devices that may be
necessary to maintain the chicks, ducklings, goslings or other fowl in good
health and without keeping adequate food and water available to the birds at
all times.
   L.   Prizes Or Inducements: Awards live animals, fish or fowl as prizes or
inducements:
      1.   No live animal, fish or fowl may be given away, raffled or offered
as a prize, premium, advertising device or as an inducement to enter any
contest, game or other competition.
      2.   No live animal, fish or fowl may be given away as an inducement to
enter a place of amusement or business.
      3.   No person may give away any live animal, fish or fowl as an
incentive to enter any commercial or business agreement.
   M.   Transportation Carriers: Carries or causes to be carried any animal in
a manner harmful to that animal. Suitable racks, cars, crates or cages in which
such animals may stand, move freely or lie down during transportation, or while
awaiting slaughter, must be provided.
   N.   Turtles; Size: Sells any turtle, less than four inches (4") in diameter
or in contravention of any state or federal law or regulation dealing with the
same.
   O.   Unattended In Vehicle: Leaves any animal confined in a vehicle
unattended in such a manner that places it in a life threatening situation by
exposure to a prolonged period of extreme hot or cold without proper
ventilation or other protection from such heat or cold.
   P.   Working Animals; Observable Strain: Continuously drives or works a
horse or other animal to a point of observable strain. Working animals shall be
offered water periodically.
   Q.   Birds And Nests: Takes or kills any bird or robs or destroys any nest,
eggs, or young of any bird in violation of the laws of the state.
   R.   Inhumane Hobbling: Inhumanely hobbles livestock or other animals.
   S.   Food And Water: Leaves any horse, mule, ox or other animal used for
draft, driving or riding purposes on the street without protection from the
weather or without food and water.
   T.   Reckless Riding Or Driving: Recklessly rides or drives any horse, mule
or other animal or animals on any street, highway, avenue or alley of the city.
   U.   Injury Or Unnecessary Suffering: Induces or encourages an animal to
perform through the use of chemical, mechanical, electrical or manual devices
in a manner which will cause, or is likely to cause, physical injury or
unnecessary suffering.
(Ord. 2013-44, 10-15-2013)
13-3-2: MOLESTING ANIMALS:
   A.   Unlawful: It shall be unlawful for any person to in any manner tease,
annoy, disturb, molest or irritate an animal that is confined to the owner's
property.
   B.   Exception: The provisions of subsection A of this section shall not
apply to animal services officers or law enforcement officers acting within the
scope of their authority.
(Ord. 2013-44, 10-15-2013)
13-3-3: TRANSFER OR ABANDONMENT IN PUBLIC PLACES:
   A.   Definitions:
   ANIMAL WELFARE ORGANIZATION: As used in this section, means a recognized
nonprofit organization incorporated in the state, which regularly engages in
the practice of acquiring or transferring animals for the purposes of animal
welfare, which includes protecting or caring for animals, returning animals to
the natural habitat, or placing animals for adoption.
   PUBLIC PLACE: A location visited by many persons, usually accessible to the
general public, where the public gathers together or to pass to and from,
including, but not limited to, flea markets, yard sales, or parking lots.
   B.   Unlawful: It is unlawful for any person to transfer to another by gift,
sale or exchange for any consideration any animal in or upon any sidewalk,
street, alley, public right of way, park or other public place.
   C.   Exception: This section does not prohibit transfer of animals under the
following circumstances:
      1.   When the animal transferred is livestock and one of the parties to
the transfer is a person who engages in the business of buying or selling
livestock for profit.
      2.   When the transfer takes place pursuant to a sale conducted by a
public body or a public officer.
      3.   When one of the parties to the transfer is a member of an animal
welfare organization and is acting on behalf of the animal welfare
organization.
      4.   When the transfer takes place at an animal show or exhibition
conducted by or for persons who regularly engage in the practice of breeding
animals for show or exhibition.
(Ord. 2013-44, 10-15-2013)
13-3-4: PLACES PROHIBITED:
Except for qualified service animals in accordance with the Americans with
disabilities act, government law enforcement, military service dogs and guide
dogs temporarily housed in the city under a recognized guide dog program, it
shall be unlawful for any person to take or permit any animals, whether on a
leash or in the arms, in any establishment or place of business where food or
food products are sold or distributed, including, but not limited to,
restaurants, grocery stores, meat markets and fruit or vegetable stores.
(Ord. 2013-44, 10-15-2013)
13-3-5: RESPONSIBILITIES OF PERSONS:
   A.   Harboring; Duty To Notify: It is unlawful for any person to harbor or
keep within the city limits any lost or strayed animal. Whenever any animal
shall be found which appears to be lost or strayed, it shall be the duty of the
finder to notify the division within seventy two (72) hours. The animal
services coordinator may take the animal into protective custody.
   B.   Struck By Motor Vehicle: It shall be the duty of the operator of a
motor vehicle or self-propelled vehicle upon the city streets to immediately
notify, upon injuring, striking, maiming or running down any domestic animal,
the animal's owner or the city police department. In addition, it shall be the
duty of the operator of the motor vehicle to remain with the animal or to
obtain a responsible person to remain with the animal until professional
assistance arrives. Emergency vehicles are exempted from the requirements of
this provision.
   C.   Animal Waste: The person having custody of an animal shall be
responsible for the immediate removal and disposal in a waste receptacle of any
excreta deposited by his/her animals on public property, including, but not
limited to, walks, trails, parks, recreation areas, or on private property
other than that belonging to the owners of the animals, and shall carry a bag
for such purposes. A violation of this subsection is an infraction, subject to
the penalties provided under title 1, chapter 4, article A of this code.
   D.   Duty To Bury Or Otherwise Dispose Of Dead Domestic Animals: Pursuant to
Utah Code Annotated section 4-31-102, as amended, an owner or other person
responsible for a domestic animal that dies shall bury or dispose of the same
within two (2) business days after the day on which the owner or other person
responsible for the animal becomes aware that the animal is dead. The person
responsible for disposal of a dead animal must dispose of it by burial,
landfilling, incineration, or another method that is not otherwise prohibited
by federal, state, or local law or regulation. Pursuant to section
12-2-3 of this code, dead animals shall not be set out for collection by city
crews or city contractors. If the city incurs expenses in conjunction with
disposing of a dead domestic animal, the owner or person responsible for the
dead animal shall pay a fee to the division for its reasonable costs of
disposing of the animal. If the owner or person responsible for the animal
fails to bury or dispose of a dead domestic animal as required under this
section, or fails to pay such fee, such person shall be in violation of this
title.
(Ord. 2013-44, 10-15-2013)
13-3-6: WILD ANIMALS:
   A.   Keeping Unlawful; Exceptions: Except as provided in subsection C of
this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale,
barter, give away, keep or purchase any "wild animal" as described in the
definition and/or which is fierce, dangerous, noxious or naturally inclined to
do harm. The animal shelter, a zoological park, veterinary hospital, humane
society shelter, public laboratory, circus, sideshow, amusement show, wildlife
preserve or facility for education or scientific purposes may humanely keep
such animal in protective devices adequate to prevent such animal from escaping
or injuring the public.
   B.   Order Of Release; Authority: After consultation with a representative
from the Utah division of wildlife resources, the animal services coordinator
and his/her assistants and officers shall have the power to release or order
the release of any wild animal kept under temporary permit which is deemed
capable of self-survival, or to recommend other appropriate action on behalf of
any animal found incapable of survival in its natural habitat.
   C.   Federal Regulations; Prohibited Or Protected Species: It shall be
unlawful for any person to keep an animal of a species prohibited or protected
by title 50 of the code of federal regulations, or its successor provisions, or
by any regulation of law of the state. This subsection shall not apply to
raptors possessed by licensed falconers holding valid Utah division of wildlife
resources and U.S. fish and wildlife falconry permits, as required, so long as
the conditions of the permits are being satisfied.
(Ord. 2013-44, 10-15-2013)
13-3-7: KILLING OF ANIMALS; DEFENSES:
   A.   Licensed Veterinarian: It is a defense to prosecution under this
chapter that the conduct of the actor toward the animal was by a licensed
veterinarian using an accepted veterinary practice or directly related to a
bona fide experimentation for scientific research; provided, that if the animal
is to be destroyed, the manner employed will not be unnecessarily cruel unless
directly necessary to the veterinary purpose or scientific research involved.
   B.   Attack On Domestic Animal: Any person may kill a dog while it is
attacking, chasing or worrying any domestic animal having a commercial value or
any species of hoofed, protected wildlife, while attacking domestic fowl or
while such dog is being pursued thereafter.
   C.   Attack On Person: Any dog making a vicious and unprovoked attack on any
person, except when the attack is in defense of the person, family or property
of the dog's owner, may be killed by any person while it is making such an
attack.
(Ord. 2013-44, 10-15-2013)
13-3-8: ARREST OF VIOLATOR; ANIMALS SEIZED:
It shall be the duty of a person making an arrest under this chapter to seize
or arrange to be seized all animals found in the keeping or custody of a person
arrested and which are then being used, or held for use in violation of any of
the provisions of said chapter. The person making said seizure shall cause such
animals to be delivered immediately to the division or other appropriate law
enforcement agency and it shall be the duty of those departments to humanely
hold those animals until further court order.
(Ord. 2013-44, 10-15-2013)
13-3-9: KEEPING OF DISEASED OR PAINFULLY CRIPPLED ANIMALS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to abandon or turn out at large any sick,
diseased or disabled animal.
   B.   It is unlawful for the owner or handler of an animal rendered worthless
to said owner or handler by reason of disease or disability, to allow said
animal to continue to live in a diseased or disabled state. Said owner or
handler shall dispose of such animal by killing the same in a humane manner, or
by contacting the division. Upon such contact, the division may assume
responsibility for disposition of the animal, not including livestock, provided
that the owner or handler shall pay a fee, which may be required in advance, to
the division to pay for the division's reasonable costs of disposing of the
animal. If the owner or handler fails to pay such fee, and fails to dispose of
the diseased or disabled animal as required above, such person shall be in
violation of this title.
   C.   It is unlawful for an owner or handler of an animal that is infected
with a disease, or is in a painfully crippled condition, to have, keep or
harbor such animal without placing the animal under veterinary care or to
dispose of such animal as required in subsection B of this section.
(Ord. 2013-44, 10-15-2013)
CHAPTER 4
BEEKEEPING
SECTION:
13-4-1: Definitions
13-4-2: Purpose
13-4-3: Hives On Residential Lots
13-4-4: Hive Construction, Location And Water Supply
13-4-5: Beekeeper Registration
13-4-6: Conflict With County Health Department Regulations
13-4-7: Civil Penalties
13-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall mean as follows:
APIARY: Includes bees, combs, hives, appliances or colonies wherever the same
are kept, located or found.
BEES: Common domestic bees specifically used in the production of honey, and
includes the adults, eggs, larvae, pupae or other immature stages thereof,
together with such materials as are deposited into hives by their adults,
except honey and rendered beeswax.
COLONY: One hive and its contents, including bees, combs and appliances.
COMB: Includes all materials normally deposited into hives by bees except
extracted honey or royal jelly, trapped pollen, and processed beeswax.
FLYWAY BARRIER: A solid wall, fence, or dense vegetation that directs the
flight pattern of the bees at least six feet (6') above ground level over the
nearest property lines in the vicinity of the apiary.
HIVE: Any receptacle or container, or part thereof, made or prepared for the
use of bees or inhabited by bees.
(Ord. 2014-7, 2-4-2014)
13-4-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to authorize beekeeping subject to certain
requirements intended to avoid problems that may otherwise be associated with
beekeeping in populated areas.
(Ord. 2014-7, 2-4-2014)
13-4-3: HIVES ON RESIDENTIAL LOTS:
   A.   Maintenance Of Apiaries: As provided in this chapter, an apiary
consisting of one or more hives may be maintained on a residential lot or
residential rooftop as follows:
 
Size Of Lot      Maximum Number Of Hives
Up to 1/2 acre   5 hives
1/2 acre or more 10 hives
 
   B.   Written Permission: A person shall not locate nor allow a hive on
property owned or occupied by another person without first obtaining written
permission from the owner or occupant.
(Ord. 2014-7, 2-4-2014)
13-4-4: HIVE CONSTRUCTION, LOCATION AND WATER SUPPLY:
   A.   Honeybee colonies shall be kept in hives with removable frames which
shall be kept in sound and usable condition.
   B.   In residential zones or neighborhoods:
      1.   Placement: Hives shall not be located in a front yard. Hives shall
be located at least twenty five feet (25') from any adjoining property line or
street right of way line unless shielded by a flyway barrier. If shielded by a
flyway barrier, hives shall be located at least five feet (5') from any
adjoining property line or street right of way line.
      2.   Rooftop Hives: Rooftop hives shall be situated in such a way as to
minimize impact on adjacent properties.
      3.   Design And Water Supply: Hives shall be placed at least six inches
(6") above the ground, and shall not exceed seven feet (7') in overall height
above ground or rooftop level. This includes all brooders, supers, stands and
any other components of the hive. Hive entrances shall be oriented away from
the nearest adjacent dwelling if less than twenty five feet (25') from the
hive. A supply of fresh water shall be maintained on the owner's property where
it is readily accessible for bees to prevent them from congregating at
neighboring swimming pools or other sources of water on nearby properties.
   C.   Hives shall be operated and maintained as provided in the Utah bee
inspection act, Utah Code Annotated, title 4, chapter 11, as amended, and in
accordance with all applicable state and local laws and policies.
   D.   Each hive shall be conspicuously marked with the owner's name, address,
telephone number, and state registration number.
(Ord. 2014-7, 2-4-2014)
13-4-5: BEEKEEPER REGISTRATION:
Each beekeeper shall be registered with the Utah department of agriculture and
food as provided in the Utah bee inspection act.
(Ord. 2014-7, 2-4-2014)
13-4-6: CONFLICT WITH COUNTY HEALTH DEPARTMENT REGULATIONS:
In the event of a conflict between any regulation set forth in this chapter and
honeybee management regulations adopted by the Weber-Morgan health department,
the most restrictive regulations shall apply.
(Ord. 2014-7, 2-4-2014)
13-4-7: CIVIL PENALTIES:
A violation of this chapter or maintaining a nuisance under title 12, chapter 8
of this code, after notice of violation and expiration of the warning period
may be enforced by imposition of the following civil penalties pursuant to
title 1, chapter 4, article B of this code:
   A.   The first civil citation issued after expiration of the warning period
shall subject the responsible party to the initial penalty of one hundred
twenty five dollars ($125.00).
   B.   The second civil citation issued after expiration of the warning period
and the prior imposition of the initial penalty shall subject the responsible
party to the intermediate penalty of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
   C.   Any subsequent civil citation issued after expiration of the warning
period and the prior imposition of the intermediate penalty, or any reoccurring
violation under section
1-4B-6 of this code, shall subject the responsible party to the maximum penalty
of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(Ord. 2014-7, 2-4-2014)
TITLE 14
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
14-1-1: Title
14-1-2: Applicability
14-1-3: Purpose And Intent
14-1-4: Definitions
14-1-5: Variations And Exceptions
14-1-6: Enforcement, Violations, And Penalties
14-1-7: Fees
14-1-8: Amendments
14-1-9: Applicant Notification
14-1-10: Appeals
14-1-1: TITLE:
The provisions of this title shall be known, cited and referred to as the
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE OF OGDEN CITY.
(1979 Code § 17.04.005; amd. 1999 Code)
14-1-2: APPLICABILITY:
No person shall subdivide any tract of land which is located wholly or in part
in the city except in compliance with this title. No person shall sell or
exchange or offer to sell or exchange any parcel of land which is any part of a
subdivision of a larger tract of land, nor offer for recording in the office of
the county recorder, any deed conveying such parcel of land, or any interest
therein, unless such subdivision has been created pursuant to and in accordance
with the provisions of this title.
(1979 Code § 17.04.010; amd. 1999 Code)
14-1-3: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The underlying purpose and intent of this title is to promote the health,
safety, convenience and general welfare of the inhabitants of the city in the
matter of the subdivision of land and related matters affected by such
subdivision. Any proposed subdivision and its ultimate use shall be in the best
interests of the public and shall be in harmony with good neighborhood
development of the area concerned, and the subdivider shall present evidence to
this effect when requested to do so by the planning commission.
(1979 Code § 17.04.020)
14-1-4: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms, as used in this title, shall have the respective meanings
set forth in this section:
AFFECTED ENTITY: A county, municipality, independent special district under
title 17A, chapter 2, Utah Code Annotated, independent special district, local
district under title 17B, chapter 2, Utah Code Annotated, local districts,
school district, interlocal cooperation entity established under title 11,
chapter 13, Utah Code Annotated, interlocal cooperation act, specified public
utility, a property owner, a property owners' association, or the Utah
department of transportation, if:
   A.   The entity's services or facilities are likely to require expansion or
significant modification because of an intended land use;
   B.   The entity has filed with the municipality a copy of the entity's
general long range plan; or
   C.   The entity has filed with the municipality a request for notice during
the same calendar year and before the municipality provides notice to an
affected entity in compliance with a requirement imposed under this title or
other requirement of state law.
CITY ENGINEER: The city engineer of Ogden City, Utah.
COLLECTOR STREET: A street, existing or proposed, of considerable continuity
which serves or is intended to serve as the principal trafficway between large
and separated areas or districts and which is the main means of access to the
major street system.
COMPLETE SYSTEM: A fully functional and operational infrastructure system
constructed as part of a subdivision and, when applicable, actually connected
to existing city infrastructure. Culinary water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer,
streets and landscaping are each a separate system. Storm sewer facilities
associated with a street are not complete until any required street
improvements are completed.
CONTACT PERSON: The individual designated in an application or petition, filed
pursuant to the provisions of this title, to receive notices, copies of staff
reports, and notices of final actions on a pending application.
DEPARTMENT: The community and economic development department.
DEVELOPMENT REVIEW TEAM: The manager, or the manager's designee, the city
engineer, or the city engineer's designee, the city attorney, or the city
attorney's designated assistant city attorney; representatives from the
building services division, operations division, water division, fire
department and police department; and other departments or divisions of the
city as needed; or any company or agency, such as a utility company, which has
been asked to review a preliminary or final plat under the provisions of this
title.
DIRECTOR: The director of the community and economic development department, or
the director's designee.
ENGINEERING STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS: The regulations, design standards,
and construction specifications for the construction of public improvements, as
adopted by the city engineer and filed with the city recorder's office.
ENHANCED MEDIAN: A landscaped median required as part of the general plan to be
located in the center portion of a minimum eighty foot (80') collector road. A
collector road for which an enhanced median is required is: Skyline Parkway.
INITIAL PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT PLAN: A plan which identifies generally how the
subdivider intends to extend water and sanitary sewer services, provide storm
drainage and storm detention facilities, and extend public streets to and
through the subdivision. All or some portions of the plan may be depicted on
the preliminary plat. The plan shall:
   A.   Identify the proposed location and size of all proposed sanitary
sewers, water mains, storm sewers and storm detention basins, and their
connection to existing facilities, including manholes, fire hydrants, and
valves, and identify the water pressure in existing water mains;
   B.   Identify proposed grades and widths of streets;
   C.   Provide sufficient information to show how proposed mains and lines
will be fed by gravity;
   D.   Identify any proposed variations from the standards for public
improvements adopted under chapter 3 of this title; and
   E.   Identify all private streets and any or all portions of water, sanitary
sewer, or storm sewer facilities located within private streets which the
subdivider is requesting to be owned and maintained by the city.
LAND USE ORDINANCE: Any planning, zoning, development, or subdivision ordinance
of the city, including, but not limited to, the provisions of this title,
commonly referred to as the subdivision ordinance of Ogden City and title 15 of
this code, commonly referred to as the zoning ordinances of Ogden City, Utah.
It is not intended to refer to the Ogden City general plan.
MAJOR CHANGE: Shall include, but not be limited to:
   A.   Any amendment that results in or has the effect of decreasing open
space in the subdivision by ten percent (10%) or more, increasing density in
the subdivision by ten percent (10%) or more, increasing the number of lots by
ten percent (10%) or more, or increasing the lot size of more than ten percent
(10%) of the lots by an amount of five hundred (500) square feet or greater;
   B.   A change in the alignment, connection or grade of a public or private
street, that could alter the locations, alignments or connections of water,
sanitary sewer, storm sewer lines and facilities; or
   C.   A change that would require amendment to any approved conditional use
permit.
MAJOR STREET: A street, existing or proposed, which serves or is intended to
serve as a major trafficway and is designated on the master street plan as a
controlled access highway, major street, parkway or other equivalent term to
identify those streets comprising the basic structure of the street plan.
MANAGER: The manager of the current planning division of the community and
economic development department of Ogden City.
MASTER STREET PLAN: A plan, labeled "Master Street Plan Of Ogden City",
including maps or reports or both, which was, on September 11, 1951, certified
to the board of commissioners as required by law, or such plan as it may be
amended from time to time and so certified to the city council.
MINOR STREET: A street, existing or proposed, which is supplementary to a
collector street and of limited continuity which serves or is intended to serve
the local needs of a neighborhood.
NEXT REGULARLY SCHEDULED MEETING: The next regularly scheduled meeting as
determined by the rules and procedures of the planning commission, which
meeting shall be held in a reasonable period of time following application and
a determination by the manager that an application is ready for review.
PLANNING COMMISSION: The Ogden City planning commission.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT PLANS: The designs and specifications for all public
improvements, and any related information and data necessary for review and
approval of such plans.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS: Improvements intended to be owned, maintained and operated
by the city after completion of construction by the subdivider and final
inspection and acceptance of the city engineer, including, but not limited to,
roadways, curb, gutter, and sidewalk; culinary water, sanitary sewer and storm
drainage mains, lines and related facilities; and storm detention facilities.
Public improvements include landscaping required by ordinance and on site
stormwater facilities even though such improvements will be maintained by the
property owner.
PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR: The director of the department of public services of
Ogden City, Utah.
RESUBDIVISION: Any change in a plat or map of an approved or recorded
subdivision that requires the filing of an amended plat or map or planning
commission review of a preliminary plat, or the vacation of all or a portion of
an existing plat or map as part of the recording of a new plat or map.
SUBDIVISION: A. Any land that is divided, resubdivided or proposed to be
divided into two (2) or more lots, parcels, sites, units, plots, or other
division of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, for offer, sale,
lease or development either on the installment plan or upon any and all other
plans, terms and conditions.
   B.   "Subdivision" includes:
      1.   The division or development of land whether by deed, metes and
bounds description, devise and testacy, lease, map, plat or other recorded
instrument; and
      2.   Except as provided in subsection C of this definition, divisions of
land for all residential and nonresidential uses, including land used or to be
used for commercial, agricultural, and industrial purposes.
   C.   "Subdivision" does not include any of the following:
      1.   A bona fide division or partition of agricultural land for the
purpose of joining one of the resulting separate parcels to a contiguous parcel
of unsubdivided agricultural land, if certified by the director that neither
the resulting combined parcel nor the parcel remaining from the division or
partition violates an applicable land use ordinance.
      2.   A recorded agreement between owners of adjoining unsubdivided
properties adjusting their mutual boundary, if certified by the director that:
         a.   No new lot is created; and
         b.   The adjustment does not violate applicable land use ordinances.
      3.   A recorded document, executed by the owner of record:
         a.   Revising the legal description of more than one contiguous
unsubdivided parcel of property into one legal description encompassing all
such parcels of property; or
         b.   Joining a subdivided parcel of property to another parcel of
property that has not been subdivided, if the joinder does not violate
applicable zoning ordinances.
      4.   A recorded agreement between owners of adjoining subdivided
properties adjusting their mutual boundary if:
         a.   No new dwelling lot or housing unit will result from the
adjustment; and
         b.   The adjustment will not violate any applicable land use
ordinance.
   D.   The joining of a subdivided parcel of property to another parcel of
property that has not been subdivided does not constitute a "subdivision" under
this definition as to the unsubdivided parcel of property or subject the
unsubdivided parcel to the requirements of this chapter and chapters 2 and 3 of
this title.
   E.   The word "subdivide" and any derivative thereof shall have reference to
the term "subdivision", as defined in this section. A condominium project shall
be considered to be a subdivision as provided in Utah Code Annotated section
57-8-35.
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES: Traffic signs limited to speed limit, yield and stop
signs and stop bar pavement markings.
ZONING ORDINANCE: The zoning ordinances of Ogden City, Utah, as adopted in
title 15 of this code.
(Ord. 2013-35, 6-25-2013)
14-1-5: VARIATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Unusual Conditions: In cases where unusual topographic or other
exceptional conditions exist, variations and exceptions from this title may be
made by the mayor.
   B.   Manufacturing Zones: As to land now or hereafter zoned "manufacturing"
by the zoning title, variations and exceptions from this title and waiver of or
changes in requirements provided by this title may be granted by the mayor.
(1979 Code § 17.04.030; amd. Ord. 91-52, 12-19-1991)
14-1-6: ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATIONS, AND PENALTIES:
   A.   General:
      1.   It is unlawful for any person to subdivide a tract or parcel of land
that is located wholly or in part in the city except in compliance with this
title. A plat of any subdivision may not be recorded until it has been
submitted and approved as required herein.
      2.   The subdivision of any lot or any parcel of land by the use of metes
and bounds description for the purpose of sale, transfer, lease, or development
is prohibited unless approved as part of a lot line adjustment or small lot
subdivision.
      3.   No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any
building or structure located on a lot, parcel or plat subdivided or sold in
violation of the provisions of this title, nor shall the city have any
obligation to issue certificates of occupancy, other permits or licenses, or to
extend utility services to any parcel or lot created in violation of this
title.
   B.   Penalty: Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall
be guilty of a class C misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, subject to
penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code.
   C.   Additional Remedies: The city may take appropriate actions and
proceedings in law or in equity to prevent any violation of this title, to
prevent unlawful construction, to recover damages, to restrain, correct, or
abate a violation, to prevent illegal occupancy of a building structure or
premises, or otherwise require the property to conform to the provisions of
this title. These remedies shall be in addition to the penalties described
above.
(1979 Code § 17.04.040; amd. Ord. 2005-9, 4-5-2005)
14-1-7: FEES:
All applications for subdivision shall be accompanied by the subdivision review
fee imposed in title 4, chapter 6 of this code in order to cover the expense of
the review process for subdivisions.
(1979 Code § 17.04.050; Ord. 87-32, 6-25-1987; amd. 1999 Code; Ord. 2000-35, 6-
27-2000)
14-1-8: AMENDMENTS:
   A.   This title may be amended from time to time by the city council;
provided that no amendment may be made unless the amendment was proposed by the
planning commission or first submitted to the planning commission for its
recommendation.
   B.   Prior to proposing or recommending any change to this title, the
planning commission shall hold a public hearing. Notice of the date, place and
time of the first public hearing shall be:
      1.   Mailed to each affected entity at least ten (10) calendar days
before the public hearing; and
      2.   Posted:
         a.   In at least three (3) public locations within the city; or
         b.   On the city's official website; and
      3.   Published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least
ten (10) calendar days before the first public hearing.
   C.   The above noticing policies are not intended to restrict the city
council or the planning commission from providing additional noticing based on
the particulars of the matter before them.
   D.   The city council may overrule the planning commission's recommendation
by a majority vote of its members.
   E.   The city council shall consider each proposed amendment to this title
recommended to it by the planning commission, and may adopt or reject the
ordinance either as proposed by the planning commission or after making any
revision the city council considers appropriate.
(Ord. 2005-67, 12-6-2005)
14-1-9: APPLICANT NOTIFICATION:
   A.   For any application submitted pursuant to this title, the director
shall:
      1.   Notify the contact person of the date, time, and place of each
public hearing and public meeting to consider the application, when held by the
planning commission, mayor, director, or other administrative body or official;
      2.   Provide to the contact person on each application a copy of each
staff report regarding the applicant or the pending application, as it pertains
to reviews before the planning commission, mayor, director or other
administrative body or official, at least three (3) business days before the
public hearing or public meeting; and
      3.   Notify the applicant or petitioner of any final action on a pending
application.
   B.   If the director fails to comply with the requirements of subsection A1
or A2 of this section, or both, the applicant or the applicant's representative
in attendance at any public hearing or public meeting may waive the failure so
that the application may stay on the public hearing or public meeting agenda
and be considered as if the requirements had been met.
   C.   In any application or petition submitted pursuant to this title, the
director may require that the name, address, telephone number, fax number and
e-mail address of a designated contact person be provided by the applicant.
Notification to the designated contact person shall be considered to be
notification to the applicant under section 10-9a-202, Utah Code Annotated.
   D.   If the application or petition is being heard before the city council,
after review and recommendation of the planning commission, the city council
staff, with the assistance of the city recorder and the director, shall:
      1.   Notify the contact person of the date, time, and place of each
public hearing and public meeting to consider the application or petition;
      2.   Provide to the contact person on each application a copy of each
staff report regarding the applicant or the pending application at least three
(3) business days before the public hearing or public meeting.
(Ord. 2006-44, 7-25-2006)
14-1-10: APPEALS:
Any person adversely affected by a final written decision of the mayor pursuant
to the provisions of this title may file a petition for review of the decision
with the district court within thirty (30) days after the mayor's decision is
final.
(Ord. 2006-44, 7-25-2006)
CHAPTER 2
PLANS REQUIRED 1
SECTION:
14-2-1: General Procedure
14-2-2: Preapplication Meeting
14-2-3: Optional Concept Plan Review
14-2-4: Concept Approval For Properties Within The Sensitive Area Overlay Zone
14-2-5: Preliminary Plats
14-2-6: Final Plats
 
Notes
1 1. Prior ordinance history: 1979 Code §§ 17.12.010, 17.12.020, 17.12.030,
  17.16.010, 17.16.020, 17.16.030; Ord. 91-52, 12-19-1991; 1999 Code.
14-2-1: GENERAL PROCEDURE:
   A.   Steps Of Approval: Before any land is subdivided the owner of the
property proposed to be subdivided, or the owner's authorized agent, shall
apply for and secure approval of the proposed subdivision in accordance with
the following procedures, which includes three (3) principal steps:
      1.   Concept plan (optional, except for property within the sensitive
area overlay zone).
      2.   Preliminary plat.
      3.   Final plat.
   B.   Coordination Of Flexible Zoning Application With Subdivision Approval:
      1.   It is the intent of these regulations that subdivision review be
carried out simultaneously with the review of flexible zoning applications
under the zoning ordinance. The plans required for flexible zoning applications
shall be submitted in a form to satisfy the requirements of the subdivision
regulations.
      2.   Whenever the zoning ordinance authorizes flexible zoning
applications which permit uses of land and density of buildings and structures
different from those which are allowed as of right with the zoning district in
which the land is situated, and the application entails the subdivision or
resubdivision of land, subdivision approval shall be required in addition to
all other procedures and approvals required in the zoning ordinance, whether or
not applicable zoning procedures also require subdivision approval, or planning
commission review or recommendation. Flexible zoning application shall include,
but not be limited to, all conditional use permits and conditional uses,
planned residential unit developments, group dwellings, residential infill
development.
      3.   Whenever a flexible zoning application is submitted which involves a
subdivision or resubdivision of land, the application shall include all
applications and information required for a preliminary plat application as set
forth in section
14-2-5 of this chapter. If the flexible zoning application is subject to the
review or recommendation of the planning commission, the planning commission
shall review the flexible zoning application concurrently with the review of
the submitted plat.
      4.   No building permits or certificates of occupancy shall be issued for
the project until the zoning application has been finally approved and the
final plat is recorded in the Weber County Recorder's office, except that a
developer may be issued building permits or certificates of occupancy for a
flexible zoning application without filing of the final plat, if:
         a.   The development has received preliminary plat approval;
         b.   The development would constitute an allowable use under the
zoning ordinances of Ogden City, Utah, without recording of the final plat;
         c.   The development is constructed in a manner consistent with the
preliminary plat approval;
         d.   No public dedications of land, easements, public improvements, or
parks are required under the preliminary plat; and
         e.   The developer is willing to proceed at his/her risk that the
final plat may not be approved.
      5.   A flexible zoning development which did not entail the subdivision
or resubdivision of land in its original application, may be subsequently
subdivided or resubdivided for purposes of sale after the project plan has been
finally approved and development completed or partially completed; provided
that the planning commission shall approve the subdivision only if an amended
zoning application also is approved for the flexible development plan.
(Ord. 2000-35, 6-27-2000)
14-2-2: PREAPPLICATION MEETING:
Before preparing a concept plan, or if no concept plan is prepared, before
preparing a preliminary plat, the applicant may schedule an appointment and
meet with the manager, or the manager's designee, to discuss the procedure for
approval of subdivision plats and the requirements as to general layout of
streets and for reservations of land, street improvements, drainage, sewerage,
fire protection, and similar matters, as well as the availability of existing
services. The manager, or the manager's designee, shall also advise the
applicant, when appropriate, to discuss the proposed subdivision with those
officials who must eventually approve those aspects of the subdivision plat
coming within their jurisdiction. The manager may also request that other
members of the development review team be present at such meeting to provide
early assistance to the applicant.
(Ord. 2000-35, 6-27-2000; amd. Ord. 2005-9, 4-5-2005)
14-2-3: OPTIONAL CONCEPT PLAN REVIEW:
Prior to submitting an application for preliminary plat approval, the owner of
land or a prospective purchaser of the land may request the manager, or the
manager's designee, to review a concept plan for the subdivision of such land.
The purpose of a concept plan review is to assist the applicant in determining
the general feasibility of the proposed subdivision prior to proceeding with an
application for preliminary plat approval, and to discuss whether the plan,
with or without revisions, can comply with minimum requirements for the
subdivision of land, considering the proposed lot configuration, street layout,
and the general availability of culinary water, sanitary sewer and storm sewer
facilities in the vicinity of the subject property. The manager shall
coordinate review of the concept plan with the city engineer, and any other
members of the development review team who may assist the applicant in
assessing the viability of the proposed subdivision.
(Ord. 2000-35, 6-27-2000)
14-2-4: CONCEPT APPROVAL FOR PROPERTIES WITHIN THE SENSITIVE AREA OVERLAY ZONE:
Prior to subdividing land located within the sensitive area overlay zone and
prior to filing an application for preliminary plat approval, the owner, the
owner's authorized agent, or a prospective purchaser of the land, shall apply
for and receive conceptual approval of the proposed subdivision from the
planning commission as provided in section
15-27-6 of this code.
(Ord. 2000-35, 6-27-2000)
14-2-5: PRELIMINARY PLATS:
   A.   Application Requirements: Prior to subdividing land, the owner of the
land, the owner's authorized representative, or a prospective owner of the
land, shall file an application for approval of a preliminary plat with the
department. The application shall:
      1.   Be made on forms available at the offices of the department,
together with the required fees, which forms shall at a minimum require the
applicant to provide the name, address and telephone number of:
         a.   The owner, or the owner's authorized representative;
         b.   The subdivider, if different from the existing owner of record;
         c.   The engineer and/or surveyor of the subdivision;
         d.   The designated contact person, in addition to the contact
person's fax number and e-mail address.
      2.   Include one current copy of the Weber County ownership plats
depicting the property proposed for subdivision and all contiguous holdings of
the owner of the subject property including land in "common ownership" as
defined in these regulations.
      3.   A recent, preliminary title report covering the subject property,
which identifies ownership, easements of record, liens or other encumbrances,
and verifies payment of taxes and assessments. The manager may waive the title
report requirement for property owned by the city or the Ogden City
redevelopment agency, if the city attorney determines that information to be
derived from a title report is otherwise available to the city.
      4.   Be accompanied by a minimum of twelve (12) copies of a preliminary
plat meeting the requirements described in subsection B of this section.
      5.   An "initial public improvement plan", as defined herein.
      6.   A soils report identifying allowable soil bearing pressure, lateral
earth pressure, lateral pressure due to seismic forces, liquefaction, seismic
design category/site class, proximity to fault lines, extent of existing fill
materials, and ground water level conditions of the buildable areas proposed to
be subdivided shall be submitted as part of the preliminary subdivision review.
The soils report shall be prepared by a registered soils engineer. In the event
the soils report determines unusual conditions requiring additional development
restrictions on what otherwise appears to be a buildable lot, then such
information shall be noted on the final plat in order to provide notice to
subsequent owners. The manager may waive the requirement for a soils report for
property already developed and constructed upon.
   B.   Requirements Of A Preliminary Plat: The preliminary plat shall be drawn
to a scale not smaller than one hundred feet to the inch (100' = 1"), and shall
show:
      1.   A name of the subdivision that is distinct from any plat already
recorded in the county recorder's office;
      2.   All land which the applicant proposes to subdivide and all land
immediately adjacent extending one hundred feet (100') from the subject
property, or of that directly opposite the subject property, extending one
hundred feet (100') from the street frontage of opposite land, with the names
of owners immediately adjoining the subject property, as shown on the ownership
plat maps maintained in the records of the Weber County recorder's office. This
information may be shown on a separate current ownership plat map reproduction
from the Weber County recorder's office showing the proposed subdivision
superimposed on such plat maps;
      3.   If the property proposed to be subdivided is part of a larger tract
or is part of a larger undeveloped area, a sketch of the proposed future street
system of the unplanned parts shall be submitted, and the proposed street
system of the part submitted shall be considered in the light of adjustments
and connections with the future street system of the larger area;
      4.   Sufficient information to locate accurately the property shown on
the plat;
      5.   Contours of the site at intervals of a maximum of five feet (5') for
property without grades exceeding thirty percent (30%), or at intervals of a
maximum of ten feet (10') for property within the sensitive area overlay zone
or for property with grades exceeding thirty percent (30%);
      6.   The boundaries, course, and dimensions of all of the parcels of
ground divided, by their boundaries, course, and extent, whether the owner
proposes that any parcel of ground is intended to be used as a street or for
any other public use, and whether any such area is reserved or proposed for
dedication for a public purpose;
      7.   The location, widths and other dimensions of all existing or platted
streets and other important features of the subject property which may affect
development, including, but not limited to, easements of record including every
existing right of way and easement grants of record for underground facilities,
as defined in section 54-8a-2 Utah Code Annotated and for other utility
facilities, railroad lines, watercourses, floodplains, exceptional topography
and buildings within the tract or within one hundred feet (100') of the tract
to be subdivided;
      8.   The location and size of existing sanitary sewers, storm drains,
water supply mains and culverts within the subject property or within one
hundred feet (100') thereof;
      9.   The location, lengths, widths and other dimensions of proposed
blocks, streets, alleys, easements, lots, units, and common areas;
      10.   Proposed special features, such as detention basins, shared access
areas, parks;
      11.   North point, scale and date of preparation;
      12.   The names of the subdivider, and the engineer or surveyor of the
subdivision.
   C.   Review; Notice:
      1.   After receiving an application for preliminary plat approval, the
manager shall distribute copies of the plat to the following officials and
reviewing agencies for the information and recommendation of such officials,
divisions and agencies: the city engineer, building services division, the
water utility, the operations division, the fire department, the police
department, and the city attorney; the Ogden City School District and the U.S.
postal service; each company or agency furnishing culinary water, sanitary
sewer or storm sewer, if such services are proposed to be provided by other
than the city; each company or agency furnishing electric, gas, telephone,
cable services, or secondary water.
      2.   If the manager determines that the application is complete and ready
for review, and no major changes are required to be made to the submittal, the
manager shall schedule a public hearing of the proposed subdivision for the
next regularly scheduled planning commission meeting. Notice of the public
hearing giving the date, time and location of the hearing shall be mailed not
less than seven (7) days before the public hearing to:
         a.   Each owner of property located within three hundred feet (300')
of the subject property, addressed to the owner's mailing address appearing on
the rolls of the Weber County assessor;
         b.   Each municipality whose boundaries are within one mile of the
subject property;
         c.   The county, if unincorporated territory is within one mile of the
subject property;
         d.   The owners of record of all parcels in the proposed subdivision;
and
         e.   Each affected entity.
      3.   If revisions are required to be made to the proposed preliminary
plat in order to meet minimum requirements for plat approval, and such
revisions may result in major changes to the proposed preliminary plat, the
subdivider shall make such changes prior to the preliminary plat being
scheduled for review of the planning commission.
   D.   Planning Commission Review And Decision: After the planning commission
has reviewed the preliminary plat, the initial public improvement plans, the
report of the department (including comments and recommendations from other
members of the development review team), and any comments or exhibits submitted
at the meeting, the planning commission may approve, conditionally approve, or
disapprove the preliminary plat only if it does not conform to the land use
ordinances.
   E.   Standards For Preliminary Plat Approval: No preliminary plat of a
proposed subdivision shall be approved by the planning commission or the mayor
unless the applicant proves by clear and convincing evidence that:
      1.   The culinary water authority approves that the water supply system
is sufficient in terms of quantity, dependability, and quality to provide an
appropriate supply of water for the type of subdivision proposed;
      2.   The sanitary sewer authority approves that the system is adequate to
handle the demands and, if other methods of sewage disposal are proposed, that
such systems will comply with federal, state, and local laws and regulations;
      3.   All areas of the proposed subdivision which may involve soil or
topographical conditions presenting hazards or requiring special precautions
have been identified by the subdivider and that the proposed uses of these
areas are compatible with such conditions;
      4.   The proposed subdivision will not result in the scattered
subdivision of land that leaves undeveloped parcels of land lacking municipal
services between developed parcels, or would otherwise detract from the orderly
extension of city utilities and the city's ability to serve other properties in
the area; and
      5.   The subdivider has taken every effort to mitigate the impact of the
proposed subdivision on public health, safety, and welfare.
The planning commission is authorized to disapprove the preliminary plat even
though the land proposed for subdivision is zoned for the use to which the
proposed subdivision will be put and the proposed use is consistent with the
general plan, if the proposed plat does not meet the requirements of this
section and the requirements of this title.
   F.   Phasing: The division of a preliminary plat into two (2) or more
sections for purposes of recording separate final plats must be approved by the
planning commission as part of preliminary plat approval. If the subdivider
plans to divide the preliminary plat for recording purposes, it must submit a
phasing plan describing each phase, the order of phasing and the projected
timing for the recording and development of each phase. The planning commission
may impose such conditions upon the filing of the sections as it may deem
necessary to assure the orderly development of the preliminary plat.
   G.   Submission To Mayor: After a preliminary plat is approved by the
planning commission, the proposed plat shall be submitted to the mayor for
preliminary approval, including the preliminary approval of all proposed public
dedications of land, easements, subdivision improvements or parks, or to
consider any other matters requiring approval of the mayor under the provisions
of this title. If the mayor approves the preliminary plat as recommended by the
planning commission, the developer shall proceed in accordance with approval
granted by the planning commission. If the mayor imposes additional conditions
which do not involve major changes to the plat as approved by the planning
commission, such conditions shall merely be added to the conditions imposed by
the planning commission. If conditions imposed under the mayor's preliminary
approval require other major changes to the preliminary plat, as approved by
the planning commission, the mayor shall refer the preliminary plat back to the
planning commission for further consideration and recommendation. The manager
may require that any such major changes to the proposed preliminary plat be
made to the preliminary plat prior to the preliminary plat being scheduled for
review by the planning commission.
   H.   Copy Of Mayor's Approval: The mayor's approval and any conditions
thereof shall be reduced to writing and signed by the mayor. A copy of such
decision shall be provided to the subdivider as authorization for the
subdivider to proceed with the preparation of subdivision improvement plans and
with the preparation of the final plat.
   I.   Approval Not Acceptance: Approval of the preliminary plat by the
planning commission and the mayor shall not constitute final acceptance of the
subdivision by the mayor. Approval of the preliminary plat by the planning
commission shall constitute a recommendation to the mayor for approval of the
final plat, if the final plat conforms in all respects to the preliminary plat
approval and the requirements of this title for final plat approval.
   J.   Amendments To Preliminary Plats: At any time after preliminary plat
approval and before submission of a final plat, the applicant may request that
an amendment be made in the approval or conditional approval of the preliminary
plat. The manager may agree to proposed amendments that are deemed to be minor.
If the proposed amendment is a major change, the proposed amendment must be
reviewed and approved by the planning commission and the mayor. Consideration
of the amendment shall be limited to whether the proposed amendment should or
should not be approved, together with any conditions or issues reasonably
related to such amendment. The mayor, after receiving the recommendations of
the planning commission, shall approve or disapprove the proposed amendment and
may make any modifications in the terms and conditions of preliminary plat
approval reasonably related to the proposed amendment. If the applicant is
unwilling to accept the proposed amendment under the terms and conditions
required by the mayor, the applicant may withdraw the proposed amendment and
proceed with the original approval. An applicant may not propose more than two
(2) amendments, whether minor or major, to any preliminary plat.
   K.   Effective Period Of Preliminary Plat Approval: Approval of the
preliminary plat by the planning commission shall be valid for a maximum period
of twelve (12) months after approval unless, upon application of the
subdivider, the planning commission grants an extension. If the final plat has
not been recorded within the twelve (12) month or approved extended period, the
preliminary plat must again be submitted to the planning commission for
reapproval; however, preliminary plat approval of a large tract approved to be
subdivided in phases shall not be void if the final plat of the first phase was
recorded within the twelve (12) month period. After recording of the first
phase of a preliminary plat with an approved phasing plan, the preliminary plat
shall be valid for a maximum period of seven (7) years from the recording of
the first phase.
   L.   Construction Of Public Improvements; Public Improvement Plans: Prior to
the construction of any public improvements and prior to the submission of any
financial guarantee:
      1.   The subdivider shall furnish to the city engineer all public
improvement plans, and any related information and data necessary for review
and approval of such plans; and
      2.   The public improvement plans shall be examined and approved by the
city engineer.
   M.   Construction Of Buildings: No construction of buildings requiring a
subdivision shall be begun on the subject property until after recording of the
final plat.
(Ord. 2000-35, 6-27-2000; amd. Ord. 2001-32, 6-5-2001; Ord. 2002-62, 10-22-
2002; Ord. 2005-9, 4-5-2005; Ord. 2005-49, 7-26-2005; Ord. 2006-44, 7-25-2006)
14-2-6: FINAL PLATS:
   A.   Contents; Approval; Acceptance: Following approval of the preliminary
plat, the applicant, if the applicant wishes to proceed with the subdivision,
shall file an application with the department for final plat approval. The
application shall be made by the owner or the owner's authorized agent and
shall:
      1.   Be made on forms available at the offices of the department,
together with the required fees.
      2.   Be accompanied by:
         a.   A minimum of four (4) copies of the proposed final plat;
(Ord. 2000-35, 6-27-2000)
         b.   If preliminary approval was submitted by a prospective owner or
if otherwise required by the city attorney, an updated, recent title report
covering the subject property, which identifies ownership (establishing the
applicant as the owner), easements of record, liens or other encumbrances, and
verifies payment of taxes and assessments;
(Ord. 2005-9, 4-5-2005)
         c.   The proposed declaration of conditions, covenants and
restrictions, if required;
         d.   A copy of the articles of incorporation establishing a
homeowners' association, if required;
         e.   The proposed public improvement plans, submitted for approval of
the city engineer;
         f.   The cost estimate for public improvements;
         g.   Verification that a proposed water main extension contract has
been submitted to the water division;
         h.   Any proposed deeds conveying property or easements to the city,
if improvements or access, not located within existing easements or rights of
way of the city, are required outside of the boundaries of the subject
property; and
         i.   Any other submissions required by preliminary plat approval.
      3.   The name, address and telephone number of:
         a.   The owner, or the owner's authorized representative;
         b.   The engineer and/or surveyor of the subdivision;
         c.   An agent of the owner/subdivider located within the state of Utah
who shall be authorized to receive all notices required by these regulations.
   B.   Additional Requirements: The final plat shall consist of a sheet of
approved Mylar, to the outside or time line dimensions of twenty four inches by
thirty six inches (24" x 36") and the borderline of the plan shall be drawn in
heavy lines leaving a space of at least one and one-half inches (11/2") on the
left margin and one-half inch (1/2") margin on the remaining three (3) sides.
The plat shall be so drawn that the top of the drawing faces either north or
west, whichever accommodates the drawing best. All lines, dimensions, markings
and signatures shall be made on the Mylar with approved waterproof black India
drawing ink. The plat shall be made to a scale large enough to clearly show all
details, in any case not smaller than one hundred feet to the inch (100' = 1"),
and workmanship on the finished drawing shall be neat, clean cut and readable.
The plat shall be signed by all parties mentioned in this subsection duly
authorized and required to sign and shall contain the following information:
      1.   A subdivision name, approved by the county recorder, and the general
location of the subdivision, in bold letters at the top of the sheet;
      2.   A north point, scale of the drawing and the date;
      3.   Accurately drawn perimeter boundaries, showing the proper bearings
and dimensions of all boundary lines of the subdivision, properly tied to
public survey monuments. These lines should be slightly heavier than street and
lot lines;
      4.   The names, widths, lengths, bearings and curve data on centerlines
of proposed streets, alleys and easements; also the boundaries, bearings and
dimensions of all portions within the subdivision, as intended to be dedicated
to the use of the public; the lines, dimensions, bearings and numbers of all
lots, units (except as otherwise may be allowed for condominium projects),
blocks and parts reserved for any reason within the subdivision; also the
acreage or square footage for all parcels, units, or lots. All lots, units, and
blocks are to be numbered consecutively under a definite system approved by the
city engineer. All proposed streets shall be named or numbered in accordance
with and in conformity with the adopted street naming and numbering system of
the city;
      5.   The standard forms of plat depictions or language approved by the
planning commission for the following:
         a.   Description of land to be included in subdivision,
         b.   Registered professional engineer and/or land surveyor's
certificate of survey,
         c.   Owner's dedication,
         d.   Notary public's acknowledgment,
         e.   The manager's certificate of approval that the subdivider has
complied with the requirements of all applicable statutes and ordinances and
that the preliminary plat was approved by the planning commission,
         f.   City engineer's and city attorney's certificate of approval,
         g.   The mayor's certificate of acceptance attested by the city
recorder, and
         h.   Any other plat requirement where standard language is deemed to
be desirable by the planning commission.
      6.   The street names and address designations for each lot as approved
by the city engineer;
      7.   A three inch by three inch (3" x 3") space in the lower right hand
corner of the drawing for recording information.
   C.   Financial Guarantee: Upon the city engineer's approval of the public
improvement plans and the cost estimate for construction of such improvements,
the applicant shall submit any financial guarantee required under the
provisions of this title for the construction of public improvements.
   D.   Review Process:
      1.   After receiving an application for final plat approval, the manager
shall distribute copies of the plat to the following officials for review and
comment: the city engineer, the city attorney, the county recorder, the water
utility, and any other member of the development review team required to review
the final plat as a requirement of preliminary plat approval or as otherwise
required by ordinance or statute.
      2.   In reviewing the final plat:
         a.   The manager shall determine whether the submitted plat complies
with the approved preliminary plat and the conditions of approval, and the
requirements of this title, the zoning ordinance and any other ordinances or
statutes affecting the development of land.
         b.   The city engineer shall:
            (1)   Review and approve the public improvement plans and the cost
estimates for the construction of such public improvements. The public
improvement plans shall be approved if and when the city engineer determines
the plans to be in accordance with the requirements of this title, the
engineering standards and specifications, and any applicable conditions of
preliminary plat approval.
            (2)   Verify, together with the public improvement plans, that the
depictions of streets, easements, storm detention facilities, and other public
improvements comply with the requirements of this title, the conditions of
approval, and the engineering standards and specifications.
            (3)   Verify boundary descriptions.
            (4)   Verify street names, addresses, and lot or unit designations.
            (5)   Verify existing easements of record.
            (6)   Verify submission and approval of any financial guarantees,
deeds, conveyances or other agreements required for final approval and
recordation.
(Ord. 2000-35, 6-27-2000)
         c.   The city attorney shall review the final plat to determine the
plat's conformity to law and the validity or acceptability of any dedications
or interests in real property to be granted or conveyed to the city.
(Ord. 2005-9, 4-5-2005)
      3.   Upon completion of the above reviews, comments shall be returned to
the subdivider for preparation of the final plat for signature and recording.
   E.   Appeal To The Planning Commission: If the final plat is disapproved as
submitted, the applicant may appeal to the planning commission. The appeal
shall be filed by filing a notice of appeal in the offices of the department,
within ten (10) days after the applicant is notified of the disapproval. The
notice of appeal shall set forth in clear and concise fashion the basis for the
appeal. The appeal shall be considered by the planning commission at its next
regularly scheduled meeting, at which time the planning commission may affirm
or reverse the decision of the development review team. On appeal, the
applicant shall be allowed to make a presentation to the planning commission.
The planning commission shall render a decision affirming or reversing the
planning commission no later than thirty (30) days after the notice of appeal
is filed. If the planning commission reverses the decision of disapproval, the
applicant may proceed to submit a final plat as is appropriate under the
conditions of approval agreed to by the planning commission. On appeal, the
planning commission may not approve major changes to the preliminary plat.
Requests for preliminary plat amendment must follow the procedures outlined in
section
14-2-5 of this chapter.
   F.   Submission Of Executed Plat: After making all required revisions, the
subdivider shall submit the Mylar of the final plat, which plat shall be
certified by a professional engineer or land surveyor, and properly executed
and acknowledged by all owners of the property and any other parties required
for recordation.
   G.   Signing And Recordation Of Plat: After approving and signing the final
plat, the manager shall submit the plat for approval to the city engineer.
After approval and signature by the city engineer, the plat shall be submitted
to the city attorney who, after final verification of the requirements of
subsection D2c of this section, shall forward the plat to the mayor for
approval and certificate of acceptance. The final plat, bearing all official
approvals as required in this section, shall be deposited in the office of the
city recorder and made available for recording in the office of the county
recorder at the expense of the subdivider. Upon such deposit, the city recorder
shall notify the subdivider's agent that the approved final plat is available
for recording.
   H.   Plat Approval And Acceptance: No subdivision or subdivision plat shall
be recorded in the office of the county recorder, no lot included in such
subdivision shall be sold or exchanged, and no offer shall be made to sell or
exchange any such lot, unless and until the plat is approved and accepted as
provided in subsection G of this section.
   I.   Specifications Required: The owner or operator of existing underground
and utility facilities shall approve the final plat prior to recording, if the
plat specifies:
      1.   The boundary, course, dimensions, and intended use of the right of
way and easement grants of record;
      2.   The location of existing underground and utility facilities; and
      3.   Any condition or restrictions governing the location of the
facilities within the right of way, and easement grants of records, and utility
facilities within the proposed subdivision.
   J.   Time Limit For Recording: Any final plat having received final approval
by the mayor shall be recorded within one month after final approval. If a
final plat is not recorded within one month after final approval, final
approval shall be considered null and void and the subdivider must resubmit the
final plat for final approval.
(Ord. 2000-35, 6-27-2000)
CHAPTER 3
STANDARDS AND IMPROVEMENTS FOR SUBDIVISIONS
SECTION:
14-3-1: Street Arrangement
14-3-2: Street Widths; Easements
14-3-3: Blocks
14-3-4: Lot Design
14-3-5: Public Open Spaces
14-3-6: Required Improvements
14-3-7: Subdivision Improvement Agreements; Guarantees For Required
Improvements Installation; Forms
14-3-8: Rules And Regulations
14-3-9: Partial Development Standards
14-3-10: Delay In Improvements Installation; Procedure
14-3-1: STREET ARRANGEMENT:
The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make provision for the
continuation of the existing streets in adjoining areas (or their proper
protection where adjoining land is not subdivided) insofar as such may be
deemed necessary by the planning commission for public requirements. The street
arrangement should be such as to cause no unnecessary hardship to owners of
adjoining property when they plat their own land and seek to provide for
convenient access to it. Minor streets shall approach the major or collector
streets at an angle of not less than eight degrees (8°).
(1979 Code § 17.20.010)
14-3-2: STREET WIDTHS; EASEMENTS:
   A.   Major And Collector Streets: Major and collector streets shall conform
to the width designated on the master street plan wherever a subdivision falls
in an area for which a master street plan has been adopted. For territory where
such street plan has not been completed at the time the subdivision preliminary
plan is submitted to the planning commission, major or collector streets shall
be provided as required by the planning commission, with minimum widths of one
hundred feet (100') for major streets and sixty six feet (66') for collector
streets.
   B.   Minor Streets:
      1.   Minor streets shall have a minimum width of:
         a.   Fifty six feet (56'), if such street will abut only residentially
zoned properties; and
         b.   Sixty feet (60') for all other minor streets.
      2.   The improvements established within a minor street shall include a
seven foot (7') wide parking strip and a four foot (4') wide sidewalk on each
side of the street, and a pavement width, not including any required curb or
gutter, of:
         a.   Twenty eight feet (28') for a fifty six foot (56') wide minor
street; or
         b.   Thirty two feet (32') for a sixty foot (60') wide minor street.
      3.   Reductions to the minimum width of minor streets may be approved by
the mayor, after review and recommendation by the planning commission, at
locations where parking on the street is prohibited or where special on street
parking areas are established that protect the areas from the travel lanes, and
such reduction will not result in a violation of the fire code as adopted
pursuant to title 16 of this code.
   C.   Alleys: Alleys shall have a minimum width of twenty feet (20'). Alleys
may be required in the rear of business lots, but will not be accepted in
residential blocks except under unusual conditions where such alleys are
considered necessary by the planning commission.
   D.   Cul-De-Sacs: Cul-de-sacs (dead end streets) shall be used only where
unusual conditions exist which make other designs undesirable. Each cul-de-sac
must be terminated by a turnaround of not less than one hundred feet (100') in
diameter. If surface water drainage is into the turnaround due to the grade of
the street, necessary catch basins and drainage easements shall be provided.
All temporary cul-de- sacs or dead end streets shall be provided with an
adequate turning area at the dead end thereof, to be available for public use
so long as the dead end condition exists.
   E.   Easements For Drainage: Easements for drainage through the property may
be required by the public works director, and easements of not less than ten
feet (10') in width shall be provided where required for utilities or other
purposes.
   F.   Reduced Pavement Width For Streets Serving One Lot Existing Before
January 1, 1951:
      1.   The minimum street width requirement and the minimum pavement width
may be reduced by the mayor, after review and recommendation by the planning
commission, for an unimproved minor street dedicated before January 1, 1951, in
order to allow for the construction and use of one single-family dwelling, if
all of the following conditions are met:
         a.   Only one lot can be accessed from this dedicated street.
         b.   The street shall have a minimum unobstructed pavement width of
twenty feet (20').
         c.   Rolled gutter or curb and gutter shall be provided on both sides
of the pavement.
         d.   The length of the street shall not be longer than one hundred
fifty feet (150') measured from the closest intersection to the farthest
portion of the allowable buildable area on the applicable lot, unless a
turnaround for emergency vehicles, approved by the fire department, is provided
on the applicable lot along with the necessary grant of easement.
         e.   No water meter shall be located in the pavement of the dedicated
street.
         f.   The reduced pavement, and curb and gutter or rolled gutter, if
applicable, shall be improved in accordance with city standards.
      2.   Notwithstanding the above, any reduction in the width of a
previously dedicated street must be vacated by ordinance of the city council.
(1979 Code § 17.20.020; amd. 1999 Code; Ord. 2003-6, 2-18-2003; Ord. 2009-52,
8-4-2009)
14-3-3: BLOCKS:
Blocks shall not exceed one thousand three hundred feet (1,300') in length.
Blocks over eight hundred feet (800') in length shall be provided with a
dedicated walkway through the block at its approximate center. Such walkways
shall be not less than ten feet (10') in width. The width of blocks generally
shall be sufficient to allow two (2) tiers of lots. Blocks intended for
business or industrial uses shall be designed specifically for such purposes
with adequate space set aside for off street parking and delivery facilities.
(1979 Code § 17.20.030)
14-3-4: LOT DESIGN:
   A.   Arrangement: The lot arrangement and design shall be such that lots
will provide satisfactory and desirable sites for buildings, be properly
related to topography and to existing and probable future needs of
infrastructure and lot usage, and provide for a diversity of lot sizes. To
accomplish these goals, in part, the following standards shall specifically
apply to lots created after April 6, 2004, when not established as part of a
planned residential unit development or a group dwelling under the zoning
title:
      1.   The minimum lot depth of any residential lot shall be a minimum of
one hundred feet (100').
      2.   No more than sixty seven percent (67%) of the lots with a single-
family zoning designation shall have a lot area (square footage) within a one
thousand (1,000) square foot range of the minimum lot area required in the
zone.
      3.   Lots with an R-2, R-2EC, R-3, R-3EC, or R-4 zone designation shall
be designed so that no more than fifty percent (50%) of the lots have a lot
area complying with the minimum lot area for a duplex or multiple-family
dwelling in that zone.
   B.   Zoning And Sewage Requirements: All lots shown on the subdivision plan
must conform to the minimum requirements of the zoning title for the zone in
which the subdivision is located, and to the minimum requirements of the public
works director for sewage disposal. The minimum width for any residential
building lot shall be as required in the zoning title.
   C.   Dedicated Street: Each lot shall abut on a street dedicated by the
recording of a subdivision or on an existing publicly dedicated street, or on a
street which has become public by right of use and is more than twenty six feet
(26') wide. Interior lots abutting on more than one street shall be prohibited
except where unusual conditions make elimination of double fronted lots
undesirable. If a double facing interior lot is determined to be appropriate,
those lots which face more than one street shall be:
      1.   Twenty percent (20%) larger than the minimum required lot size for
the zone in which the subdivision is located.
      2.   The rear portion of the lot shall have an added ten feet (10') of
right of way dedicated, which will be between the adjacent property line and
the sidewalk, and landscaped in accordance with an approved landscaping plan.
This landscaped area shall be in addition to the requirement to provide a
landscaped park strip.
      3.   The developer shall install as part of the required public
improvements a six foot (6') see through wrought iron fence with a three foot
(3') wide gate for each lot to provide maintenance access to the landscaped
area and park strip. The fence shall be designed to have a minimum four inch
(4") spacing for vertical members. The fence shall be placed along the property
line facing the rear portion of the lot and the street.
The planning commission may impose restrictive covenants as determined to be
necessary for maintenance of such required improvements.
   D.   Corner Lots; Width: Corner lots shall have extra width sufficient for
maintenance of required building lines of both streets.
   E.   Sidelines; Right Angles: Sidelines of lots shall be approximately at
right angles or radial to the street line.
   F.   Remnants: All remnants of lots below minimum size left over after
subdividing of a larger tract must be added to adjacent lots rather than
allowed to remain as unusable parcels.
   G.   Separate Ownership: Where the land covered by a subdivision includes
two (2) or more parcels in separate ownership and the lot arrangement is such
that a property ownership line divides one or more lots, the land in each lot
so divided shall be transferred by deed to either single or joint ownership
before approval of the final plan and such transfer verified by title report
submitted to and approved by the city attorney.
(1979 Code § 17.20.040; amd. 1999 Code; Ord. 2002-62, 10-22-2002; Ord. 2004-18,
5-18-2004)
14-3-5: PUBLIC OPEN SPACES:
In subdividing property, consideration shall be given to suitable sites for
schools, parks, playgrounds and other areas for public use. Any provision for
such open spaces should be indicated when and in what manner such areas will be
dedicated to, on the preliminary plan, in order that it may be determined or
acquired by the appropriate agency.
(1979 Code § 17.20.050)
14-3-6: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Specified: The owner of any land to be subdivided shall be required to
install or guarantee the installation of the following improvements, under the
specifications and inspection of the director of public services:
      1.   Land for the entire width of the streets shall be dedicated by the
subdivider. The subdivider shall provide all the street grading and surfacing
for all streets, the right of way for which is sixty six feet (66') wide or
less. The subdivider shall provide street grading and surfacing forty six feet
(46') wide on streets, the right of way for which exceeds sixty six feet (66')
in width;
      2.   Curbs and gutters;
      3.   Sanitary sewers, including laterals to the property lines of each
lot;
      4.   Street drainage and drainage structures and surface and storm
drainage structures;
      5.   Water lines, including laterals to the property line of each lot;
      6.   Fire hydrants;
      7.   Sidewalks;
      8.   Street name signs, traffic control devices, and street lighting;
      9.   Substantial fence not less than five feet (5') in height on both
sides of existing irrigation ditches or canals which will carry five (5)
second-feet or more of water and which are located within or adjacent to the
subdivision;
      10.   Bridges and culverts as may be needed for ditches, drains or
canals, for the width of the street right of way, but not more than sixty six
feet (66') for any one bridge or culvert;
      11.   Water facilities adequate to provide a minimum culinary water
service level of fifty pounds per square inch (50 psi) at the individual meter
for each residential lot; provided, that no new water facilities shall be
approved that would diminish the service level to surrounding properties.
      12.   When an enhanced median is required, land for the entire width of
the median shall be dedicated by the subdivider. The subdivider shall install
all infrastructure and landscaping improvements for the enhanced median (median
curb and gutter, median pavement, grading, drainage structures, required
landscaping, irrigation). The landscaping plan for such median shall be
approved by the planning commission. In developing and approving the
landscaping plan, as much existing natural vegetation as possible should be
retained in the median, and where new plantings are required, low water/low
maintenance plant materials should be used. The subdivider shall be reimbursed
for such median costs as follows:
         a.   One hundred percent (100%) of the fair market value of the
dedicated land;
         b.   One hundred percent (100%) of the actual cost of drainage
structures within the median; and
         c.   Eighty five percent (85%) of the actual cost of the remaining
median improvements.
The reimbursements provided herein shall not be in addition to any
reimbursement which would otherwise be required under subsection A1 of this
section.
   B.   Water And Sewer Lines: Water and sewer lines and laterals shall be
installed prior to the surfacing of the street.
   C.   Permit Required; Fee: Minimum standards of design and specifications
for materials and construction for the improvements listed in subsection A of
this section shall be prepared and approved by the city engineer and filed in
the city recorder's office before becoming effective. A permit shall be
obtained from the city engineer before the construction starts on any of these
improvements. The permit and inspection fee shall be thirty dollars ($30.00)
per lot, which fee shall be paid by the subdivider.
(1979 Code § 17.20.060; amd. Ord. 91-52, 12-19-1991; Ord. 96-43, 8-27-1996;
1999 Code; Ord. 99-18, 4-6-1999, eff. 4-17-1999; Ord. 2002-62, 10-22-2002; Ord.
2004-18, 5-18-2004; Ord. 2004-39, 6-15-2004, eff. 7-1-2004; Ord. 2005-49, 7-26-
2005; Ord. 2010-16, 5-4-2010)
14-3-7: SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENT AGREEMENTS; GUARANTEES FOR REQUIRED
IMPROVEMENTS INSTALLATION; FORMS:
   A.   In lieu of actual installation of the improvements required by this
chapter prior to the approval and recordation of the final plat, the mayor, or
the mayor's designee, may permit the subdivider to enter into an agreement by
which the subdivider agrees to complete all required improvements no later than
two (2) years following the approval of the plat and subdivision. The
subdivider shall covenant to maintain each required improvement until
inspection and acceptance by the city engineer and also shall warrant that all
required improvements will be free from defect for a period of twelve (12)
months from the date of final inspection and acceptance. The agreement shall
provide that the covenants contained in the agreement shall run with the land
and bind all successors, heirs, and assignees of the subdivider. The
subdivision improvement agreement shall contain such other terms and conditions
required by the mayor, or the mayor's designee, and shall be approved as to
form by the city attorney.
   B.   Whenever a subdivider is permitted under subsection A of this section
to enter into a subdivision improvement agreement, the mayor, or the mayor's
designee, shall require the subdivider to provide a financial guarantee for the
completion and warranty of the required public improvements by one of the
methods specified as follows:
      1.   The subdivider may furnish and file with the city recorder an
irrevocable letter of credit agreement approved by the mayor, or the mayor's
designee, together with an irrevocable letter of credit issued by a federally
insured bank or savings institution, in an amount equal to one hundred percent
(100%) of the cost of the improvements not previously installed as estimated by
the city engineer, conditioned for the installation of such improvements within
a period of two (2) years immediately following the approval of the plat and
subdivision by the mayor, which agreement and letter of credit shall be
approved by the city attorney as to form, and shall be filed with the city
recorder.
      2.   The subdivider may deposit in escrow either with the city or with a
federally insured bank or savings institution, approved by the mayor, or the
mayor's designee, as a third party depository, an amount of money equal to one
hundred percent (100%) of the cost of the improvements not previously installed
as estimated by the city engineer, as stated in subsection A of this section,
under an escrow agreement conditioned for the installation of said improvements
within two (2) years from the approval of the plat and subdivision by the
mayor. The escrow agreement shall be approved by the mayor, or the mayor's
designee, and by the city attorney as to form and shall be filed with the city
recorder.
   C.   The city shall release the financial guarantee, or portions thereof,
upon request of the subdivider under the following conditions:
      1.   A request is not made more frequently than every thirty (30) days;
      2.   The request is for a completed system that has been inspected and
accepted by the city; and
      3.   All required improvements are warranted by the subdivider for one
full year after final inspection and acceptance. The city shall, as a warranty
assurance, retain a portion of the financial guarantee, or receive from the
subdivider a separate financial guarantee, equal to:
         a.   Ten percent (10%) of the required improvement costs under the
financial guarantees until twelve (12) months from the date of final inspection
and acceptance; or
         b.   Ten percent (10%) of the actual improvement costs if the
developer provides the city with receipts or other evidence of actual cost
deemed satisfactory by the city engineer until twelve (12) months from the date
of final inspection and acceptance.
   D.   The mayor may waive the financial guarantee requirement for
improvements required to be installed by the Ogden City redevelopment agency as
the owner and subdivider of property; provided that the city and the agency
have entered into a subdivision improvement agreement.
   E.   No subdivision improvement agreement or financial guarantee shall be
required for property owned and subdivided by the city, except as may be
necessary to provide for the obligations of parties other than the city.
(Ord. 2013-35, 6-25-2013)
14-3-8: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The mayor is authorized to prescribe, by administrative rule or regulation
filed for record with the city recorder, forms and procedures to ensure the
orderly, regular and efficient processing of applications for the approval of a
proposed subdivision and the strict compliance with the requirements of this
title.
(1979 Code § 17.20.090; amd. Ord. 91-52, 12-19-1991; 1999 Code)
14-3-9: PARTIAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
Whenever the subdivider develops a subdivision a portion at a time as
contemplated by any provisions of this chapter, such development shall be in an
orderly manner and in such a way that the required improvements will be
continuous and all of the said improvements will be made available for the
full, effective and practical use and enjoyment thereof by the lessees or
grantees of any of the lands subdivided, within the time specified in this
chapter.
(1979 Code § 17.20.100)
14-3-10: DELAY IN IMPROVEMENTS INSTALLATION; PROCEDURE:
In the event any part of the periphery of the subdivision consists of an
established public street and because of the condition of the surfacing, grade
or other physical characteristics of that established street, the mayor
determines the installation in that established street of either the street
surfacing or the curb and gutter or both of said improvements, as required by
this section, will result in adversely affecting the surfacing, drainage or
safe usage of that established street, the mayor may:
   A.   Bond: Require the subdivider, by bond or otherwise as allowed in
sections
14-3-7 through
14-3-9 of this chapter, to provide for the installation of said curb and gutter
or street surfacing or both at such time as they can be installed without
adversely affecting the surfacing, drainage or safe usage of the established
public street up to a maximum of ten (10) years after date of subdividing; or
   B.   Release: Release the subdivider from the obligation to install the curb
and gutter or street surfacing, or both, in that established street. No release
will be made except in writing, consented to by all owners of the land in the
subdivision abutting the established street involved. The release shall be
recorded in the records of the county recorder at the subdivider's expense.
(1979 Code § 17.20.110; amd. Ord. 91-52, 12-19-1991)
CHAPTER 4
SMALL SUBDIVISIONS 1
SECTION:
14-4-1: Waiver Of Final Plan Requirement
14-4-2: Waiver Of Preliminary And Final Plan Requirement
14-4-3: Applications; Waivers
 
Notes
  1. Prior ordinance history: 1979 Code §§ 17.24.010, 17.24.020, 17.24.030; Ord.
1 91-52, 12-19-1991; 1999 Code; Ord. 2001-32, 6-5-2001; Ord. 2001-35, 6-5-2001;
  Ord. 2004-18, 5-18-2004; Ord. 2005-49, 7-26-2005.
14-4-1: WAIVER OF FINAL PLAN REQUIREMENT:
The division of a parcel of land by metes and bounds into less than ten (10)
lots or parcels may be approved by the mayor without recording of a plat where
all of the following conditions exist:
   A.   Approved Preliminary Plan: A preliminary plan meeting the requirements
of this title is approved by the mayor, after review and recommendation of the
planning commission, except as otherwise allowed pursuant to section
14-4-2 of this chapter;
   B.   Number Of Lots: The subdivision consists of less than ten (10) lots;
   C.   Dedications: The subdivision does not require the dedication of any
land or easements for street or other public purposes;
   D.   Streets: The subdivision is not traversed by the mapped lines of a
proposed street or a street to be widened as shown on the master street plan;
   E.   Lot Standards: Each of the proposed lots in the subdivision meets the
frontage, width, depth and area requirements of this title and the zoning
title, or has been granted a variance from such requirements by the board of
zoning adjustment;
   F.   Street Frontage: The parcels have frontage on a dedicated street or
highway, or access as provided by section
15-13-3 of this code;
   G.   Improvements: Subdivider installs such improvements on existing streets
as are normally required in this title and provides the necessary guarantees
for such improvements; provided that if the mayor determines that it would be
impractical to install such improvements at such time, the subdivider shall
sign a covenant and agreement running with the property ownership to
participate in and support any assessment district for such improvements;
   H.   Notice: Notice of the date, time and location of the planning
commission meeting where the preliminary plan will be considered is mailed not
less than seven (7) days before the public meeting to each owner of property
located within three hundred feet (300') of the subject property, addressed to
the owner's mailing address appearing on the rolls of the Weber County
assessor;
   I.   Mayor Certification: The mayor certifies in writing that:
      1.   Notice was provided as required in subsection H of this section; and
      2.   The proposed subdivision:
         a.   Is not traversed by the mapped lines of a proposed street as
shown in the general plan and does not require the dedication of any land for
street or other public purposes,
         b.   Has been approved by the culinary water authority and the
sanitary sewer authority,
         c.   Is located in a zoned area, and
         d.   Conforms to all applicable land use ordinances, or has otherwise
received a variance from the requirements of an otherwise conflicting and
applicable land use ordinance.
(Ord. 2006-44, 7-25-2006)
14-4-2: WAIVER OF PRELIMINARY AND FINAL PLAN REQUIREMENT:
The division of a parcel of land by metes and bounds into not more than five
(5) lots or parcels may be approved by the mayor without preliminary approval,
planning commission review and recommendation, and recording of a plat where
all of the following conditions exist:
   A.   Lot Standards: Each proposed lot meets the frontage, width, depth and
area requirements of this title and the zoning title, or has been granted a
variance from such requirements by the board of zoning adjustment;
   B.   Dedications: The division of land does not require the dedication of
land or easements for street or other public purposes;
   C.   Parcel Description: A description of each of the parcels or lots is
submitted to and approved by the city engineer;
   D.   Street Frontage: The proposed parcels or lots have frontage on a
dedicated street or highway, or access as provided by section
15-13-3 of this code;
   E.   Improvements: Subdivider installs such improvements on existing streets
as are normally required in this title and provides the necessary guarantees
for such improvements; provided that if the mayor determines that it would be
impractical to install such improvements at such time, the subdivider shall
sign a covenant and agreement running with the property ownership to
participate in and support any assessment district for such improvements;
   F.   Review; Recommendation: The proposed division of land is reviewed by
the director, the city engineer, the water division, the operations division,
the fire department and the city attorney, and their respective recommendations
submitted to the mayor. The culinary water authority and the sanitary sewer
authority must verify that there are sufficient services available for the
development according to this title;
   G.   Notice: Notice of the date, time and location of a public meeting where
the proposed subdivision will be considered is mailed not less than seven (7)
days before the public meeting to each owner of property located within three
hundred feet (300') of the subject property, addressed to the owner's mailing
address appearing on the rolls of the Weber County assessor; and
   H.   Mayor Certification: The mayor certifies in writing that:
      1.   Notice was provided as required in subsection G of this section; and
      2.   The proposed subdivision:
         a.   Is not traversed by the mapped lines of a proposed street as
shown in the general plan and does not require the dedication of any land for
street or other public purposes,
         b.   Has been approved by the culinary water authority and the
sanitary sewer authority, and
         c.   Is located in a zoned area, and conforms to all applicable land
use ordinances, or has otherwise received a variance from the requirements of
an otherwise conflicting and applicable land use ordinance.
(Ord. 2006-44, 7-25-2006)
14-4-3: APPLICATIONS; WAIVERS:
Application for approval of a division of land into less than ten (10) lots or
parcels under the provisions of this chapter shall be made on forms provided by
the department. Such application may require any information or documents
otherwise required for preliminary plan applications pursuant to subsection
14-2-5A of this title, if determined by the director to be necessary for the
review of the application.
(Ord. 2006-44, 7-25-2006)
CHAPTER 5
PRIVATE SUBDIVISIONS
SECTION:
14-5-1: Applicability
14-5-2: Development Plan Review
14-5-3: Standards
14-5-4: Homeowners' Association
14-5-5: Financial Guarantees
14-5-6: Common Open Space; Maintenance And Development
14-5-7: Covenants, Conditions And Restrictions (CC&Rs)
14-5-1: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all subdivisions which have any
private streets, private utilities, common open space or other facilities
proposed to be held in common ownership ("private subdivisions"). It shall
specifically apply to planned residential unit developments (PRUD), group
dwellings or cluster subdivisions as authorized by the zoning title and shall
be complied with by the subdivider in addition to all conditions generally
applicable to subdivisions.
(1979 Code § 17.28.010; amd. Ord. 98-37, 6-16-1998; Ord. 2004-18, 5-18-2004)
14-5-2: DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW:
All applications for private subdivisions shall meet the requirements for
preliminary and final plats as applicable to other subdivisions, except as
otherwise specifically provided in the zoning title or the provisions of this
chapter.
(1979 Code § 17.28.012; Ord. 98-37, 6-16-1998; amd. Ord. 2004-18, 5-18-2004)
14-5-3: STANDARDS:
   A.   Design: The design of the preliminary and final plats of the
subdivision in relation to streets, blocks, lots, units, common open spaces and
other design factors shall be in harmony with the intent of applicable zoning
regulations and design standards recommended by the planning commission and
approved by the mayor.
   B.   Frontage: All private subdivisions shall have frontage on an improved
public street.
   C.   Lot Standards: The mayor may approve lots without frontage on a public
street, if approved as part of a PRUD or group dwelling development, under the
provisions of the zoning title, wherein a private street within the development
provides access to lots.
   D.   Private Street Requirements:
      1.   Private streets shall meet the same standards required for public
streets, including, but not limited to, right of way width, street pavement
width and thickness, curbing, dimensions, park strip width and sidewalk width
and thickness.
      2.   Private street standards shall apply to any vehicular accessway that
provides lot access to a public street or exceeds a distance of two hundred
feet (200').
      3.   Any gates or planters within a private street shall be approved by
the planning commission and shall not impede required clearances.
      4.   When determined to be necessary by the city, public streets may be
required to be constructed within a private subdivision.
   E.   Private Utilities:
      1.   Defined: As used herein, "private utilities" means facilities for
culinary water, sanitary sewer and storm drainage which are held in common
ownership and provide service to more than one lot or unit.
      2.   Standards: Private utilities shall meet the same standards required
for public utilities.
      3.   Maintenance: The developer and/or subsequent homeowners' association
will be responsible for the maintenance of all private streets and utilities
within the property lines of the subdivision.
      4.   Requirement For Public Utilities: When determined to be necessary by
the city engineer, public utilities, including water lines, sanitary sewer
lines and storm drainage facilities, may be required to be constructed within a
private subdivision. An easement of proper width as determined by the city
engineer shall be deeded to the city for public utility lines.
      5.   Storm Detention Basins: All private storm detention basins shall
comply with the following standards:
         a.   The property comprising the storm detention basin shall be
landscaped in accordance with an approved landscaping plan;
         b.   Such area shall be included as part of the common open space and
adequate provision made for perpetual care and maintenance of the storm
detention facilities and landscaping improvements.
   F.   Inspection: All private streets and required private utilities (water,
sanitary sewer and storm drainage facilities) shall be inspected and approved
by the city prior to occupancy of any residential dwelling unit.
(Ord. 2009-52, 8-4-2009)
14-5-4: HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION:
All private subdivisions shall establish a homeowners' association or similar
organization that will be responsible for the long term care and maintenance of
the subdivision. A complete set of covenants, conditions and restrictions
(CC&Rs) shall provide for the perpetual care and maintenance of all private
utilities, private streets and common open space. The CC&Rs shall also set
forth the funding mechanism for that maintenance.
(1979 Code § 17.28.030; amd. Ord. 98-37, 6-16-1998; Ord. 2004-18, 5-18-2004)
14-5-5: FINANCIAL GUARANTEES:
   A.   Required: As assurance of completion of common open space improvements,
private streets and required private utilities, the subdivider shall be
required to file with the city a financial guarantee guaranteeing such
completion. Except as otherwise provided herein, the financial guarantee shall
meet the requirements of section
15-13-23 of this code.
   B.   Amount: The amount of the financial guarantee for the private streets
or required private utilities shall be approved by the public works director.
The amount of the financial guarantee for the common open space shall be
approved by the director.
   C.   Existing Improvements: Additional guarantees shall not be required for
improvements that have already been constructed and approved prior to recording
of the plat.
(1979 Code § 17.28.040; amd. Ord. 91-52, 12-19-1991; Ord. 98-37, 6-16-1998;
Ord. 2001-32, 6-5-2001)
14-5-6: COMMON OPEN SPACE; MAINTENANCE AND DEVELOPMENT:
   A.   Methods: The mayor, upon recommendation of the planning commission,
shall require the preservation, maintenance and ownership of open space
utilizing, at the city's option, one of the following methods:
      1.   Dedication of the land as a public park or parkway system; or
      2.   Granting to the city a permanent open space easement on and over the
private open spaces to guarantee that the open spaces remain perpetually in
recreation use, with ownership and maintenance being the responsibility of a
homeowners' association established with articles of association and bylaws
which are satisfactory to the city; or
      3.   Complying with the provisions of the condominium ownership act of
1963, Utah Code Annotated title 57, chapter 8, as amended, which provides for
the payment of common expenses for the upkeep of common areas and facilities.
Recreation uses and facilities may be developed within the common open space
areas in compliance with a recreation and landscaping plan approved as part of
the approved final development plan of the planned residential unit
development.
(1979 Code § 17.28.050; amd. Ord. 91-52, 12-19-1991; Ord. 98-37, 6-16-1998)
14-5-7: COVENANTS, CONDITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS (CC&Rs):
   A.   Requirements: Prior to recording of a final plat, the subdivider shall
submit for recording covenants, conditions, and restrictions which will provide
for:
      1.   Perpetual maintenance of common open space and private utilities;
      2.   The establishment of a homeowners' association;
      3.   Other conditions or restrictions to be recorded as CC&Rs under
provisions of the zoning title;
      4.   Compliance with an approved phasing plan;
      5.   Notice to subsequent owners of the need to obtain city approval of
changes to any conditional use permit approving a PRUD or group dwelling
development.
   B.   Streets Not Constructed To City Standards: Streets not constructed to
city standards for public roads shall be noted in a required covenant. Such
covenant shall provide that such streets cannot be dedicated in the future
unless brought up to city standards.
   C.   Amendments: The covenants, conditions and restrictions shall provide
for a method of amending the CC&Rs and the recorded plat.
(1979 Code § 17.28.060; amd. Ord. 91-52, 12-19-1991; Ord. 98-37, 6-16-1998)
CHAPTER 6
CONDOMINIUM APPROVAL PROCEDURE
SECTION:
14-6-1: Purpose And Intent
14-6-2: Submission Of Application
14-6-3: Staff Review
14-6-4: Preliminary Approval By Planning Commission
14-6-5: Notice To Tenants In Conversion Projects
14-6-6: Tenant Protest Review
14-6-7: Final Approval By Planning Commission
14-6-8: Approval By Mayor
14-6-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   Applicability: The procedures and requirements of this chapter shall
apply to and govern the processing of condominium record of survey maps
pursuant to the requirements of the condominium ownership act, title 57,
chapter 8, Utah code. Said procedures and requirements shall supplement zoning,
site development, health, building and other ordinances applicable to a
particular condominium project, and shall apply to the approval of such
projects involving new construction as well as those involving the conversion
of existing structures. In addition, condominium projects which contemplate
dedication of real property or improvements for the use of the public, or
condominium projects in which units are not contained in existing or proposed
buildings shall also be considered subdivisions requiring compliance with the
applicable provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Impact Assessment: It is the intent of this chapter to establish a
reasonable process whereby the city can assess the impact of mixing collective
and individual ownerships, as presented in a particular condominium project,
upon the public health, safety, welfare and convenience of the city. In the
case of commercial or residential conversions of existing buildings,
corrections of building code violations, the upgrading of vehicle parking
facilities and safety of common functional elements of the structure or
structures are of prime importance. It is also recognized that the conversion
of existing apartments or similar multi-family rental dwelling structures
presents the potential of relocation hardship to existing tenants, especially
senior citizens, and warrants that reasonable notice and disclosure
requirements be established by the city to minimize said hardships.
   C.   Definitions: For purposes of this chapter:
   BUILDING CODE: The current building code as adopted by title 16, chapter 2
of this code, or its successor provisions.
   EXISTING BUILDING CODE: The current existing building code as adopted by
title 16, chapter 2 of this code, or its successor provisions.
   TECHNICAL CODES: All of the codes adopted by title 16, chapter 2 of this
code as the rules, regulations and standards for the construction, occupancy,
alteration, repair, remodeling and maintenance of all structures and buildings
within the city.
(Ord. 2011-39, 6-28-2011)
14-6-2: SUBMISSION OF APPLICATION:
The owner or developer of a proposed condominium project desiring approval
shall file an application with the planning commission staff of the city on a
form prescribed by the city, together with:
   A.   Map: Fifteen (15) copies of the proposed map accurately drawn to scale
as required by Utah Code Annotated section 57-8-13, as amended, which shall be
made by a registered Utah land surveyor using a scale no smaller than one inch
to equal forty feet (1" = 40'). In addition, said map or an additional site
plan shall include diagrammatic floor plans identifying boundaries of the
project units, convertible and expandable areas or spaces and common areas.
Said map or plan should designate the intended use of common areas (e.g.,
storage, recreational, parking for guests as opposed to unit owners, open
space, etc.), and should indicate whether such common areas are to be open to
the public, assigned to specific units or semiprivate and available only to
unit owners. Said map or site plan shall also identify and describe in detail
the location of existing or proposed driveways, pedestrianways, curb cuts,
walls, structures, fences, landscaping and sprinkling systems.
   B.   Declarations; Bylaws: Two (2) copies, signed in the original, of the
proposed condominium declarations and bylaws.
   C.   Property Report: Where conversion of an existing building is proposed
as part of the condominium project, two (2) copies of the property report,
prepared by a licensed architect or engineer, including the following
information, shall be submitted as part of the application, together with the
plan for proposed improvements renovations and repairs:
      1.   The age of the building or buildings.
      2.   The general condition, useful life and capacity of the building,
structural elements, including the roof, foundations, mechanical system,
electrical system, plumbing system, boiler and other structural elements.
      3.   All known conditions constituting deficiencies requiring repair to
meet the existing building code.
      4.   All known conditions which may require repair or replacement within
the next succeeding five (5) year period.
      5.   The property report shall certify that the structure or structures
conform to the following minimum standards or the owner shall present plans to
bring the structure or structures into conformity with said standards prior to
issuance of certificates of occupancy:
         a.   Minimum Standards For Decent Sanitary And Safe Housing:
            (1)   The currently adopted property maintenance code and the
existing building code shall be met in all condominium conversion projects.
            (2)   Commercial condominium spaces shall conform to the existing
building code for occupancy separation, construction type and allowable area,
existing height of building, etc.
         b.   Minimum Electrical Service And Devices:
            (1)   Each dwelling unit shall be supplied with a minimum of a
sixty (60) amp service with proper breakers and main disconnect located within
each unit. Each commercial space shall be wired in conduit and have a properly
sized service and disconnects within the space for the intended use. Emergency
lighting and exit signs shall be installed as required by the technical codes.
            (2)   Each habitable room shall contain at least two (2)
convenience outlets and one wall switch controlled light. Hallways, bathrooms
and kitchens shall also have one wall switch controlled light.
            (3)   All new electrical wiring shall comply with the technical
codes and be completed with proper permits and inspections.
            (4)   Smoke detectors and carbon monoxide detectors shall be
installed in each dwelling unit in accordance with the technical codes and with
title 12, chapter 17 of this code.
         c.   Plumbing And Culinary Water Service:
            (1)   A Utah licensed engineer, plumbing contractor or a general
contractor shall determine the adequacy of the existing water service pressure
based on the fixture unit, loading as calculated from the technical codes.
            (2)   Individual shutoff valves must be provided for each unit or
each plumbing fixture within the unit.
            (3)   All new installations must be completed with proper permits
and inspections in accordance with the technical codes.
         d.   Heating And Mechanical Systems:
            (1)   Each dwelling or commercial space must be provided with its
own heating system, except when the building is provided with central water or
steam facilities.
            (2)   Dwelling units and commercial spaces within a building must
be provided with means of controlling the temperature therein.
            (3)   Each bathroom shall be provided with an operable window or
mechanical vent, capable of providing five (5) air changes per hour.
            (4)   All mechanical installations and repairs must be completed
with proper permits and inspections.
         e.   Variances: Where it is determined that physical conditions in an
existing building do not allow the strict application of the above minimum
standards, the board of building and fire code appeals shall, upon written
application and following the procedures described in title 16, chapter 1 of
this code, review all requests to vary from these standards and may grant
variances or approve alternates where it is determined the intent of the
requirement will be met.
   D.   Notice To Tenants: Proof of notice to tenants, as required by section
14-6-5 of this chapter, shall be required before final approval, but may be
submitted, at the owner/developer's option, after preliminary approval is
obtained from the planning commission.
   E.   Reserved.
   F.   Incomplete Applications: Incomplete applications may be proffered and
reviewed for advisory comment by the planning or building services divisions,
but shall not be deemed accepted or received until complete, nor shall the
condominium project be scheduled for any hearings before the planning
commission until the application is complete, except only subsection D of this
section.
(Ord. 2011-39, 6-28-2011)
14-6-3: STAFF REVIEW:
Upon receipt of a completed application for approval of a condominium project,
the city planning staff shall route copies of the application and development
plans in the same manner as a standard subdivision as outlined in chapter 1 of
this title. Additional preliminary review by the planning staff, fire marshal
and the building services division shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
   A.   Planning:
      1.   Letter Of Intent: A letter of intent shall be submitted, indicating
proposed concept of project for staff review. The condominium declarations and
bylaws shall be reviewed as part of the final approval process and will include
provisions addressing and fixing responsibility for the maintenance, upkeep and
repair of common areas, including common walls, electrical, mechanical,
plumbing or utility systems, recreational areas, landscaping and parking areas.
The declarations shall also restrict the use of any individual residential
dwelling unit to single families as defined in section
15-2-7 (definition of "family") of this code. The staff shall also review said
declaration to require appropriate disclosure of any unusual circumstances,
variances or conditions placed upon the condominium project for approval.
      2.   Plans And Related Documents: The staff shall review the plans and
related documents to determine whether the project conforms to applicable
requirements of the zoning title, the status or extent of nonconforming rights,
applicable conditions imposed upon the building or use by ordinance, board of
zoning adjustment variance conditional use permit, and/or prior approval under
a PRUD, clustered or group dwelling plan. If the planning staff finds there are
violations of applicable zoning ordinances or requirements, the staff may
recommend denial of the condominium project until such violations have been
corrected or requirements completed or bonded for prior to final approval by
the planning commission.
   B.   Building Inspection:
      1.   Upon receipt of the application for approval of a condominium
project, the inspection department shall review the proposed building plans for
new construction, and/or in the case of a conversion project, the property
report and plan of improvement, renovations and repairs to determine
conformance with the technical codes. In the case of a conversion, the
department shall require inspections of the property and may require
supplementation, revision and resubmission of the property report where
necessary.
      2.   In the preliminary review report to the planning commission, the
building services division shall note corrections, repairs and replacements
which must be made to bring the structures into compliance with the technical
codes, together with a list of renovation improvements proposed by the owner/
developer which are not required by code. The chief building official shall
also list any requirement of the building code that needs board of appeal
consideration due to unique circumstances associated with the structure. The
building official may then recommend denial until such time as existing
violations of the technical codes are corrected or may recommend preliminary
approval of the project and building report, subject to correction of the
violations prior to final approval.
   C.   Fire Marshal: The city fire marshal shall inspect each structure
proposed for conversion and shall submit a report thereon to the planning
staff, outlining the conditions of the structures as they relate to fire
safety. The marshal shall stipulate those conditions requiring improvement,
prior to occupancy, in the report.
(Ord. 2011-39, 6-28-2011)
14-6-4: PRELIMINARY APPROVAL BY PLANNING COMMISSION:
   A.   Consideration: Upon completion of the recommendations of the building
services division, the planning staff, engineering staff and the fire marshal,
the matter shall be set for consideration by the planning commission.
   B.   Compliance; Final Approval: If the planning commission finds that the
project is in full compliance with: 1) applicable city ordinances; 2) the
requirements of the condominium ownership act of 1975; 3) that proper notice to
tenants has been given; and 4) that in every way the project is ready for final
approval, the planning commission may grant final approval of the project,
authorize the signature of the chairman to be placed upon the necessary
documents and forward the project on to the mayor for his/her consideration.
   C.   Changes; Modifications: If the planning commission finds that the
project substantially complies with the above mentioned criteria, but that
certain facet of the proposal require changes or modifications prior to final
approval, or that tenant notification has not been completed, the planning
commission may grant preliminary approval to the project with instruction as to
what criteria must be met prior to submission for final approval.
   D.   Disapproval: If the planning commission finds the project in conflict
with the ordinances of the city and/or the state and is not in the best
interests of the city as a whole and/or the specific neighborhood in which the
project is proposed to be located; or if it is not satisfied with the site
development plans of the project; the planning commission may disapprove the
project, specifying in detail the reasons for disapproval.
(1979 Code § 17.30.040; Ord. 82-28, 7-1-1982; amd. Ord. 91-52, 12-19-1991; Ord.
2001-32, 6-5-2001, eff. 6-30-2001)
14-6-5: NOTICE TO TENANTS IN CONVERSION PROJECTS:
   A.   Required: As part of the application for approval of a condominium
project, when said project involves the conversion of an existing structure
where the structure has been occupied by residential or commercial tenants
prior to application for conversion, the owner/developer shall provide notice
of intended conversion to said tenants by certified mail. This notice
requirement shall not apply to a structure that was vacant and remained so
during the year prior to filing of the developer's application for conversion;
nor shall it preclude the approval of a project to the expiration date where
every tenant has executed a waiver relinquishing his or her right of notice
under this provision.
   B.   Contents: Such notice shall include:
      1.   The proposal for the conversion of the building to a condominium
project;
      2.   The established dates of construction period and termination of
occupancy which shall not be less than sixty (60) days from the date notice is
served upon occupants or expiration of individual leases, whichever is longer;
      3.   The disclosure of the sales price for each unit shall be no greater
than the price initially advertised and offered to the general public at such
time as when the condominiums are offered for public sale;
      4.   Relocation information for the tenants, specifying available
alternative housing relocation resource agencies and organizations and a plan
of any services to be voluntarily provided by the owner/developer.
   C.   Dissemination: A copy of said notice, together with a list prepared by
the owner/developer identifying names, apartment or unit numbers, approximate
ages, rental rates and other known special handicaps or factors affecting
relocation needs of the tenants, shall be submitted to the Ogden City housing
authority and Weber County social services department to advise said agencies
of the conversion and/or solicit their assistance with relocation services. No
final approval of such a conversion project shall be granted by the planning
commission until the owner/developer has provided proof of notice by certified
mail or subsequent proof of actual delivery by method of services allowed under
Utah Code Annotated section 78-36-6, of such notices and relocation information
as required above, and any plans for relocation services to be voluntarily
provided by the owner/developer and the time designated therein (a minimum of
60 days) has expired.
(1979 Code § 17.30.050; Ord. 82-28, 7-1-1982)
14-6-6: TENANT PROTEST REVIEW:
   A.   Procedure: When a tenant of a residential dwelling has received written
formal notice of eviction without cause and without at least sixty (60) days'
notice of conversion required above and has reason to believe that notice was
issued because of a proposed condominium project he may, within thirty (30)
days of the date of the notice of eviction, initiate an appeal regarding the
issue of proper notice to the mayor on a form provided in the city planning
office. The filing of such a protest shall stay the issuance of any approval or
issuance of any permits for the structure in question for a period not to
exceed thirty (30) days and the matter shall be set for hearing before the
mayor. Subsequent appeals shall not act to further stay the issuance of
approval for the condominium project and no stay shall be granted if the
building official certifies to the mayor that a stay would, in his opinion,
cause imminent peril to life or property. In such cases, approval shall not be
stayed other than by order issued by the district court upon petition, notice
and due cause being shown.
   B.   Agency Assistance: Upon filing, a copy of the appeal shall be forwarded
to the Ogden City neighborhood development agency and Ogden City housing
authority for relocation advice and assistance. Said agency shall, within ten
(10) days, forward to the mayor a statement of its report and recommendation.
   C.   Investigation: Upon filing a tenant appeal, the planning staff shall
institute an investigation to determine if the notice requirements set forth
above were satisfied. They shall then report their findings to the mayor within
ten (10) days of filing of the appeal.
   D.   Hearing:
      1.   The mayor shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal,
give due notice to the appellant and to the owner/developer of the condominium
project, and shall, at said hearing, review said appeal together with agency
and department reports, recommendations and related permit or subdivision
applications, and shall decide the same within thirty (30) days from the date
of filing the appeal.
      2.   The mayor, with regard to the hearing of said appeals, may:
         a.   Enforce the attendance of witnesses, the production of books and
papers and administer oaths;
         b.   Direct municipal resources, if necessary and appropriate for the
alleviation of relocation hardships;
         c.   Hear and decide allegations of error in any order requirement,
decision or determination made by a municipal official in the performance of
his duties as related above;
         d.   See that the laws and ordinances are faithfully executed and
direct investigations accordingly;
         e.   Institute any appropriate actions or proceedings to prevent or
punish persons from or for performing any act contrary to the building and
zoning titles of the city;
         f.   Impose reasonable conditions relating to the terms and conditions
upon which the project will be approved, which may include suspension of
approval pending preparation and implementation of a reasonable relocation plan
or services for tenants who have not been given proper notice, or denial of the
application, in which event the owner/developer may not reapply for eighteen
(18) months from the date of denial.
(1979 Code § 17.30.060; Ord. 82-28, 7-1-1982; amd. Ord. 91-52, 12-19-1991)
14-6-7: FINAL APPROVAL BY PLANNING COMMISSION:
If, upon submission of the recommendations of the building official and
planning staff, engineering staff and fire marshal, the planning commission
finds that the project is in compliance with applicable ordinances and the
requirements of preliminary approval, the planning commission may grant final
approval. The planning commission will review recommendations from the planning
staff, engineering staff, the fire marshal and building official for work that
is proposed for subsequent completion, bonding or waiver and may otherwise
impose appropriate terms upon such bonding or conditions upon its approval.
(1979 Code § 17.30.070; Ord. 82-28, 7-1-1982; amd. Ord. 91-52, 12-19-1991)
14-6-8: APPROVAL BY MAYOR:
   A.   Upon final approval by the planning commission, the planning staff
shall ensure all conditions of approval have been completed, all final
documentation is signed and submitted, including any required bonds or
agreements required to be filed, and shall then submit the matter, together
with the recommendation of the planning commission, with the chairman's
signature upon the map, before the mayor for final approval. If the mayor shall
determine said project is in conformity with the requirements of applicable
ordinances of the city, the mayor may approve said map and project. If the
mayor should determine said project is not in conformity with the requirements
of the ordinances of the city, or if they reject any offers of dedication; or
if not satisfied with plans of a project which constitutes a subdivision, the
mayor may disapprove said map, specifying reasons for disapproval.
   B.   Within thirty (30) days after the mayor has disapproved any project,
the developer may file with the planning staff a map or documents altered to
meet the requirements of the mayor. Upon receipt of said map or documents, the
matter shall be referred back to the mayor by the planning staff for
reconsideration.
   C.   No final map shall have any force or effect until the same has been
approved by the city as reflected by the signature of the mayor and is
officially recorded with the city recorder within eighteen (18) months from the
date of the mayor's signature.
(1979 Code § 17.30.080; Ord. 82-28, 7-1-1982; amd. Ord. 91-52, 12-19-1991)
CHAPTER 7
SUBDIVISION AMENDMENTS, ALTERATIONS AND VACATIONS
SECTION:
14-7-1: Definitions
14-7-2: Plat Amendments, Alterations And Vacations; Mayor And Community
Development Director Authorized; City Council Authority
14-7-3: Standards And Procedures
14-7-4: Petition Requirements
14-7-5: Criteria
14-7-6: Notice
14-7-7: Street Or Alley Vacations
14-7-8: Plat Vacation By City
14-7-9: Property Line Adjustments
14-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
LOT COMBINATION: The altering of a subdivision plat by joining two (2) or more
of an owner's contiguous, residential lots into one lot.
PLAT VACATION: The elimination of a plat, in whole or in part, which vacation
may apply to subdivided lots as well as roads, alleys, easements, and other
areas depicted or dedicated on the plat.
PROPERTY LINE ADJUSTMENT: The adjustment of a mutual boundary line between the
owners of adjacent parcels that are described by either a metes and bounds
description or as a lot within a recorded plat.
PUBLIC STREET OR ALLEY: Any street or alley, including a right of way or public
access easement, that was dedicated as a public thoroughfare by means of
recordation of a subdivision plat or street dedication plat. It also includes
public streets or alleys, rights of way, and public access easements
established by use or conveyed to the city, or its predecessor, by deed,
declaration, legislative act or other instrument of conveyance other than a
subdivision plat or street dedication plat.
(Ord. 2009-54, 8-18-2009)
14-7-2: PLAT AMENDMENTS, ALTERATIONS AND VACATIONS; MAYOR AND COMMUNITY
DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR AUTHORIZED; CITY COUNCIL AUTHORITY:
   A.   The mayor may, with or without petition, upon recommendation of the
planning commission, consider and approve any proposed vacation, alteration, or
amendment of a recorded subdivision plat under the provisions of this chapter
and Utah Code Annotated section 10-9a-608 as amended. The vacation of a public
street or alley, when proposed as part of an amended plat, shall be reviewed
and approved by the city council.
   B.   The director may, upon petition, consider and approve a property line
adjustment, under the provisions of this chapter and Utah Code Annotated
section 10-9a-608(5) as amended.
   C.   The city council may, with or without petition, consider and approve
any proposed vacation of a public street or alley, after public hearing and
notice as provided in section
14-7-7 of this chapter and Utah Code Annotated section 10-9a-208.
(Ord. 2009-78, 12-22-2009)
14-7-3: STANDARDS AND PROCEDURES:
   A.   Compliance With Zoning Title And Subdivision Title Requirements: Any
amendment, alteration, or vacation of a recorded subdivision plat shall comply
with the requirements of the zoning title. The approval of an amended
subdivision plat shall comply with the standards and procedures for the
approval of a new subdivision plat, except for those procedural requirements
waived herein.
   B.   Preliminary Plat Approval:
      1.   In addition to the petition requirements under section
14-7-4 of this chapter, the director may require the submission of any
information or documents otherwise required for preliminary plat approval for
any proposed amended subdivision plat that:
         a.   Requires the additional dedication of any land for street or
other public purposes; or
         b.   Creates more than five (5) new additional lots.
      2.   Under such circumstances, the petitioner shall meet with the
director prior to submission of the petition in order to determine what
additional documents or information will be necessary to adequately review the
proposal.
   C.   Resubdivision: Whenever an owner or developer desires to vacate all or
a portion of a recorded subdivision plat for purposes of the resubdivision of
land, the owner or developer shall first, or concurrently therewith, obtain
approval for the new or resubdivided plat by the same procedures prescribed for
the subdivision of land.
   D.   Approval And Recordation: All subdivision amendments shall be approved
by recording of an amended plat in the office of the Weber County recorder
meeting all requirements of this title for the approval of a final plat, except
where approval by another instrument is authorized herein.
   E.   Waiver Of Requirement To File Amended Plat: The filing of an amended
plat shall not be required to effectuate a subdivision amendment, alteration or
vacation under the following circumstances:
      1.   A property line adjustment approved by the director pursuant to
section
14-7-9 of this chapter.
      2.   The vacation of an easement, other than a public access easement,
dedicated to the city may be approved by recording of a deed signed by the
mayor quitclaiming any interest the city may have in the described easement.
      3.   The vacation of an entire subdivision plat, wherein the
resubdivision of the property is not intended, may be approved by recording of
a resolution duly adopted by the city council containing a legal description of
the entire subdivision.
   F.   Planning Commission Review: All petitions to vacate, alter or amend a
subdivision plat shall be reviewed by the planning commission and its
recommendations made to the mayor, except that property line adjustments may be
approved without planning commission review and recommendation, if such
adjustment is reviewed and approved by the director, the city engineer, and the
city attorney, pursuant to section
14-7-9 of this chapter.
   G.   Required Owner Signatures: Any amended plat, or conveyance document
effectuating a property line adjustment, shall be signed and acknowledged by
all owners of the real property which is the subject of the amended plat or
property line adjustment.
   H.   Effective Period Of Approval: Approval of a petition to amend a plat
shall be valid for a maximum period of twelve (12) months, unless, upon
application of the subdivider, the planning commission grants an extension. If
the amended plat has not been recorded within twelve (12) months or the
approved extended period, the amended plat must again be submitted for
approval.
   I.   Time Limit For Recording: After the mayor has approved a petition to
amend a plat, an amended plat shall be prepared and approved in the same manner
as final plats under the provisions of section
14-2-6 of this title. An approved amended plat, in the form of a final plat,
shall be recorded within one month after receiving approval from the city. If a
final plat is not recorded within one month after receiving final approval, the
approval shall be considered null and void and the petitioner must again submit
for final approval.
(Ord. 2009-54, 8-18-2009)
14-7-4: PETITION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   A fee owner of land, as shown on the last county assessment roll, in a
subdivision that has been laid out and platted as provided in this title may
file a written petition with the city to have some or all of the plat vacated,
altered, or amended. A separate petition is required if the applicant proposes
to vacate a public street or alley in connection with the vacation, alteration
or amendment of a plat. A petition to vacate, alter or amend a plat shall be
made on forms provided by the department, upon payment of fees as prescribed in
title 4, chapter 6 of this code. A petition shall include at a minimum:
      1.   The name and address of each owner of record of the land contained
in the entire plat.
      2.   The signature of each of these owners within the plat who consents
to the petition.
      3.   The name, address, telephone number, fax number and e-mail address
of the designated contact person.
      4.   A copy of the recorded plat to be amended, and a current copy of the
Weber County ownership plats depicting the subdivision and the adjacent
properties.
      5.   Be accompanied by a minimum of twelve (12) copies of the proposed
amended plat.
      6.   A recent title report covering the subject property, which
identifies ownership, easements of record, liens or other encumbrances, and
verifies payment of taxes and assessments. Such requirement may be waived by
the director if the city attorney determines that the ownership records of
Weber County or other documentation of ownership provided by the petitioner
will be adequate.
      7.   Any additional information or documents required by the director to
be submitted pursuant to subsection
14-7-3B of this chapter, in order to adequately review the proposed amendment,
alteration or vacation.
   B.   Unless an amended plat is not required under the provisions of this
chapter, a copy of the proposed amended plat is required.
   C.   No petition shall be accepted unless accompanied by the applicable fee
required in subsection
4-6-1A1 of this code. Regardless of the action on the petition, the petitioner
will have no right to a refund of any monies, fees, or charges paid to the city
nor to the return of any property or consideration dedicated or delivered to
the city except as may have previously been agreed to or approved by the city.
   D.   For purposes of determining whether all owners in the subdivision have
signed a petition or an amended plat, ownership may be determined as of the
date of the petition requesting the amendment, alteration or vacation.
(Ord. 2009-54, 8-18-2009)
14-7-5: CRITERIA:
The vacation, alteration, or amendment of a recorded subdivision plat may be
approved upon a finding that there is good cause for the vacation, alteration,
or amendment and on such terms and conditions as are reasonable to protect
public health, safety, and welfare, or as is necessary to meet the requirements
for new subdivisions.
(Ord. 2009-54, 8-18-2009)
14-7-6: NOTICE:
   A.   Except for a lot combination or a property line adjustment involving
unsubdivided properties, notice of a proposed subdivision vacation, alteration,
or amendment shall be made by:
      1.   Mailing the notice to each record owner of property located within
three hundred feet (300') of the property that is the subject of the proposed
plat change, and all record owners of property subject to the change, addressed
to the owner's mailing address appearing on the rolls of the Weber County
assessor at least ten (10) calendar days before a public meeting or public
hearing where the matter will be considered. The notice shall include:
         a.   A statement that anyone objecting to the proposed plat change
must file a written objection to the change within ten (10) days of the date of
the notice;
         b.   A statement that if no written objections are received by the
city within the time limit, no public hearing will be held; and
         c.   The date, place, and time when a public meeting or public
hearing, if one is required, will be held to consider a vacation, alteration,
or amendment without a petition when written objections are received or to
consider any petition that does not include the consent of all landowners as
required.
      2.   Posting the date, place, and time of the public meeting or public
hearing, in lieu of mailing, on the property proposed for subdivision vacation,
alteration or amendment in a visible location, with a sign of sufficient size,
durability, and print quality that is reasonably calculated to give notice to
passersby.
   B.   The public meeting or, if required, the public hearing will be held by
the mayor or, in the case of a lot line adjustment involving subdivided lots,
by the director within forty five (45) days after the petition is filed. A
public hearing will be required, if:
      1.   Any owner within the plat notifies the city of the owner's objection
in writing within ten (10) days of mailed notification;
      2.   All of the owners in the subdivision have not signed the revised
plat; or
      3.   Any owner of property located within three hundred feet (300') of
the property that is the subject of the proposed plat change notifies the city
of their objection in writing within ten (10) days of mailed notification.
(Ord. 2009-54, 8-18-2009)
14-7-7: STREET OR ALLEY VACATIONS:
   A.   Procedure:
      1.   Any person desiring to vacate a public street or alley as part of a
subdivision amendment or as a separate action is required to file a petition
making the request and provide a recordable plat if such vacation is approved
in any manner. The plat may be either a street vacation plat or, if the
vacation is proposed as part of a resubdivision of property, a subdivision
plat. The petition shall include:
         a.   The name and address of each owner of record of land that is
adjacent to the section of public street or alley proposed to be vacated and
that is accessed by or within three hundred feet (300') of said section;
         b.   The signature of each owner under subsection A1a of this section
who consents to the vacation;
         c.   A title report disclosing how the section of public street or
alley proposed to be vacated was acquired by the city or dedicated to public
use.
      2.   No petition shall be accepted unless accompanied by the applicable
fee required in subsection 4-6-1A1 of this code. Regardless of the action on
the petition, the petitioner will have no right to a refund of any monies,
fees, or charges paid to the city nor to the return of any property or
consideration dedicated or delivered to the city except as may have previously
been agreed to or approved by the city.
      3.   No portion of any public street or alley may be vacated by the city
council unless the vacation has been proposed by the planning commission or
first submitted to the planning commission for its recommendation. Notice of
the date, place and time of the planning commission meeting where such vacation
shall be considered shall be mailed at least seven (7) days in advance to the
record owner of each parcel located within three hundred feet (300') of the
portion of the street or alley to be vacated regardless of whether such parcel
is located within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city.
      4.   The recommendation of the planning commission shall be forwarded to
the city council.
      5.   The city council shall hold a public hearing for any proposed
vacation of a public street or alley. At least ten (10) days before the public
hearing, notice of the date, place and time of the hearing shall be:
         a.   Mailed to each affected entity;
         b.   Published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city;
         c.   Mailed to the record owner of each parcel that is accessed by the
portion of the public street or alley proposed to be vacated or that is located
within three hundred feet (300') of the portion of the street or alley to be
vacated regardless of whether such parcel is located within the jurisdictional
boundaries of the city; and
         d.   Posted on or near the public street or alley in a manner that is
calculated to alert the public.
      6.   The city council may approve the proposed vacation if it finds that
good cause exists for the vacation and neither the public interest nor any
person will be materially injured by the vacation. The ordinance approving the
vacation or narrowing of a public street or alley shall contain a legal
description of the vacated portion.
      7.   The plat reflecting the vacation shall be signed by those persons
within the city who sign subdivision plats, and shall be effective when
recorded with the Weber County recorder's office. The plat and ordinance shall
be recorded:
         a.   Within thirty (30) days of approval or of complying with any
required conditions if the vacation is not part of a resubdivision of property;
or
         b.   At the time the subdivision plat is filed if the vacation is
included as part of a resubdivision of property.
      8.   The action of the city council vacating some or all of a public
street or alley that has been dedicated to public use operates to the extent to
which it is vacated, upon the effective date of the recorded plat, as a
revocation of the acceptance of and the relinquishment of the city's fee in the
vacated street or alley, but may not be construed to impair any right of way or
easement of any lot owner or the franchise right of any public utility with
existing utility lines in the portion vacated.
      9.   The action of the city council in vacating some or all of a public
street or alley that was acquired by the city by use or conveyance to the city,
or its predecessors, by deed, declaration, legislative act or other instrument
of conveyance, other than a subdivision plat or street dedication plat,
operates to remove the property from the category of public use property and
the portion vacated shall be held and managed by the city according to the
property management requirements of title 4, chapter 3, article A of this code.
(Ord. 2009-54, 8-18-2009)
14-7-8: PLAT VACATION BY CITY:
   A.   Planning Commission Recommendation; Conditions: The planning
commission, on its motion, may recommend that the plat of any recorded
subdivision be vacated when:
      1.   No lots within the approved subdivision have been sold within five
(5) years from the date that the plat was recorded;
      2.   The developer has breached a subdivision improvement agreement or
otherwise failed to install the required public improvements and the city is
unable to obtain funds with which to complete construction of public
improvements, except that the vacation shall apply only to lots owned by the
developer or its successor;
      3.   The plat has been of record for more than five (5) years and the
planning commission determines that the further sale of lots within the
subdivision presents a threat to public health, safety and welfare, except that
the vacation shall apply only to lots owned by the developer or its successor.
   B.   Procedure: Upon any motion of the planning commission to vacate the
plat of any previously approved and recorded subdivision the proposed vacation
shall be referred to the mayor, who may approve the vacation of the subdivision
plat after notice and public hearing as provided under sections
14-7-6 and
14-7-7 of this chapter. If approved a resolution of vacation containing a legal
description of the entire vacated subdivision shall be prepared and submitted
to the city council for their approval and thereafter recorded in the records
of Weber County.
   C.   Authority Not Restricted: The authority granted herein shall not be
interpreted to restrict the power of the city to approve, without petition,
other amendments, alterations or vacations of recorded subdivision plats.
(Ord. 2009-54, 8-18-2009)
14-7-9: PROPERTY LINE ADJUSTMENTS:
   A.   A property line adjustment may be approved by the director, if the
director determines, after the required notice and public hearing, that:
      1.   No new lot, dwelling unit, or remnant parcel will result from the
property line adjustment;
      2.   The adjoining property owners have agreed, or intend to agree, to
the property line adjustment through means of a recorded agreement or an
agreement suitable for recording; and
      3.   The adjustment does not result in violation of applicable zoning
requirements.
   B.   The conveyance document effecting the property line adjustment shall
recite the descriptions of both the original parcels or lots and the parcels or
lots created by the adjustment or exchange of title, and be signed and
acknowledged by the owners.
   C.   If the director approves a property line adjustment, a notice of
approval shall be recorded in the Weber County recorder's office, either as an
attachment to the conveyance document or as a separate document, in a form
suitable for recording, approving such conveyance document.
   D.   The city engineer shall review and approve the legal descriptions used
in the conveyance document. The city attorney shall review and approve the form
of the conveyance documents for compliance with this chapter and the
requirements of state law.
(Ord. 2009-54, 8-18-2009)
TITLE 15
ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
15-1-1: Short Title
15-1-2: Purpose
15-1-3: Interpretation; Conflict; Effect On Previous Provisions
15-1-4: Changes And Amendments
15-1-5: Administration And Enforcement
15-1-6: Issuance Of Licenses And Permits
15-1-7: Building Permits And Land Use Permits
15-1-8: Certificate Of Occupancy
15-1-9: Fees
15-1-10: Violation Of Nuisance
15-1-11: Violations Of Use Regulations And Site Development Standards
15-1-12: Territory Annexed To City
15-1-13: Temporary Exceptions
15-1-14: Violation Of Conditions
15-1-15: Powers Of Planning Commission
15-1-16: Effect Of General Plan On Public Uses
15-1-17: Penalties; Remedies
15-1-18: Applicant Notification
15-1-19: Noticing And Review Of General Plan Amendments
15-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This title shall be known as the ZONING ORDINANCES OF OGDEN CITY, UTAH.
(Ord. 90-52, 10-25-1990; amd. 1999 Code)
15-1-2: PURPOSE:
This title is designed and enacted for the purpose of promoting the health,
safety, morals and the general welfare of the present and future inhabitants of
Ogden City, state of Utah, including, amongst other things, the lessening of
congestion in the streets, securing safety from fire, panic and other dangers,
encouraging energy efficient patterns of development, the use of energy
conservation, solar and renewable energy sources, and assuring access to
sunlight for solar energy devices, providing adequate light and air, preventing
the overcrowding of land, avoiding undue concentration of population,
facilitating adequate provision for transportation, water, sewage, schools,
parks and other public requirements, providing for the classification of land
uses. These regulations shall be made with reasonable consideration, among
other things, to the character of the district and its peculiar suitability for
particular uses, and with a view to conserving the value of buildings and
encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the city.
(Ord. 90-52, 10-25-1990; amd. 1999 Code)
15-1-3: INTERPRETATION; CONFLICT; EFFECT ON PREVIOUS PROVISIONS:
   A.   Minimum Requirements: In interpreting and applying the provisions of
this title, the requirements contained herein are declared to be the minimum
requirements for the purposes set forth.
   B.   More Restrictive Provisions: This title shall not nullify the more
restrictive provisions of any covenants or agreements, but shall prevail
notwithstanding such provisions which are less restrictive.
   C.   Higher Standards: Whenever this title imposes higher standards than are
required in any other statute or city ordinance or regulation, the provisions
of this title shall govern. Wherever the provision of the statute or city
ordinance or regulation impose other higher standards than are required by this
title, the provisions of such statute, or local ordinance or regulation shall
govern.
   D.   Conflicts: If any of the provisions within this title are in conflict,
a particular provision shall prevail over a general provision covering the same
subject matter and the more stringent provision shall prevail over the more
liberal provision.
   E.   Definitions: When a definition is provided in this title, that meaning
shall prevail unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest
intent of the legislative body or repugnant to the context of the ordinance.
   F.   Interpretation: If in the course of administration hereof, a question
arises as to the meaning of any phrase, section or chapter, the interpretation
thereof given by the director shall be construed to be the official
interpretation thereof. In the event that there is a need of further
interpretation by any person, firm or corporation or official of the city, they
shall submit the question to the planning commission who is authorized to
interpret this title and such interpretation shall be final, subject to appeal
to the board of zoning adjustment.
(Ord. 90-52, 10-25-1990; amd. 1999 Code; Ord. 2002-72, 12-17-2002)
15-1-4: CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS:
   A.   This title, including the zoning map, may be amended from time to time
by the city council at a public meeting; provided that no amendment may be made
unless the amendment was proposed by the planning commission or first submitted
to the planning commission for its recommendation.
   B.   Prior to proposing or recommending any change to this title or the
zoning map, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing at a public
meeting. Notice of the date, place and time of the first public hearing shall
be:
      1.   Mailed to each affected entity at least ten (10) calendar days
before the public hearing; and
      2.   Posted:
         a.   In at least three (3) public locations within the city; or
         b.   On the city's official website; and
      3.   Published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least
ten (10) calendar days before the public hearing; and
      4.   For any amendment to the zoning map, mailed at least seven (7) days
before the public hearing to:
         a.   The record owner of each parcel to be rezoned; and
         b.   The record owner of each parcel located within three hundred feet
(300') of the property to be rezoned regardless of whether such property is
located within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city.
   C.   Prior to city council adoption of an amendment to the zoning map,
notice of the date, time and place of the first public meeting where the city
council shall consider such amendment shall be mailed at least seven (7) days
before such public meeting to:
      1.   The record owner of each parcel to be rezoned; and
      2.   The record owner of each parcel located within three hundred feet
(300') of the property to be rezoned regardless of whether such property is
located within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city.
   D.   The above noticing policies are not intended to restrict the city
council or the planning commission from providing additional noticing based on
the particulars of the matter before them.
   E.   The city council shall consider each proposed amendment to this title
or the zoning map recommended to it by the planning commission, and may adopt
or reject the ordinance or map either as proposed by the planning commission or
after making any revision the city council considers appropriate.
(Ord. 90-52, 10-25-1990; amd. 1999 Code; Ord. 2005-67, 12-6-2005)
15-1-5: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   The director is hereby charged with the administration and enforcement
of the provisions of this title.
   B.   The director may investigate and enforce the provisions of this title,
as provided under section
15-1-17 of this chapter.
   C.   In order to carry out this charge, the building official, under the
direction of the director, is authorized to enforce all of the provisions of
this title in performing the building official's duties under title 16 of this
code. If, in the course of inspection of any buildings in the course of
construction, alteration or repair, or any change in the use of any building,
it shall come to the building official's attention that any such construction,
alteration or repair, or that any use or contemplated use is in violation of
the provisions of this title, the building official shall issue a written order
to the person responsible therefor, ordering and directing such person to cease
and desist such construction, alteration, repair or use.
(Ord. 90-52, 10-25-1990; amd. Ord. 98-2, 1-6-1998; Ord. 2002-72, 12-17-2002)
15-1-6: ISSUANCE OF LICENSES AND PERMITS:
All departments, officials and employees of the City, which are vested with the
duty or authority to issue permits or licenses, shall conform to the provisions
of this title and shall issue no such permit or license for uses, buildings, or
purposes where the same would be in conflict with the provisions of this title,
or any condition imposed under authority of this title, and any such permit or
license, if issued in conflict with the provisions of this title shall be null
and void.
(Ord. 90-52, 10-25-1990; amd. 1999 Code)
15-1-7: BUILDING PERMITS AND LAND USE PERMITS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person, whether acting as owner, occupant or
contractor, or otherwise, to erect, construct, reconstruct or alter, or change
the use or occupancy of any building or other structure within the City
contrary to any provisions of this title, or without first obtaining a building
permit from the building official. No building permit shall be issued by the
building official unless a written land use permit has been issued by the
Director and, if otherwise required by the provisions of this title, by the
Planning Commission or the Mayor.
   B.   Effective April 1, 2003, it is unlawful for any person, whether acting
as owner, occupant or contractor, to fail to obtain a written land use permit
from the Director for:
      1.   The installation of any asphalt, concrete, or other hard surface
material or structure on any property, other than walkways, ornamental
landscaping features, or for the minor repair of existing legal hard surfaced
areas; or
      2.   The use of, or change of use for, any lot or parcel not involving
the erection, construction, reconstruction or alteration of a building or
structure; or
      3.   The installation of any fence over four feet (4') in height within a
required yard area, or the installation of any fence within a "sight triangle
area" of any lot, as defined in section
7-3-2 of this Code; or
      4.   The keeping of residential chickens.
   C.   All applications for building permits or land use permits shall be
accompanied by a plan drawn to scale showing the actual dimensions of the lot
to be built upon, the size and location of existing buildings or structures,
buildings or structures to be erected and existing buildings or structures on
adjacent property and such other information as may be deemed necessary by the
building official, or the Director, for the enforcement of this title. Such
requirement may be met by submission of a site plan approved pursuant to
chapter 4 of this title. A record of such applications and permits shall be
kept in the office of the building official.
   D.   Building permits or land use permits issued on the basis of plans and
specifications approved by the building official, the Director, or other
approving official or agency, authorizes only the use, arrangement, and
construction set forth in the approved plans and applications, and no other
use, arrangement or construction. Use, arrangement, or construction at variance
with that authorized in said plans and specifications shall be deemed a
violation of this title.
(Ord. 2017-50, 12-19-2017)
15-1-8: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
   A.   Issuance: No land shall be used or occupied and no building hereafter
structurally altered or erected shall be used or changed in use until a
certificate of occupancy and zoning compliance shall have been issued by the
building official or the Director stating that the building or structure or the
proposed use thereof, or the use of land, complies with the provisions of this
title. A like certificate shall be issued for the purpose of maintaining,
renewing, changing or expanding a nonconforming use. A certificate of occupancy
and zoning compliance either for the whole or a part of the building or
structure shall be applied for coincidentally with the application for a
building or land use permit and shall be issued after the erection or
structural alteration of such building or structure, or part thereof, shall
have been completed in conformity with the provisions of this title or any
condition imposed under the authority of this title. In addition, a new
certificate shall be required at any time the occupancy of the building changes
to a more intensive use.
   B.   Information: Any applicant for a certificate of occupancy and zoning
compliance shall provide such information as needed to enforce the provisions
of this title as determined by the building official.
(Ord. 90-52, 10-25-1990; amd. 1999 Code; Ord. 2001-32, 6-5-2001; Ord. 2002-72,
12-17-2002)
15-1-9: FEES:
Fees may be assessed for examining and processing plans; issuing building or
land use permits or certificates of occupancy; processing rezoning petitions;
filing fees for matters before the Board of Zoning Adjustment; permits or
nonconforming use permits; processing street vacating requests; or any other
function requiring additional or unusual administrative costs. The fees for the
above costs shall be as provided in title 4, chapter 6 of this Code. Fees
authorized under this section shall not exceed the reasonable costs of
providing the service. Once a fee has been established, no application,
petition or plan shall be accepted until the fee has been paid. The fees
assessed shall not be refundable, regardless of the eventual disposition,
unless it is determined by the Director that no administrative costs have been
incurred or expended.
(Ord. 90-52, 10-25-1990; amd. Ord. 91-51, 12-19-1991; 1999 Code; Ord. 2002-72,
12-17-2002)
15-1-10: VIOLATION OF NUISANCE:
Any structure made or existing, or any use of land in violation of any
provision of this title, is a public nuisance and may be abated by appropriate
proceedings.
(Ord. 90-52, 10-25-1990; amd. 1999 Code)
15-1-11: VIOLATIONS OF USE REGULATIONS AND SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
Except as otherwise provided in this title:
   A.   No building, structure or premises shall be used or occupied for other
than a permitted or conditional use specified for the zoning district in which
it is located.
      1.   If a use is listed as a permitted or conditional use in any zoning
district, it is prohibited in all districts where it is not listed.
      2.   The provisions of subsection A3 of this section may not be applied
to recognize a use prohibited in subsection A1 of this section as a permitted
or conditional use.
      3.   If a proposed use is not listed as a permitted or conditional use in
a zone, the Planning Manager may determine if the proposed use is substantially
similar to, and has no more impact than, a listed use based on an affirmative
finding of all the following factors:
         a.   The proposed use is consistent with the General Plan, the
applicable neighborhood plan and the zoning district purposes;
         b.   The proposed use has substantially similar impacts as a listed
use on the neighborhood, such as traffic, noise, lighting, hours of operation,
protection of adjacent properties from negative impacts or similar
considerations; and
         c.   The proposed use has substantially the same characteristics as a
listed use, including characteristics involving building and site arrangement,
outdoor usage of lot, site area or floor space, equipment devoted to the
activity, customer type, number of employees in each activity, hours of
operation, vehicles used and parking requirements, number of vehicle trips
generated, signs, and how the use is advertised.
      4.   If the Planning Manager determines that a proposed unlisted use
meets all of the factors in subsection A3 of this section, the unlisted use
shall be treated in the same manner as the listed use, including any
regulations governing the listed use.
      5.   If the Planning Manager determines that a proposed unlisted use does
not meet all of the factors in subsection A3 of this section, the proposed use
is not allowed unless a text amendment establishing a specific listing for the
use in question is adopted by the City Council.
   B.   No building or part thereof or other structure shall be erected,
raised, moved, placed, reconstructed, extended, enlarged or altered except in
conformity with the regulations herein specified for the use and the zoning
district in which it is located.
   C.   No building or structure shall be erected, altered or used so as to
produce greater heights, smaller yards, greater lot coverage, or less open
green space or other unoccupied area, than specified for the use and the zoning
district in which it is located.
   D.   No yard or other open spaces provided about any building for the
purpose of complying with the provisions of the ordinances codified in this
title shall be used as a yard or open space for another building.
   E.   The application of the provisions of this section satisfy the City's
obligation under State law to interpret and apply City land use regulations to
favor a land use application that is not plainly restricted.
(Ord. 2017-36, 8-22-2017)
15-1-12: TERRITORY ANNEXED TO CITY:
At the time of the annexation of new territory to the City, the City Council
shall classify such territory for zoning purposes according to the zones
established by this title.
(Ord. 90-52, 10-25-1990; amd. 1999 Code)
15-1-13: TEMPORARY EXCEPTIONS:
The Mayor has the authority to grant temporary exceptions from any term or
condition of this title for a period of not to exceed three (3) months, for a
total duration for any one tract of land not to exceed six (6) months. The
granting of a temporary exception may be made by the Mayor with or without the
prior recommendation concerning the same from the Planning Commission. Such
temporary exceptions may be granted upon the Mayor determining that such a
temporary exception is justified because of some unusual or emergency situation
or act of God and that the health, safety, convenience, order and welfare of
the inhabitants of the City will not be materially adversely affected, if such
temporary exception is granted.
(Ord. 90-52, 10-25-1990; amd. Ord. 91-51, 12-19-1991; 1999 Code)
15-1-14: VIOLATION OF CONDITIONS:
If any person, firm or corporation, in the use or occupation of a building,
structure or land, intentionally fails to abide by or to fulfill any condition
legally imposed under the provisions of this title in approving any permit,
site plan or variance, shall be considered to be a violation of the provisions
of this title punishable under section
15-1-17 of this chapter; and any structure made or existing or any use of land
used or occupied in violation of any condition legally imposed in approving any
permit, site plan or variance under the provisions of this title shall be
subject to abatement under section
15-1-10 of this chapter.
(Ord. 90-52, 10-25-1990; amd. 1999 Code)
15-1-15: POWERS OF PLANNING COMMISSION:
Pursuant to those powers and duties of a Planning Commission as are or may be
prescribed in State law, the Planning Commission shall have the following
powers:
   A.   Recommendations: The Planning Commission shall make recommendations to
the City Council regarding:
      1.   The Ogden City General Plan for the development of the City;
      2.   A zoning ordinance, any amendments thereto, establishing regulations
for land use and development, including both the full text of the zoning
ordinance and zoning maps;
      3.   A subdivision ordinance, and any amendments thereto, regulating the
subdivision of land.
   B.   Review: Subject to the commission's review power being delegated
pursuant to subsection C of this section, the Planning Commission shall review,
in order to determine conformance to the Ogden City General Plan, the location
and extent of the following:
      1.   The construction or authorization of any street, park or other
public way, ground, place or space, publicly owned building or structure, and
any public utility, whether publicly or privately owned; and
      2.   The City's acquisition of real property for the establishment of any
street, park, or other public way, ground, place or space, and City owned
building or structure, or any City owned utility.
   C.   Exceptions To Review: Planning Commission review shall not be required
under subsection B of this section for property acquired by the City for a
specific project or purpose involving the future conveyance of such property to
a third party for other than a public use.
   D.   Guidelines: The Planning Commission may adopt guidelines authorizing
planning staff review of the City's acquisition of real property for compliance
with the General Plan.
(1999 Code; amd. Ord. 2003-49, 9-16-2003)
15-1-16: EFFECT OF GENERAL PLAN ON PUBLIC USES:
   A.   Conformance; Approval: No street, park, or other public way, ground,
place, or space, no publicly owned building or structure, and no public
utility, whether publicly or privately owned, may be constructed or authorized
until and unless:
      1.   It conforms to the Ogden City general plan; or
      2.   It has been considered by the planning commission and, after
receiving the advice of the planning commission, approved by the city council
as an amendment to the general plan.
   B.   Determination Of Conformance: The determination as to whether any of
the above proposals conform with the general plan shall be made by the planning
commission either directly or under guidelines established by the planning
commission.
(1999 Code; amd. Ord. 2003-49, 9-16-2003)
15-1-17: PENALTIES; REMEDIES:
   A.   Complaints Regarding Violations: The director may investigate any
complaint alleging a violation of this title and take such action as is
warranted in accordance with the procedures set forth in this section.
   B.   Persons Liable: The owner, owner's agent, tenant or occupant of any
building or land or part thereof and any architect, builder, contractor, agent
or other person who participates in, assists, directs or creates any situation
that is contrary to the requirements of this title may be held responsible for
the violation, suffer the penalties, and be subject to the remedies herein
provided.
   C.   Penalties And Remedies For Violations:
      1.   Any person, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent,
employee or otherwise, violating, causing or permitting the violation of any of
the provisions of this title or failing to comply with any of its requirements
shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be
punishable as set forth in title 1, chapter 4, article A of this code.
      2.   This title may also be enforced by injunction, mandamus, abatement
or any other appropriate judicial action in law or equity.
      3.   Failure to correct a violation of this title after written notice of
violation and expiration of the warning period may be enforced by imposition of
the following civil penalties pursuant to title 1, chapter 4, article B of this
code:
         a.   The first civil citation issued after expiration of the warning
period shall subject the person to the initial penalty as provided in
subsection D of this section.
         b.   The second civil citation issued after expiration of the warning
period and the prior imposition of the initial penalty shall subject the person
to the intermediate penalty as provided in subsection D of this section.
         c.   Any subsequent civil citation issued after expiration of the
warning period and the prior imposition of an intermediate penalty, or any
reoccurring violation under section
1-4B-6 of this code, shall subject the person to the maximum penalty as
provided in subsection D of this section.
      4.   Each day that any violation of this title is committed, maintained,
continued or permitted shall be considered a separate offense or violation for
purposes of the penalties and remedies available to the city.
      5.   Any one, all, or any combination of the foregoing penalties and
remedies may be used to enforce the provisions of this title.
   D.   Civil Penalties:
      1.   Penalties Imposed: Violations of this title shall carry civil
penalties pursuant to the following schedule:
 
   Violation Classification                        Initial Intermediate Maximum
                                                   Penalty Penalty      Penalty
   Causing, permitting or maintaining any land
a. use not allowed in the applicable zoning        $125.00 $250.00      $500.00
   district
   Constructing, installing, permitting or
   maintaining any building, structure or
   improvement, which violates yard, setback,
b. height or other dimensional requirements,       125.00  250.00       500.00
   regarding the placement of buildings,
   structures or other site improvements, imposed
   under the provisions of this title
   Violating any condition or requirement of a
   permitted or conditional use; noncompliance
   with conditions of an approved conditional use
c. permit, variance, a site plan or any other      125.00  250.00       500.00
   development plan or permit issued in
   accordance with the provisions of this title
   (except violations under subsection D1b of
   this section)
d. Allowing a vehicle to be parked at a location   25.00   50.00        100.00
   prohibited under the provisions of this title
   Advertising, renting, or operating a
e. residential vacation rental in violation of     500.00  500.00       500.00
   section
   15-13-38 of this title
f. Any other violation not described above         125.00  250.00       500.00
 
(Ord. 2016-63, 12-20-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)
15-1-18: APPLICANT NOTIFICATION:
   A.   For any application submitted pursuant to this title, the director
shall:
      1.   Notify the contact person of the date, time, and place of each
public hearing and public meeting to consider the application;
      2.   Provide to the contact person on each application a copy of each
staff report regarding the applicant or the pending application at least three
(3) business days before the public hearing or public meeting; and
      3.   Notify the applicant or petitioner of any final action on a pending
application.
   B.   If the director fails to comply with the requirements of subsection A1
or A2 of this section, or both, the applicant, or the applicant's
representative in attendance at any public hearing or public meeting may waive
the failure so that the application may stay on the public hearing or public
meeting agenda and be considered as if the requirements had been met.
   C.   In any application submitted pursuant to this title, the director may
require that the name, address, telephone number, fax number and e-mail address
of a designated contact person be provided by the applicant. Notification to
the designated contact person shall be considered to be notification to the
applicant under section 10-9a-202, Utah Code Annotated.
   D.   Notwithstanding the above, if the application or petition is being
heard before the city council, city council staff shall be responsible for
providing staff reports to the contact person.
(Ord. 2006-44, 7-25-2006)
15-1-19: NOTICING AND REVIEW OF GENERAL PLAN AMENDMENTS:
   A.   The city council has adopted a general plan, known and referred to as
the Ogden City general plan, which plan is subject to amendment in accordance
with the provisions of state law and the provisions of this section. The Ogden
City general plan may be amended from time to time by the city council at a
public meeting; provided that no amendments may be made unless the amendment is
first reviewed and a recommendation received from the planning commission.
   B.   Prior to proposing or recommending any change to the Ogden City general
plan, the planning commission shall hold at least one public hearing at a
public meeting. Notice of the date, place and time of the first public hearing
shall, at least ten (10) calendar days before such hearing, be:
      1.   Mailed to each affected entity; and
      2.   Posted:
         a.   In at least three (3) public locations within the city; or
         b.   On the city's official website; and
      3.   Published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city.
   C.   If the amendment to the Ogden City general plan involves the initial
adoption of a community plan or a corridor plan that may consider specific
recommendations for the future zoning of properties, notice of the date, place
and time of the first public hearing shall also be mailed at least seven (7)
days before the public hearing to the record owner of each parcel located
within the community plan area or corridor plan area.
   D.   If the amendment to the Ogden City general plan involves an amendment
to a previously adopted community plan or a corridor plan, notice of the date,
place and time of the first public hearing where such amendment will be
considered shall also be mailed at least seven (7) days before the public
hearing to the record owner of each parcel that is the subject of the proposed
amendment.
   E.   Prior to city council's initial adoption of a community plan or a
corridor plan that may consider specific recommendations for the future zoning
of properties, notice of the date, time and place of at least one public
meeting where such general plan amendment will be considered shall be mailed at
least seven (7) days before such public meeting to the record owner of each
parcel located within the community plan area or corridor plan area.
   F.   In the event the planning commission mails notice of a public hearing
for a plan amendment to a broader range of property owners as required herein,
such additional noticing shall be repeated for a public meeting where such plan
amendment will be considered by the city council by mailing notice of the date,
time and place of such public meeting at least seven (7) days in advance.
   G.   The above noticing policies are not intended to restrict the city
council or the planning commission from providing additional noticing based on
the particulars of the matter before them.
   H.   The city council shall consider each proposed amendment to the Ogden
City general plan recommended by the planning commission, and may adopt or deny
the amendment as proposed by the planning commission, or adopt after making any
revision the city council considers appropriate.
(Ord. 2006-59, 9-19-2006)
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
15-2-1: Terms Defined
15-2-2: "A" Definitions
15-2-3: "B" Definitions
15-2-4: "C" Definitions
15-2-5: "D" Definitions
15-2-6: "E" Definitions
15-2-7: "F" Definitions
15-2-8: "G" Definitions
15-2-9: "H" Definitions
15-2-10: "I" Definitions
15-2-11: "J" Definitions
15-2-12: "K" Definitions
15-2-13: "L" Definitions
15-2-14: "M" Definitions
15-2-15: "N" Definitions
15-2-16: "O" Definitions
15-2-17: "P" Definitions
15-2-18: "Q" Definitions
15-2-19: "R" Definitions
15-2-20: "S" Definitions
15-2-21: "T" Definitions
15-2-22: "U" Definitions
15-2-23: "V" Definitions
15-2-24: "W" Definitions
15-2-25: "X" Definitions
15-2-26: "Y" Definitions
15-2-27: "Z" Definitions
15-2-1: TERMS DEFINED:
The terms included in this chapter, as used in this title, shall have the
respective meanings as herein defined.
(Ord. 2011-2, 1-4-2011)
15-2-2: "A" DEFINITIONS:
ACCESS RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land which is part of a lot and provides access
to the part thereof used or to be used for buildings or structures.
ACCESSORY APARTMENT(S): A dwelling unit that is self-contained, but
incorporated within an existing structure that was originally designed, in
whole or in part, and is still used for a commercial business and which will
not be substantially altered.
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT: A functionally separate living space developed
subordinate to a single-family dwelling on the same lot or in the same building
as the single-family dwelling; but which is not an independent residence or
dwelling unit.
ADULT DAYCARE FACILITY: Any building or structure furnishing care, supervision,
and guidance for three (3) or more adults unaccompanied by a guardian for
periods of less than twenty four (24) hours per day.
AFFECTED ENTITY: A county, municipality, independent special district under
title 17D, chapter 2, Utah Code Annotated (independent special district), local
district under title 17B, chapter 2, Utah Code Annotated (local districts),
school district, interlocal cooperation entity established under title 11,
chapter 13, Utah Code Annotated, interlocal cooperation act, specified public
utility, a property owner, a property owners' association, or the Utah
department of transportation, if:
   A.   The entity's services or facilities are likely to require expansion or
significant modification because of an intended land use;
   B.   The entity has filed with the municipality a copy of the entity's
general long range plan; or
   C.   The entity has filed with the municipality a request for notice during
the same calendar year and before the municipality provides notice to an
affected entity in compliance with a requirement imposed under this title or
other requirement of state law.
AGRICULTURE: The tilling of the soil, the raising of crops, horticulture and
gardening, but not including keeping or raising of domestic animals or fowl,
except household pets, and not including any agricultural industry or business,
such as fruit packing plants, fur farms, animal hospitals or similar uses.
AIRPORT: The Ogden-Hinckley Airport.
ALLEY: A public thoroughfare less than twenty six feet (26') wide.
AMUSEMENT DEVICE: Any machine, device or contrivance not prohibited or declared
unlawful by the city, designed, or intended to be operated or used for
amusement or the playing of a game upon or in response to the payment of some
charge or the insertion therein of a coin, slug or check.
ARCADE: Any commercial enterprise open to persons under twenty one (21) years
of age, which contains four (4) or more amusement devices.
ARCHITECTURAL METAL: A paneled metal sheet building exterior that is not part
of a prefabricated building; does not have a specific coating; consists of all
new materials; and whose use is limited to accessory buildings in the rear yard
or interior side yard.
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY: A residential facility, licensed by the state of
Utah, with a homelike setting that provides an array of coordinated supportive
personal and healthcare services, available twenty four (24) hours per day, to
residents who have been assessed under Utah department of health or the Utah
department of human services rules to need any of these services. Each resident
in an assisted living facility shall have a service plan based on the
assessment, which may include: a) specified services of intermittent nursing
care; b) administration of medication; and c) support services promoting
resident's independence and self-sufficiency. Such facility does not include
adult daycare provided in conjunction with a residential facility for elderly
persons or a residential facility for persons with a disability.
AUTO REPAIR OR BODY SHOPS: A. A facility where automobiles are repaired or
maintained within an enclosed building.
   B.   Outdoor storage of junk vehicles, intended for restoration, repair or
limited salvage as described in subsection B3 of this definition, may be
allowed as an accessory use to an auto repair or body shop only in C-3, M-1 and
M-2 zones, provided the following conditions are met:
      1.   The area dedicated to outdoor storage does not exceed ten percent
(10%) of the lot in a C-3 zone, thirty percent (30%) of the lot area in an M-
1 zone or fifty percent (50%) of the lot area in an M-2 zone;
      2.   All such outdoor storage shall be in a completely enclosed area
screened by a seven foot (7') tall screening fence, made of any of the
following fencing materials:
         a.   Chainlink with vertical plastic or vinyl slats spaced no farther
than three-eighths inch (3/8") apart;
         b.   Solid wood, vinyl or other fencing materials having an appearance
of wood of one inch by four inch (1" x 4") to one inch by eight inch (1" x 8")
members spaced no farther apart than one-eighth inch (1/8");
         c.   Baked enamel finish, metal ribbed fence;
         d.   Decorative masonry; or
         e.   Other fence materials and construction approved by the community
development director which provides adequate screening of the storage area
similar to the above fencing materials; and
      3.   Limited salvage of parts from such vehicles shall be permitted only
as necessary for the repair of other vehicles on site and not as part of any
other type of salvage operation.
AUTOMOBILE LUBE AND OIL CENTER: A retail business engaged solely in the service
and sales of motor oil, lubricants and filters and placing those items directly
in the motor vehicle.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: A retail business engaged primarily in the sale of
motor fuel and having pumps from which fuel, such as gasoline, is dispensed
either by an attendant or customer, and which may also provide as an accessory
use, the sales and services generally required in the operation of a motor
vehicle excluding painting, body and fender and upholstery work.
(Ord. 2012-44, 8-28-2012)
15-2-3: "B" DEFINITIONS:
BANK, LIMITED FUNCTION: A branch banking facility limited in use to accepting
deposits and withdrawals, with drive-in window and/or automated teller machine
(ATM) station, operated either directly or indirectly by staff personnel or
automated equipment. The building shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) square
feet.
BASEMENT: A story partly underground and having at least one-half (1/2) its
height above the average level of the adjoining ground. A basement shall be
counted as a story, for purposes of height measurement.
BED AND BREAKFAST INN: An owner occupied dwelling of historic significance
(listed on the Ogden register of historic resources) in which eight (8) or
fewer rooms are rented out by the day, offering overnight lodgings to
travelers, and where one or more meals are provided by the host family, the
price of which may be included in the room rate.
BOARD OF ZONING ADJUSTMENT: The Ogden City board of zoning adjustment as
established in title 3, chapter 4 of this code.
BOARDER: A person living in a rented room in a boarding house. The boarding
house operator, or a member of his or her immediate family who resides on the
premises with the operator, shall not be considered to be a boarder.
BOARDING HOUSE: A building or portion thereof where, for compensation, rooms
are rented together with meals for not more than fifteen (15) boarders who
generally do not directly utilize kitchen facilities. The operator of a
boarding house must reside on the premises of a boarding house. The word
"compensation" shall include compensation in money, services, or other things
of value. A boarding house does not include a residential facility for disabled
persons or a residential facility for the elderly. A boarding house does not
include a nonresidential facility, such as a rehabilitation/treatment facility,
where the primary purpose of the facility is to deliver rehabilitation,
treatment, counseling, medical, protective or other similar services to the
occupants.
BUILDING: Any structure other than a boundary wall or fence.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY: A subordinate building or a portion of the main building
on a lot, the use of which is customarily incidental to that of the main or
principal building.
BUILDING, DETACHED: A building surrounded by open space on the same lot.
BUILDING, ENCLOSED: A building or structure having enclosing walls and roof.
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF: The vertical distance from the grade elevation to the
highest point of the coping of a flat roof, or to the deck line of a mansard
roof, or to a point midway between the lowest part of the eaves or cornice and
ridge of a pitch or hip roof.
BUILDING, MAIN: A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot
on which it is located.
BUILDING OFFICIAL: The manager of the building services division, community and
economic development department of the city, or the manager's duly authorized
representative.
BUILDING, PUBLIC: A building owned and operated, or owned and intended to be
operated, by the city, a public agency of the United States Of America, the
state of Utah, or any of its political subdivisions. The use of a public
building, with immunity, is nontransferable and terminates if the structure is
devoted to a use other than as a public building with immunity. A public
building referred to as with immunity under the provisions of this title
includes:
   A.   "Properties owned by the state of Utah or the United States government"
which are outside of the jurisdiction of the city's zoning authority as
provided under section 10-9a-304, Utah Code Annotated, 1953, as amended, or its
successor provision; and
   B.   The ownership or use of a building which is immune from the city's
zoning authority under the supremacy clause of the United States constitution.
(Ord. 2011-2, 1-4-2011)
15-2-4: "C" DEFINITIONS:
CABARET: A restaurant with beer license, restaurant with liquor consumption
license, drinking establishment, or other business licensed for the on premises
consumption of alcoholic beverages, which business is licensed to permit its
patrons to dance or to entertain its patrons with live performers who sing,
dance or play musical instruments. Cabarets do not include sexually oriented
businesses.
CANNABIS: All species of the genus cannabis and all parts of the genus, whether
growing or not; the seeds of it; the resin extracted from any part of the
plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or
preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. The term does not include the
mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made
from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative,
mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks, except the resin extracted from
them, fiber, oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is
incapable of germination.  Any synthetic equivalents of the substances
contained in the plant cannabis sativa or any other species of the genus
cannabis which are chemically indistinguishable and pharmacologically active
are also included.
CANNABIS CULTIVATION FACILITY: A person that:
   A.   Possesses cannabis;
   B.   Grows or intends to grow cannabis; and
   C.   Sells or intends to sell cannabis to a cannabis cultivation facility, a
cannabis processing facility or, as defined in Utah law, a medical cannabis
research licensee.
CANNABIS PROCESSING FACILITY: A person that:
   A.   Acquires or intends to acquire cannabis from a cannabis production
establishment or a holder of an industrial hemp processor license under Utah
State Code Title 4, Chapter 41, Hemp and Cannabinoid Act;
   B.   Possesses cannabis with the intent to manufacture a cannabis product;
   C.   Manufactures or intends to manufacture a cannabis product from
unprocessed cannabis or a cannabis extract; and
   D.   Sells or intends to sell a cannabis product to a medical cannabis
pharmacy or, as defined by Utah law, a medical cannabis research licensee.
CANNABIS PRODUCT: A product that:
   A.    Is intended for human use; and
   B.   Contains cannabis or tetrahydrocannabinol.
CANNABIS PRODUCTION ESTABLISHMENT: A cannabis cultivation facility, a cannabis
processing facility, or an independent cannabis testing laboratory.
CAR WASH, LAUNDRY TYPE: A structure or portion thereof containing facilities
for washing passenger automobiles, using production line methods such as, but
not limited to, chain conveyor, movable or revolving cleaning brushes, blower,
steam cleaning, or similar mechanical devices.
CAR WASH, MANUAL SPRAY: A structure or portion thereof containing facilities
for washing passenger automobiles, limited to using only hand operated manual
spray cleaning equipment and techniques.
CELLAR: A story having more than one-half (1/2) its height below the average
level of the adjoining ground. A cellar shall not be counted as a story for the
purpose of height measurement.
CHECK CASHER: A person engaged in the business of cashing checks.
   A.   A check is a draft, other than a documentary draft, payable on demand
and drawn on a bank; a cashier's check or teller's check; or a demand draft. An
instrument may be a check even though it is described on its face by another
term, such as "money order".
   B.   A check casher does not include: a depository institution; a depository
institution holding company; an institution directly owned or controlled by one
or more depository institutions or depository institution holding companies; or
a person that cashes checks in a transaction that is incidental to the retail
sale of goods or services and for consideration that does not exceed the
greater of one percent (1%) of the amount of the cashed check or one dollar
($1.00).
CLUSTER SUBDIVISION: A subdivision of land in which the areas and widths of
residential lots are reduced below the minimum lot areas and lot width
requirements of the zone in which the subdivision is located and where
equivalent common open space areas are provided to compensate for such lot
reduction.
COIN: A piece of currency, usually metallic and usually in the shape of a disc
that is:
   A.   Stamped metal, and issued by a government as monetary currency; or
   B.   Is worth more than its current value as currency and is also worth more
than its metal content value.
COMMERCIAL GRADE PRECIOUS METALS: Ingots, monetized bullion, art bars,
medallions, medals, tokens, and currency that are marked by the refiner or
fabricator indicating their fineness and include:
   A.   .99 fine or finer ingots of gold, silver, platinum, palladium, or other
precious metals; or
   B.   .925 fine sterling silver ingots, art bars, and medallions.
COMMUNITY CORRECTIONAL FACILITY: A facility licensed by or contracted by the
state of Utah to provide temporary occupancy for previously incarcerated
persons which assists such persons in making a transition from a correctional
institution environment to independent living. Such facility may also provide
ancillary, temporary occupancy for individuals placed as part of, or in lieu
of, confinement rehabilitation, or treatment in a correctional institution.
COMMUNITY LOCATION: A public or private school, a licensed child-care facility
or preschool, a church, a public library, a public playground, or a public
park.
CONDOMINIUM PROJECT: A real estate condominium project where ownership of a
single unit in a multi-unit project, together with an undivided interest in
common in the common areas and facilities of the property, is transferred; a
plan or project whereby four (4) or more apartments, rooms, office spaces, or
other existing and proposed apartments, or commercial or industrial buildings
or structures are separately offered or proposed to be offered for sale and
meeting all requirements of Utah Code Annotated title 57, chapter 8,
condominium ownership act. Structures shall conform with all area, yard,
frontage and height regulations of the zone district in which they are located.
CONTACT PERSON: The individual designated in an application or petition, filed
pursuant to the provisions of this title, to receive notices, copies of staff
reports, and notices of final actions on a pending application.
CONVENIENCE STORE: A place of retail business primarily engaged in the sale of
food or drink for consumption either on or off premises and the retail sales of
motor fuel from pumps on the site.
CORRAL: A space, other than a building, less than one acre in area, or less
than one hundred feet (100') in width, used for the confinement of animals so
they can be easily captured.
CORRECTIONAL INSTITUTION: A prison, jail, juvenile detention facility or
juvenile secure facility.
COUNTRY CLUB: A chartered, nonprofit membership club with or without dining
facilities and cocktail lounge, catering primarily to its membership, providing
one or more of the following recreational and social amenities: golf, horseback
riding, tennis, swimming, any of which shall be located on a site of not less
than two (2) acres and open only to members and their duly authorized guests.
COURT: An unoccupied open space, other than a yard, on the same lot with a
building or buildings, which is bounded on two (2) or more sides by the walls
of such buildings.
COVERAGE, LOT: The percent of lot area covered by the main and accessory
buildings.
(Ord. 2012-5, 1-24-2012; amd. Ord. 2019-46, 10-22-2019; Ord. 2020-24, 6-23-
2020)
15-2-5: "D" DEFINITIONS:
DAIRY: A commercial establishment for the manufacture, processing or sale of
dairy products.
DAYCARE CENTER: Any building or structure other than an occupied residence
furnishing care, supervision, and guidance for three (3) or more children
unaccompanied by parent or guardian for periods of less than twenty four (24)
hours per day; or, an occupied residence which furnishes care, supervision and
guidance for six (6) or more children unaccompanied by parent or guardian for
periods of less than twenty four (24) hours per day. Occupied residence shall
refer to being used as a residence by a family. The term "daycare center" is
inclusive of kindergartens, nursery schools, and all other similar facilities,
except preschools as defined by this chapter, specializing in the education
and/or care of children prior to their entrance into the first grade, other
than facilities owned and/or operated by the public school system.
DEFERRED DEPOSIT LENDER: A person engaged in the business of making loans or
transactions where:
   A.   A person presents to the deferred deposit lender one or more checks
written on that person's account, or provides written or electronic
authorization to the deferred deposit lender to effect one or more debits from
the person's account using an electronic payment; and
   B.   The deferred deposit lender provides the person an amount of money that
is equal to the face value of the check(s) or the amount of the debit(s) less
any fee or interest charged for the transaction; and agrees not to cash the
check(s) or process the debit(s) until a specific date.
DEPARTMENT: The Department of Community and Economic Development.
DIRECTOR: The Director of the Department of Community and Economic Development,
or the Director's designee.
DISABILITY: A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or
more of a person's major life activities, including a person having a record of
such an impairment, or being regarded as having such an impairment.
"Disability" does not include current illegal use of, or addiction to, any
Federally controlled substance, as defined in section 102 of the Controlled
Substances Act, 21 USC 802, or successor law. As used in this definition:
Has A Record Of Such An Impairment: Has a history of, or has been misclassified
as having, a mental or physical impairment that substantially limits one or
more major life activities.
Is Regarded As Having An Impairment: A. Has a physical or mental impairment
that does not substantially limit one or more major life activities but that is
treated by another person as constituting such a limitation;
   B.   Has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or
more major life activities only as a result of the attitudes of others toward
such impairment; or
   C.   Has none of the impairments defined herein under definition of
"physical or mental impairment", but is treated by another person as having
such an impairment.
Major Life Activities: Functions such as caring for oneself, performing manual
tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning and working.
Physical Or Mental Impairment: Includes:
   A.   Any physiological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurement, or
anatomical loss affecting one or more of the following body systems:
neurological; musculoskeletal; special sense organs; respiratory, including
speech organs; cardiovascular; reproductive; digestive; genitourinary; hemic
and lymphatic; skin; and endocrine; or
   B.   Any mental or psychological disorder, such as mental retardation,
organic brain syndrome, emotional or mental illness, and specific learning
disabilities.
   C.   The term physical or mental impairment includes, but is not limited to,
such diseases and conditions as orthopedic, visual, speech and hearing
impairments, cerebral palsy, autism, epilepsy, muscular dystrophy, multiple
sclerosis, cancer, heart disease, diabetes, human immunodeficiency virus
infection, mental retardation, emotional illness, drug addiction (other than
addiction caused by current, illegal use of a controlled substance) and
alcoholism.
DOMESTIC STAFF: Persons employed or residing on the premises of a dwelling unit
or other residential facility to perform domestic services or to assist
residents in performing major life activities.
DRINKING ESTABLISHMENT: An establishment that serves food and drink, or drink
only, to the general public or to its members and their guests, for on-premises
consumption and whose annual revenue from the sale of alcoholic beverages
equals or exceeds the revenue from the sale of food. A drinking establishment
shall also be licensed and hold a class B, C, D, or liquor consumption license,
as applicable, under title 5, chapter 3, article C of this Code. A drinking
establishment shall not include entertainment for its patrons unless the
premises are zoned for and licensed as a cabaret or adult live entertainment
business.
DRIVE APPROACH/APPROACH: A hard surface area located in the public right-of-way
used to provide access from the public street to private property for motorized
or towed vehicles. A typical drive approach will transition from the road
surface across the gutter and sidewalk to a driveway. Sometimes referred to as
the driveway apron.
DRIVEWAY: The use of a portion of property outside the public right-of-way
intended and designed to facilitate movement of vehicles from the road right-
of-way across the property to an area designed and regulated as a parking
space.
DRY CLEANER: An establishment which has as its sole purpose the cleansing of
fabrics with substantially nonaqueous organic solvents. Laundry establishments
with individual dry cleaning machines shall not be classified as a dry cleaner.
DWELLING: Any building or portion thereof containing one or more dwelling units
occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or
more families.
DWELLING, BACHELOR OR BACHELORETTE: A building arranged or designed to include
three (3) or more dwelling units, each dwelling unit to be occupied by not less
than five (5) but not more than ten (10) unrelated individuals.
DWELLING, GROUP: Two (2) or more dwellings located in more than one building
placed upon a single lot. A group dwelling development may be subdivided into
more than one lot, if approved under the provisions of chapter 10 of this title
and title 14, chapter 5 of this Code.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A building arranged or designed to include three (3)
or more dwelling units, each to be occupied by one family.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A building arranged or designed to include only one
dwelling unit or a building arranged or designed to include a dwelling unit and
an accessory dwelling unit that is permitted according to the regulations of
this title.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ROW HOUSE: A building built directly against an
adjoining building without an open space between, and containing a one-family
dwelling unit extending from basement to roof. Each single-family attached
dwelling unit shall have a front and rear entrance. Each group of single-family
attached dwellings shall be considered one structure, for purposes of front,
rear and side yard requirements.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY/DUPLEX: A building arranged or designed to include two (2)
dwelling units, each to be occupied by one family.
DWELLING UNIT: Any building or portion thereof designed, occupied, or intended
as a residence for a family with complete, and independent facilities for
living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
(Ord. 2018-28, 10-16-2018; amd. Ord. 2020-24, 6-23-2020)
15-2-6: "E" DEFINITIONS:
EARTHQUAKE FAULT: For purposes of this title, earthquake fault shall refer to
that portion of the Wasatch Fault which traverses the eastern area of the
corporate limits of the City, said fault lines being approximately delineated
on the zoning map of Ogden City. Source of delineation of the fault line is
"Wasatch Fault, Northern Portion, Earthquake Fault Investigation and
Evaluation, a Guide to Land Use Planning", by Woodward/Clyde Associates,
Oakland, California. The detailed and exact location of a fault is to be
determined by the review procedure as specified in section
15-27-6 of this title.
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION: A public elementary or secondary school, seminary,
parochial school or private education institution having a curriculum similar
to that ordinarily given in grades 1 through 12 in a public school system. The
term educational institution for the purpose of this title does not include
post- high school educational facilities or educational facilities which
include residential facilities for its students.
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION, POST-HIGH SCHOOL: A postsecondary institution offering
courses in general, technical, or religious education; operating completely
within the City and including administrative and faculty offices, and student
and faculty facilities.
EDUCATIONAL/POST-HIGH SCHOOL EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION WITH HOUSING: A public or
private educational institution or post-high school educational institution
with residential facilities or housing for its students and/or staff located on
the same property as the institution.
ELDERLY PERSON: A person who is sixty (60) years or older, who desires or needs
to live with other elderly persons in a group setting, but who is capable of
living independently.
(Ord. 2015-32, 6-23-2015)
15-2-7: "F" DEFINITIONS:
FAMILY 1 : A. One individual living alone; or
   B.   One of the following groups of individuals, but not both at the same
time, living together as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit, together with
any incidental domestic staff residing on the premises:
      1.   Two (2) or more individuals related by blood, marriage, adoption,
guardianship, or other duly authorized custodial relationship;
      2.   Two (2) unrelated individuals and any children of either such
individuals, if any; or
      3.   A group of not more than three (3) unrelated individuals including
in such number any domestic staff residing on the premises.
FENCE: A structure or planting such as a hedge that creates a tangible barrier
or obstruction having the effect of preventing passage or view across the fence
line.
FLOODPLAIN: A relatively flat area or lowland adjoining a river, stream,
watercourse, ocean or lake which has been or may be covered with floodwater.
Specifically, for purposes of this title, floodplain shall be that area of this
City designated within the boundaries of the official flood insurance rate map
and approved amendments, which may be subject to periodic inundation in the
event of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY ZONE: Boundaries of the intermediate regional flood as
defined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency maps. The floodplain zone is
designed to overlay or be superimposed over existing zoning within the defined
floodplain. Within such an overlay zone, the existing zone remains effective
with the additional conditions superimposed by the Floodplain Zone.
FLOOR AREA: The sum of the gross horizontal area of the several floors of a
building and its accessory buildings on the same lot, excluding cellar and
basement floor areas not devoted to residential use, but including the area of
roofed terraces. All dimensions shall be measured from the exterior faces of
the exterior walls.
FLOOR, LOT AREA RATIO: The total floor area of a building divided by the area
of the lot on which it is located.
FRATERNAL AND BENEVOLENT SOCIETIES: Includes chartered nonprofit drinking
establishments including social clubs or lodges with or without dining
facilities and cocktail lounges composing a branch of a fraternal order, or
society such as Elks, Masons, American Legion, Eagles, Optimists, Odd Fellows,
Kiwanis, Rotary and other similar nonprofit organizations and is open only to
members and their duly authorized guests.
FRATERNITY OR SORORITY HOUSE: A building occupied by and maintained exclusively
for students affiliated with Weber State University, who are associated
together in a fraternity/sorority that is officially recognized by Weber State
University and who receive lodging and/or meals on the premises for
compensation.
FRONTAGE: All the property fronting on one side of the street between
intersecting or intercepting streets, or between a street and a right-of-way,
waterway, end of dead end street, or political subdivision boundary, measured
along the street line. An intercepting street shall determine only the boundary
of the frontage on the side of the street which it intercepts.
(Ord. 2015-58, 12-1-2015; amd. Ord. 2020-24, 6-23-2020)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  15-13-31 of this title.
15-2-8: "G" DEFINITIONS:
GARAGE, CARPORT: A private garage not completely enclosed by walls or doors.
For the purpose of this title, a carport shall be subject to all of the
regulations prescribed for a private garage.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An enclosed space or accessory building for the storage of one
or more motor vehicles; provided, that no business, occupation or service is
conducted for profit therein, nor space therein for more than one car is leased
to a nonresident of the premises. A garage shall be considered part of the
dwelling if the garage and dwelling have a roof or wall in common, or are
connected structurally by a physical connection such as a wall, trellis or
solid fence.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: A building or portion thereof, other than a private garage,
designed or used for servicing, repairing, equipping, hiring, selling, or
storing motor driven vehicles.
GRADE: The average level of the finished surface or the ground adjacent to the
exterior walls of those buildings more than five feet (5') from a street line.
For buildings closer than five feet (5') to a street line, the grade is the
sidewalk elevation to the center of the building. If there is more than one
street, an average sidewalk elevation is to be used. If there is no sidewalk,
the City Engineer may establish the grade.
GROVE, SIGNIFICANT: A group of five (5) or more trees in healthy condition with
the trunk of any individual tree being not more than twenty feet (20') from the
trunk of another tree and having at least one tree with a caliper of four
inches (4") or greater as measured by industry standards.
GUESTHOUSE: A separate dwelling structure located on a lot with one or more
main dwelling structures used for housing of guests or servants and not rented,
leased or sold separate from rental, lease or sale of the main building.
(Ord. 2016-12, 3-1-2016)
15-2-9: "H" DEFINITIONS:
HOME OCCUPATION: The use of a portion of a dwelling as an office, studio or
workroom for occupations which are customarily conducted in the home that are
incidental to the primary use as a home or residence; provided additionally,
that: a) the occupation is limited to members of the family who reside on the
premises; b) such occupation shall not require interior or exterior
alterations; c) the occupation shall not include the sale of commodities which
are not produced on the premises; and d) the occupation shall not use any
accessory buildings, yard or any space outside of the main building not
normally associated with residential use (it may include child daycare of not
more than 8 children or preschool of not more than 8 children); and e)
wholesale and/or retail sales of commodities are not permitted directly from
the home.
HOSPITAL: An institution licensed by the State of Utah which provides
diagnostic, therapeutic, and rehabilitative services to individuals on both an
inpatient and outpatient basis by or under the supervision of one or more
physicians. Any medical clinic or professional office which offers any
inpatient or overnight care, or operates on a twenty four (24) hour basis shall
be considered to be a hospital. A hospital may include integral support service
facilities such as laboratories, outpatient units and training and central
services, together with staff offices necessary to the operation of the
hospital.
HOTEL: A building providing, for a fee, sleeping accommodations and customary
lodging related service for the traveling or business public who have primary
residence at another location. Such building is designed with an interior lobby
and interior access to the individual rooms. It may or may not include central
dining facilities and conference rooms for guests and the general public. It is
not intended to be a residence or residential facility.
HOUSEHOLD PETS: Animals or fowl ordinarily permitted in the house and kept for
company or pleasure, such as dogs, cats, or canaries, but not including a
sufficient number of dogs or cats to constitute a "kennel", as defined in this
chapter.
HOUSING, STUDENT: A type of dwelling unit specifically designed for, and
occupied by, not more than four (4) individuals who may or may not be related.
(Ord. 2017-32, 6-13-2017)
15-2-10: "I" DEFINITIONS:
ILLEGAL NONCOMPLYING STRUCTURE: A structure that does not conform to the land
use ordinances currently in effect and does not have rights as a noncomplying
structure.
ILLEGAL USE: A use of land that does not conform to the land use ordinances
currently in effect and does not have rights as a nonconforming use.
INDEPENDENT CANNABIS TESTING LABORATORY: A person that:
   A.   Conducts a chemical or other analysis of cannabis or a cannabis
product; or
   B.   Acquires, possesses, and transports cannabis or a cannabis product with
the intent to conduct a chemical or other analysis of the cannabis or cannabis
product.
INITIAL ENACTMENT OF THE ZONING ORDINANCES: The date of enactment of the first
zoning ordinances of Ogden City, February 8, 1951.
INOPERABLE VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer that cannot be
operated in its existing condition because the parts necessary for operation
such as, but not limited to, tires, windshield, engine, drive train, driver's
seat, steering wheel or column, gas or brake pedals are removed, destroyed,
damaged, deteriorated or nonfunctioning; or any motor vehicle which is not
currently registered and licensed in this State or another state, except for
motor vehicles owned or possessed under consignment by a person licensed under
the Motor Vehicle Business Regulation Act.
(Ord. 2011-2, 1-4-2011; amd. Ord. 2019-46, 10-22-2019)
15-2-11: "J" DEFINITIONS:
JAIL: A place of incarceration owned and operated by the County.
JUNK OR SALVAGE MATERIAL: Articles that are used, secondhand, worn out,
obsolete, defective, destroyed or discarded and which may be reused or resold
in their original form, or which may have outlived their usefulness in their
original form and are commonly gathered up and sold to be converted into
another product either of the same or a different kind by some manufacturing or
recycling process, or which may be salvaged by separating, collecting, or
retrieving reusable materials or parts therefrom. Junk or salvage material
includes, but is not limited to, inoperable vehicles, auto parts or parts from
other types of vehicles, tires, machinery or parts thereof, building materials,
scrap metal or other scrap material, and recyclable materials when not located
in a recycling processing center, but does not include refuse or hazardous
materials. No article shall be considered "used" or "secondhand" for purposes
of this definition, if the article is being used in its original form in
conjunction with a main use established in conformance with this title, other
than those uses involving salvaging or recycling.
JUNK OR SALVAGE YARD: The use of any lot, portion of a lot, or tract of land
for the storage, buying, selling, dismantling, demolition or abandonment of
junk, whether or not the use is a main use or is accessory to the main use.
Junk or salvage yard shall not include:
   A.   Businesses whose main use involves the sale of used, secondhand or
reprocessed goods when the use is conducted entirely within an enclosed
building, which may include, but is not limited to, antique stores, or
secondhand or thrift shops, and the reprocessing and reconditioning of such
goods as an accessory use to the main retail use;
   B.   Used car lots or used and rebuildable car lots;
   C.   Swap meets meeting the requirements of subsection 15-38-5S of this
title;
   D.   Warehousing, where articles meeting the definition of junk or salvage
are stored entirely within an enclosed building, or outdoor storage allowed as
an accessory use to warehousing under the definition of "warehouse,
warehousing, warehouse storage", as defined in this chapter;
   E.   Auto repair or body shops where vehicles meeting the definition of junk
vehicles are temporarily parked on the associated open premises awaiting
imminent repair or bodywork; provided, that this use shall not allow the
outdoor storage of junk vehicles, except as allowed as an accessory use under
the definition of "auto repair or body shops", as defined in this chapter;
   F.   Residential recycling drop off stations, recycling drop off stations,
recycling collection centers, and recycling processing centers, established in
conformance with the requirements of this title;
   G.   One automobile or one truck with a capacity of one ton or less, which
is inoperable, may be temporarily stored, rather than parked, in a rear yard or
in a side yard other than a side yard facing a street, on property which is the
place of residence of the owner of the vehicle for a period not to exceed six
(6) months, as accessory to a residential use, provided:
      1.   The automobile or truck is located on a legal parking slab; and
      2.   The body of the automobile or truck is entirely concealed by an
opaque, weather resistant covering which is maintained in good condition; and
      3.   The main use meets existing parking requirements; and
      4.   The vehicle is being stored by the owner in order to repair or
restore the vehicle for personal use or as a hobby; and
      5.   A vehicle which is twenty five (25) years or older may be stored in
accordance with the above requirements for an additional period of eighteen
(18) months; and
   H.   Junk or salvage material stored in an enclosed building accessory to a
main use.
JUVENILE DETENTION FACILITY: A place of temporary detention for delinquent
juveniles, which either is owned and operated by the state of Utah or is under
contract with the state of Utah.
JUVENILE SECURE FACILITY: A place of incarceration for delinquent juveniles,
which either is owned and operated by the state of Utah or is under contract
with the state of Utah.
(Ord. 2011-2, 1-4-2011)
15-2-12: "K" DEFINITIONS:
KENNEL: The land or building used for the keeping of three (3) or more dogs at
least six (6) months old and/or eight (8) or more cats at least six (6) months
old, which may also be referred to as a cattery.
KINDERGARTEN: A school or class for children of the four (4) to six (6) age
group.
(Ord. 2011-2, 1-4-2011)
15-2-13: "L" DEFINITIONS:
LAND USE ORDINANCE: Any planning, zoning, development or subdivision ordinance
of the city, including, but not limited to, the provisions of title 14 of this
code, commonly referred to as the subdivision ordinance of Ogden City, and this
title, commonly referred to as the zoning ordinances of Ogden City, Utah. It is
not intended to refer to the Ogden City general plan.
LAND USE PERMIT: A permit, approval or authorization under the provisions of
this title for the erection, construction, reconstruction or alteration of any
building or structure, or the use of any building, structure or land.
LANDSCAPE OR LANDSCAPING: The installation of living plant material (i.e., turf
grasses or turf type fescues, ground cover, annual and perennial flowering
plants, vines, shrubs, and trees) planted directly on the property and kept
free from all hard surfaces. The following may also be defined as landscaping
when they are combined with installed living plant material:
   A.   Water features (i.e., pools, fountains, falls and streams) and
sculptures;
   B.   Paving materials (i.e., bricks, pavers, flagstones, textured concrete)
used to create a useful open space, add color or texture to the design, and
create visual interest provided that such materials in the front yard setback
are used only as trim or edging and not used as patios, sports surfaces, or
areas where vehicles can be parked;
   C.   Existing natural vegetation of shrubs (e.g., Wood's rose, willows,
currant, sagebrush) or trees (e.g., box elder, Gambel oak, maple, birch); or
   D.   Landscaping rocks, gravel, mulches, artificial turf or wood chips may
be used solely or as ground covers under other plant materials, provided such
materials used solely as ground cover without plants above do not cover more
than ten percent (10%) of the ground area required to be landscaped. If more
than ten percent (10%) is desired, approval must be given by the planning staff
based on the criteria in section
15-13-16 of this title.
LAUNDROMAT OR LAUNDERETTE: A self-service laundry establishment where clothes
are cleansed in a coin operated machine. Laundromats or launderettes may
include individual dry cleaning machines.
LINEAR BLOCK: Both sides of that portion of any street that has street numbers
ranging between any two (2) consecutive multiples of 100, such as 100 and 200,
or between 2200 and 2300, etc. A corner drinking establishment shall be
included in the particular linear block indicated by the street address of such
establishment.
LODGE: A building used by a local chapter of a national fraternal beneficiary
society or domestic fraternal society for meetings and activities associated
with the organization and its programs.
LOT: A parcel of land occupied or to be occupied by a main building or group of
buildings (main or accessory), together with such yards, open spaces, lot width
and lot areas as are required by this title and having frontage upon a street;
provided, that frontage upon a street shall not be required for lots in PRUD
subdivisions as permitted in the subdivision title. Except for group dwellings
and a guesthouse, not more than one dwelling structure shall occupy one lot.
LOT, CORNER: A lot abutting on two (2) intersecting streets where the interior
angle of intersection or interception does not exceed one hundred thirty five
degrees (135°).
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot.
(Ord. 2015-17, 5-12-2015; amd. Ord. 2020-24, 6-23-2020)
15-2-14: "M" DEFINITIONS:
MANUFACTURED HOME: A transportable factory built housing unit constructed on or
after June 15, 1976, according to the Federal Home Construction and Safety
Standards Act of 1974 (HUD Code), in one or more sections, which, in the
traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet
or more in length, or when erected on site, is four hundred (400) or more
square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used
as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and
electrical systems.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK: A parcel of land, either held and operated in single
ownership or developed as a condominium subdivision, which has been planned and
improved for the placement of manufactured homes for residential use as a
single- family dwelling without a permanent foundation. A manufactured home
park may include as an accessory use an area designated as a recreational coach
park. Accessory buildings or structures for park management or park resident
use not exceeding two (2) stories or twenty four feet (24') in height shall be
permitted as part of such park. A mobile home park approved prior to May 27,
1997, shall be considered to be a manufactured home park.
MANUFACTURED HOME SPACE: A plot of ground within a manufactured home park
designed for the accommodation of one manufactured home, including accessory
structures and yard spaces. A manufactured home space shall not be considered
to be a lot or other subdivided parcel for purposes of separate ownership;
provided, that if the park is approved as a condominium subdivision in
accordance with the requirements of title 14 of this Code, a space may be
considered to be a unit under the Utah Condominium Ownership Act.
MANUFACTURED HOME STAND: That part of an individual manufactured home space
which has been reserved for the placement of the manufactured home.
MEDICAL CANNABIS PHARMACY: A person that:
   A.   1.   Acquires or intends to acquire:
         a.   Cannabis in a medicinal dosage form or a cannabis product in a
medicinal dosage form from a cannabis processing facility; or
         b.   A medical cannabis device; or
      2.   Possesses cannabis in a medicinal dosage form, a cannabis product in
a medicinal dosage form, or a medical cannabis device; and
   B.   Sells or intends to sell cannabis in a medicinal dosage form, a
cannabis product in a medicinal dosage form, or a medical cannabis device to a
medical cannabis cardholder.
MOBILE FOOD TRAILER: A business that serves only food, which may include
nonalcoholic beverages, from an enclosed self-contained trailer. The term
"mobile food trailer" does not include a sidewalk vendor cart, a mobile food
truck or mobile ice cream vendor.
MOBILE FOOD TRUCK: A business that serves only food, which may include
nonalcoholic beverages, from an enclosed self-contained motorized vehicle. The
term "mobile food truck" does not include a sidewalk vendor cart, mobile food
trailer or mobile ice cream vendor.
MOBILE HOME: A transportable factory built housing unit built prior to June 15,
1976, in accordance with a State Mobile Home Code which existed prior to the
Federal Manufactured Housing and Safety Standards Act (HUD Code).
MOBILE HOME PARK: A parcel of land, approved prior to May 27, 1997, which was
planned and improved for the placement of mobile homes for residential use.
MOBILE ICE CREAM VENDOR: A business that serves only ice cream or frozen
novelties from which a vendor makes sales by traveling through a residential
area and signaling the vendor's presence in the area, including by playing
music, and that primarily makes sales by stopping at the signal of a patron.
MOTEL: Any building or group of buildings providing, for a fee, sleeping
accommodations and customary lodging service for the traveling or business
public who have primary residence at another location. Such building is
designed with independent exterior access to the room from the parking area. It
is not intended to be a residence or residential facility.
(Ord. 2017-38, 8-22-2017; amd. Ord. 2019-46, 10-22-2019)
15-2-15: "N" DEFINITIONS:
NATURAL WATERWAYS: Those areas, varying in width, along streams, creeks,
gullies, springs or washes, which are natural drainage channels as determined
by the chief building official and in which areas no buildings shall be
constructed.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING, NONCOMPLYING STRUCTURE: A structure that legally
existed before its current land use designation, and because of one or more
subsequent changes to the zoning ordinance, or other land use ordinance, does
not conform to the setback, height restrictions, or other regulations now
governing the use of land.
NONCONFORMING USE: A use of land that legally existed before its current land
use designation, has been maintained continuously since the time the land use
ordinance governing the land changed, and because of one or more subsequent
changes to the zoning ordinance, or other land use ordinance, does not conform
to the regulations that now govern the use of the land.
NURSERY FOR CHILDREN: A building or structure where six (6) or more children
are regularly cared for during the day for compensation.
NURSING HOME: An intermediate care/nursing facility or a skilled nursing
facility, licensed by the State of Utah, for the care of individuals who, due
to illness, advanced age, disability, or impairment, require assistance and/or
supervision on a twenty four (24) hour per day basis. Such facility does not
include an adult daycare facility or adult daycare provided in conjunction with
a residential facility for elderly persons or a residential facility for
persons with a disability.
(Ord. 2011-2, 1-4-2011)
15-2-16: "O" DEFINITIONS:
OFFICE, BUSINESS: A place intended for the conduct of administration or
services by a business enterprise. Includes insurance agencies, real estate
agencies, stockbrokers, and other persons who operate or conduct offices in
which no goods or merchandise are stored, displayed or sold; does not include
personal service businesses such as barbers, beauty operators, cosmetologists,
nor does it include embalmers or morticians.
OFFICE, PROFESSIONAL: A place intended for the conduct of a recognized learned
profession. Such uses include offices and clinics devoted to treatment and care
of human illness or injury (medical, dental, chiropractic offices and similar
uses), but not including facilities for inpatient care. Other professions so
defined would include, but not be limited to, accountants, architects,
engineers and lawyers.
OPEN SPACE: A landscaped area in any side or rear yard which area is unoccupied
and unobstructed by buildings, parking or pavement.
OPEN SPACE EASEMENT: An easement granted to the city by the owner/developer on
or over land in that development which provides and guarantees that the
designated common open space and recreation land is permanently reserved for
and can be used only for open space and recreation purposes in accordance with
the plans and specifications approved by the planning commission and mayor at
the time of approval of the development.
OUTDOOR ACTIVITY AREA: Any open area, exclusive of parking and vehicular
accessways, which is part of the main use or accessory to the main use and is
used for outdoor activities such as, but not limited to, playgrounds, picnic
grounds, dining, receptions, pedestrian walkways, recreation, or work areas.
(Ord. 2011-2, 1-4-2011)
15-2-17: "P" DEFINITIONS:
PARKING LOT: An open area, other than a street, used for parking of more than
four (4) automobiles and available for public use, whether free, for
compensation, or as an accommodation for clients or customers.
PARKING SPACE: Space within a building, lot, or parking lot for parking or
storage of one automobile.
PAYING GUEST: Any person hiring a room in a dwelling unit for living, eating or
sleeping purposes.
PERSONAL SERVICE BUSINESS: A business specializing in grooming or hygiene
service, limited to hairdressers, barbers, manicurists. Also to include dry
cleaning pick up station, tailoring and alteration of garments.
PIGEON LOFT: Any structure in which pigeons are housed and which complies with
the provisions of this title, as well as the Weber- Morgan district health
department's rules and regulations governing the keeping of homing pigeons.
PIGEON, RACING: Only such pigeons which are maintained and housed by the owner
thereof in a pigeon loft, and which may be identified by means of a leg band,
including "homing pigeons", "Antwerp messengers" and "carrier pigeons". These
pigeons are not to be identified or classified as fowl when raised and used in
the sport and hobby of racing carrier pigeons.
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PRUD): A residential development planned
as a whole, single complex, incorporating a definite development theme which
includes the elements of usable open spaces, diversity of lot design or
residential use, amenities, a well planned circulation system, and attractive
entrances as part of the design.
PLANNING COMMISSION: The planning commission of Ogden City, Utah, as
established in title 3, chapter 3 of this code.
PRECIOUS METAL PURCHASING: A business that purchases precious metals in any
form from the general public, whether or not the metal is part of a finished
product or in pure form; except that a precious metal purchaser may not
purchase coins or commercial grade precious metals. For the purpose of this
title, a business whose principal business includes the sale of the same types
of forms of precious metal items that it buys is not considered precious metal
purchasing.
PRECIOUS METALS: Refined metals with high economic value which can be used in
the makeup of items such as commercial grade precious metals, coins, jewelry or
other items and which also have investment value. For the purposes of this
title precious metals are limited to gold, silver, palladium and the platinum
group of metals.
PRESCHOOL: Home occupation furnishing teaching for no more than eight (8)
children between the ages of three (3) and six (6), where teaching of these
children is carried out in a structured format for not more than four (4) hours
per session during normal daytime working hours and not on weekends. No child
in a preschool shall be taught more than one session per day.
PRISON: A place of incarceration owned and operated by the state of Utah.
PRIVATE JAIL: A place of incarceration established or operated under a contract
with the county.
PRIVATE PRISON: A correctional facility established or operated under a
contract with the state of Utah under the provisions of the private
correctional facilities act, title 64, chapter 13D, Utah Code Annotated, as
amended.
PROFESSIONAL, BUSINESS OR CIVIC ASSOCIATION HALL: A place intended for
conducting the business of a recognized professional, business or civic
association. Such activities include planning, training, recordkeeping, social
assembly, exercise and relaxation and general meetings. This use specifically
does not include the issuance of beer, liquor, drinking establishment, cabaret
or restaurant licenses.
PROTECTIVE HOUSING FACILITY: A facility either:
   A.   Operated, licensed or contracted by a governmental entity, or
   B.   Operated by a charitable, nonprofit organization, where, for no
compensation, temporary, protective housing is provided to:
      1.   Abused or neglected children awaiting placement in foster care;
      2.   Pregnant or parenting teens;
      3.   Victims of sexual abuse; or
      4.   Victims of domestic abuse.
(Ord. 2012-5, 1-24-2012; amd. Ord. 2020-24, 6-23-2020)
15-2-18: "Q" DEFINITIONS:
Reserved.
(Ord. 2011-2, 1-4-2011)
15-2-19: "R" DEFINITIONS:
REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION: A change in a rule, policy, practice, or service
necessary to afford a person with a disability equal opportunity to use and
enjoy a dwelling. As used in this definition:
   Equal Opportunity: Achieving equal results as between a person with a
disability and a nondisabled person.
   Necessary: The applicant must show that, but for the accommodation, one or
more persons with a disability likely will be denied an equal opportunity to
enjoy housing of their choice.
   Reasonable: A requested accommodation will not undermine the legitimate
purposes of existing zoning regulations notwithstanding the benefit that the
accommodation would provide to a person with a disability.
RECREATIONAL COACH: A vehicle such as a recreational trailer, tent camper
trailer, truck camper, travel trailer, camp car or other vehicle with or
without motive power, designed and/or constructed to travel on the public
thoroughfare in accordance with the provisions of the Utah Motor Vehicle Code,
and designed for the use of temporary human habitation.
RECREATIONAL COACH PARK: Any area or tract of land or a separate designated
section within a manufactured home park where one or more spaces are rented or
held out for rent to owners or users of recreational coaches for a temporary
time not to exceed two (2) weeks.
RECREATIONAL COACH SPACE: A plot of ground within a manufactured home park
designated and intended for the accommodation of one recreational coach.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS: Reusable material, including, but not limited to, glass,
plastics and synthetic materials, paper products such as newspaper, stationery,
scrap paper, computer paper and corrugated cardboard, rubber, batteries,
ferrous and nonferrous metals, concrete, asphalt, wood, building materials, or
any "junk or salvage material", as defined herein, which are intended for
reuse, remanufacture, or reconstitution for the purpose of using in altered
form. Recyclable material does not include refuse or hazardous materials nor
does it include coins, precious metals or commercial grade precious metals if
they are the sole recyclable material.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS, LIMITED: Aluminum cans, plastic, or scrap paper such as
newspapers, stationery, computer paper, or magazines, but not including
cardboard materials or boxes.
RECYCLING COLLECTION CENTER: A facility located in an enclosed building for the
acceptance by donation, redemption, or purchase, of recyclable materials, which
have been source separated by type by the person who last used the material.
Such facility may allow limited compacting or crushing of recyclable materials
and may allow temporary outdoor storage of such recyclable materials if stored
in weather resistant containers.
RECYCLING DROP OFF STATION: A facility maintained in connection with another
use consisting of reverse vending machines or unattended weather resistant
containers that are provided for collection of limited recyclable materials
which have been source separated by type by the person who last used the
material. A recycling drop off station shall not include weather resistant
containers located on a residential, commercial or manufacturing designated
parcel used solely for the collection of recyclable material generated on the
parcel.
RECYCLING PROCESSING CENTER: A facility that accepts, stores or processes
recyclable materials, whether or not maintained in connection with another
business. Processing includes baling, briquetting, crushing, compacting,
grinding, shredding, sawing, shearing, and sorting of recyclable materials and
the heat reduction or melting of such materials. Recycling processing center
includes junk or salvage yards where processing of recyclable material is
included, but does not include recycling drop off stations or recycling
collection stations.
REHABILITATION/TREATMENT FACILITY: A facility licensed by or contracted by the
State of Utah to provide temporary occupancy and supervision of individuals
(adults/juveniles) in order to provide rehabilitation, treatment, or counseling
services. Without limitation, such services may include rehabilitation,
treatment, counseling, or assessment and evaluation services related to
delinquent behavior, alcohol and drug abuse, sex offenders, sexual abuse, or
mental health. Associated education services may also be provided to juvenile
occupants.
RESIDENCE, RESIDENTIAL FACILITY: Any building or portion thereof where an
individual is actually living at a given point in time and intends to remain,
and not a place of temporary sojourn or transient visit.
RESIDENTIAL CHICKEN: A female domesticated fowl of the genus Gallus, commonly
referred to as a hen chicken.
RESIDENTIAL FACILITY FOR ELDERLY PERSONS: A dwelling unit that is either owned
by one of the residents or by an immediate family member of one of the
residents, or is a facility for which the title has been placed in trust for a
resident; and is occupied on a twenty four (24) hour per day basis by eight (8)
or fewer elderly persons in a family type arrangement, together with any
incidental domestic staff. A "residential facility for elderly persons" shall
not include any facility:
   A.   Which is operated as a business; provided, that such facility may not
be considered to be operated as a business solely because a fee is charged for
food or for actual and necessary costs of operation and maintenance of the
facility;
   B.   Where persons being treated for alcoholism or drug abuse are placed;
   C.   Where placement is not on a strictly voluntary basis or where placement
is part of, or in lieu of, confinement, rehabilitation, or treatment in a
correctional institution;
   D.   Which is a healthcare facility as defined by section 26-21-2 of the
Utah Code; or
   E.   Which is a residential facility for persons with a disability.
RESIDENTIAL FACILITY FOR PERSONS WITH A DISABILITY: A residence in which more
than one person with a disability resides, together with any incidental
domestic staff, and which is:
   A.   Licensed or certified by the Department of Human Services under title
62A, chapter 2, of the Utah Code, Licensure of Programs and Facilities; or
   B.   Licensed or certified by the Department of Health under title 26,
chapter 21, of the Utah Code Health Care Facility Licensing and Inspection Act.
RESIDENTIAL GARAGE SALES OR YARD SALES: The occasional sale of surplus
household goods or furnishings as a use accessory to a dwelling. Sales held
more frequently than three (3) days in any one calendar quarter shall be
considered a retail use and not "occasional" in nature, nor a use accessory to
a dwelling. A residential garage sale or yard sale shall not include goods or
property:
   A.   Acquired for the purpose of resale, barter or exchange; or
   B.   Manufactured or repaired for the purpose of sale as part of a home
occupation.
RESIDENTIAL VACATION RENTAL: Use of a dwelling unit for temporary sojourn or
transient visit for a period of up to thirty (30) consecutive days by a person
or group of people whose primary residence is at another location; who provide
compensation, in any form, in exchange for occupancy; and where meals or food
are not provided.
RESTAURANT: A place of business where food and beverages are prepared, served
and sold for human consumption. A restaurant does not include a business:
   A.   Engaged in the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages unless
licensed by the City and the State of Utah;
   B.   That provides entertainment for its patrons unless zoned for and
licensed as a cabaret or adult live entertainment business; or
   C.   Where the annual revenue from the sale of food is less than the annual
revenue from the sale of alcoholic beverages.
RETAIL TOBACCO SPECIALTY BUSINESS: A commercial establishment in which:
   A.   The sale of tobacco products accounts for more than thirty five percent
(35%) of the total annual gross receipts for the establishment;
   B.   Food and beverage products excluding gasoline sales, is less than forty
five percent (45%) of the total annual gross receipts for the establishment;
and
   C.   The establishment is not licensed as a pharmacy under title 58, chapter
17b, Pharmacy Practice Act of the Utah Code.
Tobacco products for sale in a retail specialty business are defined as:
   A.   Any cigar, cigarette or electronic cigarette as defined in section 76-
10-101, Utah Code Annotated;
   B.   A tobacco product as defined in section 59-14-102, Utah Code Annotated,
including chewing tobacco or any substitute for a tobacco product including
flavoring or additives to tobacco;
   C.   Tobacco paraphernalia as defined in section 76-10-104.1, Utah Code
Annotated;
   D.   Liquid for producing vapor in electronic cigarettes, regardless of
whether such liquid contains nicotine.
RETIREMENT HOME: A residential facility designed, occupied and intended for
residents fifty (50) years of age or older, where common facilities for cooking
and dining are available to all residents and independent facilities are
provided for living, sleeping and sanitation.
REVERSE VENDING MACHINE: An automated mechanical device, maintained in
connection with another use, which accepts at least one or more types of
limited recyclable materials and issues a cash refund or a redeemable credit
slip. A reverse vending machine may sort and process containers mechanically;
provided, that the entire process is enclosed within the machine.
(Ord. 2017-50, 12-19-2017; amd. Ord. 2020-24, 6-23-2020)
15-2-20: "S" DEFINITIONS:
SENSITIVE AREA: Lands containing environmentally and geologically sensitive
elements which, if encroached upon by unsuspecting urban land development such
as utilities, housing, streets, and/or public facilities, could be damaged
beyond reparability or could cause severe damage to such urban development or
cause complete destruction thereof or cause the loss of life or bodily harm.
Such sensitive areas could include active earthquake faults, potential
landslide areas, steep unstable terrain, or areas of potential rockfall.
SENSITIVE VEGETATION: Vegetative cover which can be harmed by compaction from
overuse, urban development or altering of the hydrologic cycle in such a manner
as to create an environmental imbalance causing a severe retardation of growth
or elimination of a particular variety of vegetative species.
SENSITIVE WILDLIFE HABITAT: Wildlife habitat which provides an environmental
biosphere critical to the well being and perpetuation of certain species of
wildlife, particularly if encroached upon by urban related development. It is
specifically related to the elimination of a limited habitat and its related
wildlife.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES: An inclusive term used to describe collectively
those businesses for which a sexually oriented business license is required,
pursuant to the sexually oriented business license chapter, set out in title 5,
chapter 15 of this Code, which types of businesses include for purposes of this
title the following: outcall services, adult entertainment dancing agencies,
adult businesses (an inclusive term including adult motion picture theaters,
adult bookstores or adult video stores), and adult live entertainment
businesses. This collective term does not describe a specific land use and
shall not be considered a single use category for purposes of this title.
SHELTER FOR THE HOMELESS: Charitable lodgings or sleeping rooms provided on a
temporary basis (usually on a daily basis), to those members of society lacking
other safe, sanitary or affordable shelter. May also include kitchen and
cafeteria.
SHELTERED WORKSHOP: An on site supervised educational or vocational training
facility for persons with a disability that does not provide any residential
facilities.
SHORT TERM LOAN BUSINESS: A. An establishment engaged in extending credit to
individuals (regardless of whether the debt is secured or unsecured or in the
form of a loan, advance or other credit intermediation service) that:
      1.   Generally charges an annual percentage rate of thirty percent (30%)
or higher as calculated under the federal truth in lending act (15 USC 1601 et
seq.) or the rules or regulations adopted pursuant to the truth in lending act;
or
      2.   Extends credit in amounts generally less than ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00).
   B.   This definition specifically includes businesses such as check cashers,
deferred deposit lenders and title lenders, but does not include establishments
whose primary activity is:
      1.   Selling real estate or financing real estate transactions;
      2.   Making retail or food sales or financing retail or food sales made
on the installment plan;
      3.   Selling vehicles or financing purchase money vehicle loans;
      4.   Making repairs or improvements to real or personal property;
      5.   Acting as a pawnbroker under the provisions of title 5, chapter 12,
article A of this code;
      6.   Providing professional, medical, dental, insurance or educational
services;
      7.   Acting as a charitable organization under section 501(c)(3) of the
internal revenue code or as a community development entity that has been
certified by the U.S. department of the treasury's community development
financial institutions fund; or
      8.   Providing deposit banking as a depository institution or depository
institution holding company as defined in Utah code section 7-1-103.
   C.   In determining the primary activity of a business, the value of any
goods sold or services rendered compared with the amount of credit extended
shall be taken into account.
   D.   A short term loan business may offer more than one type of credit
intermediation service if it meets the licensing requirements for each service
and operates from a single storefront.
SIDEWALK VENDOR: Any person or persons licensed under title 5, chapter 13,
article B of this code as a sidewalk vendor who sells, or offers to sell at
retail, food, nonalcoholic beverages, balloons, or cut flowers on a public
sidewalk.
SINGLE ROOM OCCUPANCY: A residential facility with six (6) or more living units
which are leased generally on a monthly basis with no more than two (2) persons
per unit and may or may not provide complete and independent living facilities;
provided, that bathroom facilities shall be available either in common or on an
individual basis. Twenty four (24) hour on site management shall also be
provided.
SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS: Established regulations concerning lot areas, yard
setbacks, building height, lot coverage, open green space and any other special
regulations deemed necessary to accomplish the purpose of this title.
SOCIAL HALL: A for profit privately owned, multiuse indoor space that provides
for a variety of private and public functions such as banquets, parties, games,
social gatherings, entertainment, lectures and receptions.
SOUP KITCHEN, CHARITABLE: A not for profit establishment devoted exclusively to
feeding the poor. Such establishment may provide one or more meals per day, at
no monetary charge to the hungered.
STABLE, PRIVATE: A detached, accessory building for the keeping of horses owned
by the occupants of the premises, and not kept for remuneration, hire or sale.
STABLE, PUBLIC: A stable other than a private stable.
STORY: The space within a building, other than a cellar, included between the
surface of any floor area and the surface of the ceiling next above.
STORY, HALF: A story with at least two (2) of its sides situated in a sloping
roof, the floor area of which does not exceed two- thirds (2/3) of the floor
immediately below it.
STREET: A public thoroughfare, dedicated, abandoned or condemned for public use
prior to the initial enactment of the zoning ordinance, which affords the
principal means of access of abutting property and is more than twenty six feet
(26') wide, and any public thoroughfare dedicated to the public and accepted by
proper public authority or condemned for public use after said date.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS: Any change in supporting members of a building, such as
bearing walls, columns, beams or girders.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location
on the ground, or attachment to something having location on the ground.
SWAP MEET: A business operated entirely within an enclosed building where,
under direction of a swap meet proprietor, individual sellers occupy a
designated area where goods are sold or exchanged.
SWIMMING POOL: Any artificial or semiartificial container, whether indoors or
outdoors, and whether above or below the surface of the ground, or both, used
or intended to be used to contain a body of water for swimming by any person or
persons, together with all permanent structures, equipment, appliances and
other facilities used or intended for use in and about the operation,
maintenance and use of such pool.
SWIMMING POOL, FAMILY: A swimming pool used and intended to be used solely by
the owner, operator or lessee thereof and his family and by friends invited to
use it without payment of any fee or consideration.
(Ord. 2013-13, 3-26-2013)
15-2-21: "T" DEFINITIONS:
TELEVISION SATELLITE ANTENNA (OR DISH ANTENNA): A combination of an antenna or
dish antenna whose purpose is to receive communication or other signals from
orbiting satellites; a low noise amplifier (LNA) which is situated at the focal
point of the receiving component and whose purpose is to magnify and transfer
signals; and coaxial cable whose purpose is to carry the signals into the
interior of the building.
TEMPORARY AUTOMOTIVE SUMMER SALES IN COMMERCIAL PARKING LOTS: The occasional
sale of automobiles, trucks or RVs on a shopping center or large store parking
lot in the C-2 or C-3 zones, so long as:
   A.   The sale takes place from March 1 to and including September 30;
   B.   The space used must not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the
available parking at that location;
   C.   The person engaging in the sale must have a permanent retail location
within Weber County and show that such person is a dealer licensed by the
state; and
   D.   Any sale shall not last longer than fourteen (14) days; provided, that
no dealer may conduct more than one 14-day sale or two (2) 7-day sales per
calendar year, per location.
TEMPORARY BUSINESS: A permitted wholesale or retail business conducted on a lot
without a permanent building or on a lot with a permanent building but
disassociated with any business located within said building.
THEATER, INDOOR PICTURE: A building or part of a building devoted to the
showing of moving pictures on a paid admission basis.
THEATER, OUTDOOR DRIVE-IN: An open lot or part thereof, with its appurtenant
facilities devoted primarily to the showing of moving pictures, on a paid
admission basis, to patrons seated in automobiles.
TITLE LENDER: A person engaged in the business of making loans or transactions
that are:
   A.   Secured by the title to a:
      1.   Motor vehicle, as defined in Utah code section 41-6a-102;
      2.   Mobile home, as defined in Utah code section 41-6a-102; or
      3.   Motorboat, as defined in Utah code section 73-18-2.
   B.   "Title loan" includes a title loan extended at the same premises on
which any of the following are sold:
      1.   A motor vehicle, as defined in Utah code section 41-6a-102;
      2.   A mobile home, as defined in Utah code section 41-6a-102; or
      3.   A motorboat, as defined in Utah code section 73-18-2.
"Title loan" does not include:
      1.   A purchase money loan;
      2.   A loan made in connection with the sale of a motor vehicle, as
defined in Utah code section 41-6a-102; a mobile home, as defined in Utah code
section 41-6a-102; or a motorboat, as defined in Utah code section 73-18-2; or
      3.   A loan extended by an institution listed in Utah code section 7-24-
305.
TOWING OR IMPOUND LOT: A secure facility where a licensed tow truck operator
temporarily stores vehicles, belonging to another, which have been damaged,
disabled, abandoned, seized, or impounded.
TRADE OR VOCATIONAL SCHOOL: A post-high school educational or vocational
training facility.
TRANSITIONAL HOUSING FACILITY: A facility owned, operated or contracted by a
governmental entity or a charitable, nonprofit organization, where, for no
compensation, temporary housing (for usually 3 to 24 months, but in no event
less than 30 days) is provided to homeless persons, while they obtain work, job
skills, or otherwise take steps to stabilize their circumstances. A
transitional housing facility shall not include a shelter for the homeless. A
dwelling unit provided to a family for their exclusive use as part of a
transitional housing program, for more than thirty (30) days, shall not be
considered to be a transitional housing facility.
TREE, LARGE, MEDIUM, OR SMALL: A tree designated by the city urban forester or
in the city arboricultural regulations as being of a particular size.
TREE, SIGNIFICANT: An existing tree in healthy condition and having a minimum
caliper of four inches (4") or greater as measured by industry standards.
(Ord. 2016-12, 3-1-2016; amd. Ord. 2020-24, 6-23-2020)
15-2-22: "U" DEFINITIONS:
UNLICENSED REHABILITATION/TREATMENT FACILITY: A facility providing temporary
occupancy for individuals (adult/juvenile) in order to provide rehabilitation,
treatment, or counseling services, which facility either does not require
licensure by the state of Utah or does not operate under contract with the
state of Utah. Without limitation, such services may include rehabilitation,
treatment, or counseling services, related to delinquent behavior, alcohol and
drug abuse, sex offenders, sexual abuse, or mental health.
USABLE OPEN SPACE REQUIRED: Usable open space shall be provided as prescribed
by the provisions contained in each zone. "Usable open space" shall be defined
as the aggregate area of side, rear and front yards, patios, and balconies and
decks having a minimum horizontal dimension of not less than five feet (5'), on
a building site or building, which is available and accessible to the occupants
of the building for purposes of active or passive outdoor recreation. Upon
determination by the planning commission, permanent recreational areas within
the building may be considered for the purposes of contributing to the open
space provisions contained in each zone. Usable open space does not include
driveways, areas for off street parking and off street services, roofs of
buildings, or other structures except as determined by the planning commission
when substantial landscaping and/or recreation area is provided thereon; ground
level areas with a width of five feet (5') or less; and a ground level area
width of eight feet (8') or less, if over seventy five percent (75%) of the
area is hard surfaced.
USE: The specified purpose for which land or a building is designed, arranged,
intended, or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
USE, ACCESSORY: A subordinate use customarily incidental to and located upon
the same lot occupied by the main use and devoted exclusively to the main use
of the premises.
USE, CONDITIONAL: A use or occupancy of a building, or use of land, permitted
only when authorized upon issuance of a conditional use permit and subject to
the limitations and conditions specified therein, as provided in chapter 7 of
this title, intended to allow compatible integration of uses which may be
suitable only in certain locations within a particular zone, or only upon
certain conditions and/or design criteria being achieved.
USE, PERMITTED: Any use lawfully occupying land or buildings as authorized in
the zone regulations and for which no conditional use permit is required.
USED AND REBUILDABLE CAR LOTS: A facility where used and rebuildable vehicles
are sold and displayed for sale by a licensed dealer; provided, that no salvage
operations shall be allowed as part of such use, and outdoor display and
storage of any rebuildable vehicle must meet the requirements of subsection 15-
23-5C of this title. Rebuildable vehicles shall include only damaged or
disabled vehicles which are either intended to be sold "as is" for repair by
the purchaser or intended to be sold and repaired for the purchaser by the
seller as part of an associated auto body and repair shop use.
USED CAR LOTS: A facility where operable, used vehicles are sold and displayed
for sale by a licensed dealer.
(Ord. 2011-2, 1-4-2011)
15-2-23: "V" DEFINITIONS:
Reserved.
(Ord. 2011-2, 1-4-2011)
15-2-24: "W" DEFINITIONS:
WAREHOUSE, WAREHOUSING, WAREHOUSE STORAGE: A. An enclosed building for the
reception and storage of goods.
   B.   Outdoor storage of certain goods may be allowed as an accessory use in
an M-1 or M-2 zone; provided:
      1.   The area dedicated to outdoor storage does not exceed thirty percent
(30%) of the lot area;
      2.   All such outdoor storage shall be in a completely enclosed area
screened by a seven foot (7') tall screening fence, made of any of the
following fencing materials:
         a.   Chainlink with vertical plastic or vinyl slats spaced no farther
than three-eighths inch (3/8") apart;
         b.   Solid wood, vinyl or other fencing materials having an appearance
of wood of one inch by four inch (1" x 4") to one inch by eight inch (1" x 8")
members spaced no farther apart than one-eighth inch (1/8");
         c.   Baked enamel finish, metal ribbed fence;
         d.   Decorative masonry; or
         e.   Other fence materials and construction approved by the community
development director which provide adequate screening of the storage area
similar to the above fencing materials;
      3.   No salvage or repair operations shall be allowed as part of such
use; and
      4.   Such goods shall be limited to either new goods or merchandise, or
to used or secondhand goods that are intended to be reused or resold in their
original form.
WASTE TRANSFER STATION: The use of any lot, portion of a lot, or tract of land
for the receiving, processing and immediate off site disposal of solid waste to
a permanent disposal site. This may include the temporary collection of
recyclable materials and household hazardous waste as an accessory use.
WIDTH OF LOT: The distance between the side lot lines at the distance back from
the front line required for the depth of the front yard.
(Ord. 2011-2, 1-4-2011)
15-2-25: "X" DEFINITIONS:
Reserved.
(Ord. 2011-2, 1-4-2011)
15-2-26: "Y" DEFINITIONS:
YARD: An open space on a lot, other than a court, unoccupied and unobstructed
from the ground upward by buildings, except as otherwise provided herein.
YARD, FRONT: An open space on the same lot with a building between the front
line of the building (exclusive of steps) and the front lot line and extending
across the full width of the lot. The "depth" of the front yard is the minimum
distance between the front lot line and the front line of the building.
YARD, REAR: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a building between
the rear line of the building (exclusive of steps) and the rear lot line and
extending the full width of the lot. On side yards facing street on the corner
lot, the rear yard does not extend the full width, but extends to the side line
of the building facing the street.
YARD, SIDE: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a building, between
the side line of the building (exclusive of steps) and the side lot line
extending from the front yard to the rear yard.
YARD, SIDE FACING STREET ON CORNER LOT: An open, unoccupied space on the same
lot with a building between the side line of the building (exclusive of steps)
and the side lot line, extending from the front yard to the rear property line.
(Ord. 2011-2, 1-4-2011)
15-2-27: "Z" DEFINITIONS:
ZONE: The geographical area of the city within which the zoning regulations are
uniform.
ZONING MAP: The zoning map of Ogden City describing the location and boundaries
of the various zoning districts established by this title.
ZONING ORDINANCES: The zoning ordinances of Ogden City, Utah.
(Ord. 2011-2, 1-4-2011)
CHAPTER 3
ZONES AND DISTRICTS
SECTION:
15-3-1: Establishment Of Zones
15-3-2: Height Limiting Zones
15-3-3: Boundaries Of Zones
15-3-4: Rules Applicable Where Boundaries Uncertain
15-3-5: Boundaries Of Floodplain Overlay Zone
15-3-6:    Primarily Residential Zones
15-3-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES:
For the purpose of this title, the city is divided into the following zones in
which land uses shall be limited as specified in this title. Classification
will be determined on the basis of location, topographic features and other
reasonable considerations to guide the orderly physical growth, neighborhood
compatibility and overall stability of the city.
 
Open space zone                                 O-1
Single-family residential zone                  R-
                                                1-10
Single-family residential zone                  R-
                                                1-8
Single-family residential zone                  R-
                                                1-6
Single-family residential zone                  R-
                                                1-5
Two-family residential zone                     R-2
Two-family residential zone                     R-2A
Two-family residential zone - East Central      R-2EC
Multiple-family residential zone                R-3
Multiple-family residential zone - East Central R-3EC
Multiple-family residential zone                R-4
Multiple-family residential zone                R-5
Residential manufactured home park zone         Rmh-1
Professional/institutional zone                 PI
Neighborhood commercial zone                    C-1/CP-1
Community commercial zone                       C-2/CP-2
Regional commercial zone                        C-3/CP-3
Central business district zone                  CBD
CBD intensive district                          CBD-I
Commercial recreation zone                      CRC-1
Planned commercial recreation zone              PCR
Limited manufacturing zone                      M-1
Manufacturing and industrial zone               M-2
Manufacturing, research and development zone    MRD
Defense Depot reuse district                    DDR
Business exchange industrial                    BEI
Business exchange historical                    BEH
Floodplain overlay zone                         FP
Sensitive area overlay zone                     SA
Conditional overlay zone                        CO
Ogden commercial and industrial park            OCIP
Airport commercial zone                         A-C
Airport industrial zone                         A-I
Airport overlay zone                             
12th Street corridor overlay zone               12th CO
Mixed use zone                                  MU
Limited scale neighborhood commercial zone      NC-1
Expanded scale neighborhood commercial zone     NC-2
 
(Ord. 72-13, 7-6-1972; amd. Ord. 75-31, 6-19-1975; Ord. 90-19, 5-30-1990; Ord.
90-36, 7-26-1990; Ord. 91-25, 7-25-1991; Ord. 97-36, 5-27-1997; Ord. 99-38, 10-
19-1999; Ord. 2000-42, 7-18-2000; Ord. 2000-56, 11-7-2000; Ord. 2000-72, 1-16-
2001, eff. 1-18-2001; Ord. 2002-24, 6-4-2002; Ord. 2006-17, 4-18-2006; Ord.
2007-17, 5-1-2007; Ord. 2008-37, 8-19-2008; Ord. 2009-17, 1-13-2009; Ord. 2011-
14, 3-15-2011; Ord. 2015-4, 2-24-2015; Ord. 2016-2, 1-12-2016)
15-3-2: HEIGHT LIMITING ZONES:
In addition to the zones hereinabove established, all the land within the
incorporated boundaries and overlaid by the airport overlay zone is hereby
divided into the following listed height limiting zones:
   A.   Precision instrument approach surface zone.
   B.   Nonprecision approach surface zone.
   C.   Transitional surface zone.
   D.   Horizontal surface zone.
   E.   Conical surface zone.
(Ord. 72-13, 7-6-1972; amd. 1999 Code; Ord. 2002-24, 6-4-2002)
15-3-3: BOUNDARIES OF ZONES:
The location and boundaries of each of the said zones are hereby established as
described herein or as shown on the map entitled "zoning map of Ogden City" and
the map entitled "airport zoning map of Ogden City", or as hereafter amended,
and all boundaries, notations and other data shown on said maps are made by
this reference as much a part of this title as if fully described and detailed
herein. Said maps shall be filed in the custody of the city recorder, and may
be examined by the public subject to any reasonable regulations established by
the city recorder.
(Ord. 72-13, 7-6-1972; amd. 1999 Code)
15-3-4: RULES APPLICABLE WHERE BOUNDARIES UNCERTAIN:
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundary of any zone, the following rules
shall apply:
   A.   Wherever the zone boundary is indicated as being approximately upon the
centerline of a street, alley or block, or along a property line, then unless
otherwise definitely indicated on the map, the centerline of such street,
alley, or block, or such property line, shall be construed to be the boundary
of such zone.
   B.   Wherever such boundary line of such zone is indicated as being
approximately at the line of any river, irrigation canal, or other waterway, or
railroad right of way, or public park or other public land, or any section
line, then in such case of the center of such stream, canal, or waterway or of
such railroad right of way, or the boundary line of such public land or such
section line shall be deemed to be the boundary of such zone.
   C.   Where such zone boundary lines cannot be determined by the above rules,
their location may be found by the use of the scale appearing upon the map.
   D.   Where the application of the above rules does not clarify the zone
boundary location, the board of zoning adjustment shall interpret the map.
(Ord. 72-13, 7-6-1972; amd. 1999 Code)
15-3-5: BOUNDARIES OF FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY ZONE:
The boundaries of the floodplain overlay zone are hereby established as
described herein or as shown on the map entitled "Ogden River floodplain
overlay zone", and all boundaries, notations and other data shown on said map
is made by this reference as much a part of this section as if fully described
and detailed herein. Said map shall be filed in the custody of the city
recorder and may be examined by the public subject to any reasonable
regulations established by the city recorder.
(Ord. 75-31, 6-19-1975; amd. 1999 Code)
15-3-6: PRIMARILY RESIDENTIAL ZONES.
   A.   For purposes of this title, a zoning district, including an overlay
zone or conditional overlay zone, is primarily residential if the majority of
the buildings in the zone are used, in whole or in part, for dwelling units.
   B.   Specific zones that are primarily residential include:
 
Single-family residential zone                 R-1-10 
Single-family residential zone                 R-1-8 
Single-family residential zone                 R-1-6 
Single-family residential zone                 R-1-5 
Two-family residential zone                    R-2 
Two-family residential zone                    R-2A 
Two-family residential zone - East Central     R-2EC 
Multiple-family residential zone               R-3 
Multiple-family residential zone - East Central R-3EC 
Multiple-family residential zone               R-4 
Multiple-family residential zone               R-5 
Residential manufactured home park zone        Rmh-1 
Mixed use zone                                 MU
 
(Ord. 2019-46, 10-22-2019)
CHAPTER 4
DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW PROCESS
SECTION:
15-4-1: Purpose
15-4-2: Definitions
15-4-3: Type Of Development Applications
15-4-4: Application And Review Process
15-4-5: Standards
15-4-6: Expiration
15-4-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   The development plan review process is established in order to assure
that new development proposed for Ogden City will comply with the requirements
of this code, and to ensure that new development is designed and constructed in
a manner that will:
      1.   Ensure that all growth and development is consistent with the
requirements of this title and the Ogden City general plan;
      2.   Foster the safe, efficient and economic use of the land, the city's
transportation infrastructure, and other public facilities and services;
      3.   Ensure adequate infrastructure servicing new development;
      4.   Provide for adequate drainage of surface water and reduction of
flood damage;
      5.   Provide adequate on site litter control;
      6.   Provide safe and convenient vehicular access and circulation, and
encourage patterns of land use that decrease automobile trip length and
encourage trip consolidation;
      7.   Improve the design, quality and character of new development;
      8.   Encourage the development of vacant properties within established
areas;
      9.   Ensure that development proposals are sensitive to the character of
existing neighborhoods; and
      10.   Ensure that development proposals are sensitive to natural areas
and features.
   B.   Compliance with the regulations of this chapter in no sense excuses a
developer from the applicable requirements outlined elsewhere in this code.
(Ord. 99-38, 10-19-1999)
15-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms, as used in this chapter, shall have the respective
meanings as indicated:
DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW TEAM: Representatives from the following city
departments or divisions: current planning division, building services
division, engineering division, operations division, water division, and fire
department. Representatives from other departments or divisions of the city, or
other agencies, which have been assigned to review development proposals for
compliance with city regulations.
DEVELOPMENT PROPOSAL: A proposal to Ogden City for the approval of new
development or a substantial change to existing development.
DIRECTOR: The director of the community and economic development department, or
the director's designee.
FINAL PLAN: A site plan that shows all approved requirements and conditions for
development of a project.
NEW DEVELOPMENT: The construction or exterior alteration of any building or
structure, or the modification of a site for an existing or new building or
structure. "New development" shall not include construction of or changes to a
single-family dwelling or a two-family dwelling, unless such dwellings are
being constructed or modified as a group dwelling, a PRUD, a residential infill
development, or a conditional use.
SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE: Those changes or modifications that:
   A.   Change the use or character of the development;
   B.   Increase the overall density or intensity of use;
   C.   Increase the coverage of the site by structures;
   D.   Reduce previously approved requirements for open space, amenities or
landscaping;
   E.   Change the number of parking spaces to below the minimum required;
   F.   Modify on site traffic circulation or affect driveways;
   G.   Increase the impervious area of the site which increases storm drainage
requirements; or
   H.   Alter the location of existing or proposed utilities.
(Ord. 99-38, 10-19-1999; amd. Ord. 2001-32, 6-5-2001; Ord. 2007-67, 9-18-2007)
15-4-3: TYPE OF DEVELOPMENT APPLICATIONS:
   A.   Project Development Plan: All development proposals must be processed
and approved through submittal of a "project development plan". If the
applicant desires to develop in phases, i.e., with two (2) or more separate
project development plan submittals, an "overall development plan" will also be
required prior to, or concurrently with, the project development plan for any
one phase. The requirement for project development plan review may be waived by
the director for expansions or alterations that do not constitute a substantial
change. The reason(s) for the waiver will be put in writing by the director,
and a copy filed with the city's permanent records for the site.
   B.   Overall Development Plan: An overall development plan shall be required
for any property that is intended to be developed over time in two (2) or more
separate project development plan submittals. The purpose of the overall
development plan is to establish general planning and development control
parameters for projects that will be developed in phases with multiple
submittals while allowing sufficient flexibility to permit detailed planning in
subsequent submittals. Approval of an overall development plan does not
establish any vested right to develop property in accordance with the plan.
(Ord. 99-38, 10-19-1999)
15-4-4: APPLICATION AND REVIEW PROCESS:
   A.   Conceptual Review Meeting:
      1.   Purpose: Conceptual review is an opportunity for an applicant to
discuss requirements, standards and procedures that apply to a development.
Major problems and a course of action for their resolution can be identified
before a formal application is made.
      2.   Applicability: A conceptual review meeting is encouraged for all
development proposals, including existing developments that are proposed to
have substantial changes.
      3.   Conceptual Plan Submittal: A sketch plan of the proposed development
that shows the location of the proposal, major use areas, streets and other
significant features is drawn. This is brought as the discussion exhibit for
the conceptual review meeting.
      4.   Staff Review And Recommendations: A meeting shall be held at
appointed times with the development plan review team and those proposing a
development in order to discuss the conceptual plan. After the meeting, the
review team shall furnish the applicant with written comments and
recommendations to inform and assist the applicant in the preparation of the
development application. The information shall include whether the use is
permitted or conditional and what the existing zone is, and advise the
applicant on the applicable review process.
   B.   Formal Submittals:
      1.   Application Forms: All applicants for proposed new development shall
complete an application form established by the director and made available to
the public.
      2.   Application Submittal: The application form, fees, plans and other
supporting material as required by the city shall be submitted to the planning
division. All pieces of the application package and requirements of the
submittal forms must be present and verified by the director before the
application is accepted. The director may waive items on the application form
that are not applicable due to the particular circumstances or conditions of
that development proposal.
      3.   Determination Of Completeness: The planning division, upon receipt
of the application, shall determine whether or not the application is complete
and ready for review based on the stated requirements for submittal and
requests for exceptions to the submittal requirements. If the material that has
been submitted is determined to be incomplete, all review of the submittal will
be delayed until the planning division receives the necessary material to make
the submittal complete.
   C.   Review Process:
      1.   Review Requirement: All applications for proposed new development
plans shall be reviewed by the development plan review team. If the plan is
required to be reviewed and approved by the planning commission or mayor under
other provisions of this title, the development plan review team shall submit
recommendations to such officials.
      2.   Department, Division And Agency Review: The director shall within
two (2) working days, transmit a copy of the project development plan to each
of the reviewing departments, divisions and agencies, with the date that the
proposed plan will be discussed at a development plan review team meeting. The
reviewing departments and agencies shall submit comments to the director at
least two (2) working days before the scheduled meeting, which shall be
compiled for presentation and discussion with the applicant at the meeting.
      3.   Development Plan Review Team Meeting: Within twenty (20) working
days after receipt of a complete application, the development plan review team
shall meet to discuss the application with the applicant. At this meeting, the
applicant will be informed whether the application complies with all applicable
standards of this code. The applicant will also be informed of proposed
conditions for approval, which may be imposed to eliminate areas of
noncompliance or mitigate any adverse effects of the development proposal. The
applicant will be given an opportunity at the meeting to make presentations,
ask questions, propose alternative conditions. The proposal may be tabled to a
subsequent meeting if the director determines that more information is
necessary or upon request of the applicant.
      4.   Director Determination: After consideration of the proposed plan at
the meeting, the director shall within seven (7) working days make a
determination whether the proposed plan is in compliance with the requirements
of this code and may impose conditions to eliminate areas of noncompliance or
mitigate any adverse effects of the development proposal. Such determination
shall be in writing and provided to the applicant.
      5.   Resubmittals: If major areas of noncompliance or significant changes
are evident, the director may require that the applicant revise the submittal
and resubmit prior to further consideration and review by the development plan
review team.
      6.   Submittal Of Final Plans: Upon receiving approval of the project
development plan the applicant shall submit three (3) final plans to the
director for approval. The final plans shall be submitted according to city
requirements and must incorporate all conditions of approval.
      7.   Appeals:
         a.   If the director has designated another official in the department
to have responsibility for the development plan review process under this
chapter, any decision of the designated official may be appealed to the
director by filing a written appeal to the director within thirty (30) days of
the design being appealed. Any decision of the director shall be a final
administrative determination, subject to appeal to the board of zoning
adjustment.
         b.   Decisions made by the planning commission or mayor may be
appealed to the board of zoning adjustment.
(Ord. 99-38, 10-19-1999; amd. Ord. 2001-32, 6-5-2001, eff. 6-30-2001)
15-4-5: STANDARDS:
   A.   Review Criteria: In addition to criteria established in other
provisions of this code, the following criteria shall be considered in the
review and evaluation of a project development plan, or other site plan
approved under the provisions of this title, consistent with a reasonable use
of the site for the purposes permitted or allowed by the regulations of the
underlying zone:
      1.   If the proposal requires a conditional use permit or other
development permit, it must conform to the conditions imposed under the permit.
      2.   The development shall be served with adequate water supply and be
connected to the water and sewer mains, in accordance with city standards.
      3.   The plan shall maximize the convenience and safety of vehicular and
pedestrian movement within the site and in relation to adjacent ways. The plan
shall show traffic flow patterns for vehicles and pedestrians that provide safe
and adequate access to, from and within the site.
      4.   The site plan shall show adequate measures to prevent pollution of
surface or ground water, to minimize erosion and sedimentation, and to prevent
changes in groundwater levels, increased runoff and potential for flooding.
Drainage shall be designed so that runoff shall not be increased, groundwater
recharge is maximized, and neighboring properties will not be adversely
affected. The above requirement shall include compliance with title 9, chapter
6 of this code or its successor provisions, requiring installation of storm
sewer facilities.
      5.   Adequate containers for trash enclosure areas.
   B.   Public Improvements:
      1.   Required: The following public improvements shall be required for
all project development plans or any other site plan approved under the
provisions of this title:
         a.   The applicant shall be responsible for the dedication and
improvement of all off site public improvements that do not presently exist
along frontage of the project according to a half width of the ultimate right
of way as provided in the minimum standards for design and specifications
approved by the city engineer, adopted pursuant to titles 7 and 14 of this
code. Such improvements shall include, but are not limited to, curb, gutter,
sidewalk, drive approaches, waterways, road base, asphalt, striping,
streetscape, storm drainage, fire hydrants, copper laterals, piping of
irrigation ditches and flood control systems, fencing of canals, extension of
water lines, appurtenances and sewer lines, etc.
         b.   If existing sidewalk, curb and gutter, or drive approaches are in
need of "extraordinary repairs", as defined and provided in sections
7-7-1 and
7-7-2 of this code, the applicant shall be responsible for such improvements.
         c.   The applicant shall be responsible for any upgrades to existing
off site public improvements necessary to meet city standards applicable for
the provision of water and sewer.
         d.   The area within the public right of way between the curb and
gutter and sidewalk shall be landscaped with lawn, approved street trees,
flowers or shrubs, in accordance with the landscaping standards of this code.
      2.   Installation Of Curb, Gutter Or Sidewalk: Where no curb and gutter
or sidewalk exists along any public way adjacent to property proposed for new
development or construction under this title, these street improvements must be
installed at the time of any new development or construction unless, due to
special circumstances existing on the street, the city engineer certifies that
the installation of curb and gutter is impractical or not desirable. "Special
circumstances" may include, but are not limited to:
         a.   Development at midblock where no improvements exist in either
direction of the proposed development provided the applicant agrees to record a
city approved covenant and agreement for future public improvement
installation.
         b.   Improvements are planned as part of a special improvement
district or capital improvement plan.
   C.   Engineering Design Standards:
      1.   Development projects must comply with all design standards,
requirements, and specifications for the following services as certified by the
appropriate agency, or variances must be granted by such agency:
         a.   Water supply.
         b.   Sanitary sewer.
         c.   Fire protection and emergency services.
         d.   Flood hazard areas.
         e.   Storm drainage.
         f.   Streets/roadways.
      2.   As a matter of courtesy, the city will notify the following agencies
of the proposed project, however, the applicant shall be responsible to make
contact with each of the following service providers regarding their individual
requirements for development. These requirements shall also be included on the
final plan:
         a.   Telephone.
         b.   Electricity.
         c.   Natural gas.
         d.   Cable television.
         e.   Irrigation water.
         f.   Mass transit.
         g.   Post office.
   D.   Walkways:
      1.   For all on site sidewalks, provide a minimum six foot (6') wide
sidewalk when the sidewalk is also used as tire stop for parked vehicles. In
all other cases a minimum four foot (4') wide sidewalk is required.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4027.png]
 
      2.   The design of walks within the public right of way must meet the
city standards for construction of public improvements.
      3.   The design of all walkways shall meet the requirements associated
with accepted design standards for handicapped access use.
   E.   Landscaping: These criteria apply to all proposed new development:
      1.   Landscape Plan: As part of any proposed development, the owner or
developer shall submit a landscape plan to the planning division for approval.
All landscaping plans shall demonstrate conformance with the applicable
requirements contained in this section.
      2.   Landscape Objectives: Landscaping should substantively satisfy the
following objectives to the extent that they apply to the specific site:
         a.   Landscaping should be encouraged that will serve the function of
enhancing the visual environment by:
            (1)   Adding visual interest through texture, color, size and
shape, etc.;
            (2)   Enhancing perspective by framing views, complementing
architecture, screening and creating points of interest and activity; and
            (3)   Defining and screening parking areas and associated access
lanes from adjacent residential zones and public rights of way.
         b.   Landscaping should be encouraged that will serve the function of
ensuring public safety by:
            (1)   Guiding the circulation of cars and people;
            (2)   Controlling access to parking lots;
            (3)   Making traffic diverters prominent; and
            (4)   Defining the relative importance of streets by varying the
species, height and location of landscaping.
         c.   Landscaping should be encouraged that will serve the function of
minimizing the nuisance of noise and glare. Landscaping should be encouraged
that will service the function of conserving energy by:
            (1)   Shading hot summer sun; and
            (2)   Blocking cold winter winds.
         d.   Care should be taken to integrate the project to the site.
Landscaping is one tool in carrying out this thoughtful consideration of the
land. Sensitivity to topography and useful existing vegetation should be used
in determining building location and special uses. The total landscape should
be harmonious with the overall neighborhood concept.
         e.   Preservation of existing landforms and mature trees is usually
desirable.
         f.   Visual variety should be the aim of landscaping treatment.
Landscaping should be used to break up large expanses of pavement.
         g.   Species that are a public nuisance or that cause excess litter
should be avoided.
         h.   Landscaping and other design elements, such as pavers, lighting,
seating, etc., as deemed appropriate, should enhance the visual environment by
creating a visually obvious and definite entry point or entry corridor,
enframing views, complementing the architecture, screening objectionable views
and creating points of interest.
         i.   Landscaping, combined with other design elements, should ensure
public safety by: guiding the circulation of cars and people, controlling
access to parking lots, and making traffic diverters prominent.
      3.   General Requirements:
         a.   All required front and side yard setbacks facing a street, as
well as the area of the public right of way defined by a curb or gutter shall
be landscaped utilizing ground covers, trees and shrubs.
         b.   When shrubs or ground covers other than grass are used for
landscaping, the spacing, type and size of plants used shall be such that
seventy five percent (75%) of all landscaped areas shall be covered with living
material within three (3) years of planting.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4029.png]
 
         c.   Planting beds shall be covered with rock or wood mulch to a
minimum depth of three inches (3").
         d.   Plant material shall be species that are regionally appropriate
and suitable for the site specific planting conditions, including available
moisture, shade, salt tolerance, wind exposure and soil pH.
         e.   The maximum allowable cut or fill slope is three feet (3')
horizontal distance for one foot (1') of rise. Slopes steeper than three to one
(3:1) will require retaining walls or other types of approved slope
stabilization methods.
         f.   No plant material greater than twenty four inches (24") in height
shall be located within fifteen feet (15') of a curb cut.
         g.   For all properties, except those associated with group dwellings,
PRUDs and multiple-family dwellings, all on site landscape areas shall be
planted with a minimum of one live tree per one thousand (1,000) square feet of
landscaped area.
         h.   For properties with new multiple-family dwellings in residential
zones, areas not covered with pavements or structures shall:
            (1)   Be landscaped with grass or other ornamental plant material;
            (2)   Have a minimum of one tree per unit in addition to the street
trees required in the parkway; and
            (3)   Have five (5) 5-gallon shrubs per unit planted on the lot.
      4.   Size Of Landscape Materials At Time Of Planting: Unless specified
elsewhere in this code:
         a.   Deciduous shade trees shall have a minimum caliper size, as
defined by industry standards, of:
            (1)   Two inches (2") for multi-family dwellings, commercial and
industrial developments, and in residential zones when placed by the developer;
and
            (2)   One and one-fourth inches (1.25") in residential zones when
placed by the individual property owner.
         b.   Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of four feet (4') tall.
         c.   Shrubs shall be of a size generally known in the landscape
industry as requiring at least a one gallon container.
      5.   Installation And Maintenance:
         a.   Landscaping shall be installed in all areas not occupied by
buildings, parking, storage, future phased plan areas or accessways and in
accordance with the approved landscape plan.
         b.   Landscaping shall be installed prior to occupancy of any unit in
the structure. In the case of inclement weather that prevents the installation
of the required improvements, the time completion of the improvements may be
extended, in writing, upon the approval of the applicable reviewing body or
designee. However, in no case shall the time for completion be extended beyond
June 1 immediately following the completion date. A financial guarantee
according to section
15-13-23 of this title shall be required prior to issuing building permits.
         c.   All landscaping, fencing, walls and other buffering/screening
materials shall be maintained in a good, healthy, weed free, effective
condition by the owner. Diseased or dead plant material shall be removed and
replaced by June 1 if due to winterkill or October 1 if the plant material dies
during summer months. Deteriorated or ineffective fencing material shall be
removed and replaced within three (3) months of notice of correction.
         d.   Landscaping materials shall be contained so as not to obstruct
any portion of the public sidewalk or street pavement.
         e.   All landscaping shall be protected from automobile overhang.
      6.   Irrigation System Design:
         a.   Irrigation systems shall be designed to avoid or minimize
overspray of water onto paved surfaces or structures.
         b.   Landscaped areas shall be irrigated with an underground
irrigation system. Areas with existing natural vegetation of shrubs (e.g.,
Wood's rose, willows, sagebrush) or trees (e.g., box elder, scrub oak, maple,
birch) are not required to be irrigated unless site improvements have altered
the historic drainage pattern or soil absorption patterns so as to reduce the
amount of available water so the planting cannot exist in its natural state.
      7.   Tree Preservation:
         a.   Significant trees and significant groves shall be preserved to
the extent reasonably feasible. Existing trees and shrubs within areas that can
be developed (excluding river setbacks/buffer zones, floodways and wetlands
areas) may be used to satisfy the landscaping requirements of this section. All
required landscape plans shall accurately identify the locations, species,
size, condition and proposed disposition of all significant trees or
significant groves.
         b.   Existing trees that will remain and their root systems shall
receive adequate water to ensure survival, and shall be protected from damage,
soil contamination and compaction within the drip line during construction
through the use of barricades or fencing.
      8.   Street Trees: When the public street frontage has existing curbs or
is required to install curbs as part of the development improvements, street
trees shall be required to be installed in the parkway.
         a.   Large trees shall be spaced at forty feet (40') on center, medium
trees shall be spaced at thirty feet (30') on center, and small trees shall be
spaced at twenty feet (20') on center.
         b.   In areas with existing aboveground power lines, new street trees
that exceed a height of twenty five feet (25') at maturity may not be installed
underneath the power lines.
         c.   Street trees shall not be closer than twenty five feet (25') to
any drive approach.
         d.   If the space in the parkway is less than five feet (5') wide the
required trees shall be placed outside of the parkway but within twenty five
feet (25') of the curb line and may be arranged in a formal or informal manner.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4032.png]
 
   F.   Buffer Yards (Protection Of Adjoining Residential Zoned Properties):
      1.   Purpose Of Screening: The intent of the screening requirements
provided herein is to protect residential zones from the potential impacts
commonly associated with commercial and manufacturing uses, such as lights,
noise, increased pedestrian and automobile traffic, invasions of privacy and
physical intrusions on property.
      2.   Screening Requirement: Whenever commercial or manufacturing
development abuts property in a residential zone, screening is required to
protect residential properties from the potential impacts of lights, noise,
increased pedestrian traffic, invasions of privacy and physical intrusions on
property. Based on the applicant's site plan, the department will determine the
potential impacts resulting from location, site design and layout as they
relate to the areas of concern identified in table A of this section. The
applicant may then choose from among those screening options in table A of this
section that will mitigate all of the identified impacts. The specific standard
for each option is identified in table B of this section. Determinations may be
appealed to the planning commission. If there are no potential impacts,
screening is not required.
   TABLE A: SCREENING OPTIONS
 
Impacts On Adjacent Residentially Zoned Property
Areas Of Lights Noise Privacy Objectionable Access
Concern                       View          Restrictions
Parking     A,B,C1,D,E or C1,D,E or H1 C1,D,E or H1 A,B,C1,D,E or D,E,F,G,H or
            H1                                      H1            I
Service     C1,D,E or H1  C1,D,E or H1 C1,D,E or H1 C1,D,E,G or   D,E,F,G,H or
entrance                                            H1            I
Dumpster    C1,D,E or H1  C1,D,E or H1 C1,D,E or H1 C1,D,E,G or   D,E,F,G,H or
                                                    H1            I
Outdoor     C1,D,E or H1  C1,D,E or H1 C1,D,E or H1 C1,D,E,G or   D,E,F,G,H or
storage                                             H1            I
Outdoor                                             C1,D,E,G or   D,E,F,G,H or
activity    C1,D,E or H1  C1,D,E or H1 C1,D,E or H1 H1            I
area
Distance of E or H1       None         E or H1      E or H1       None
building
 
Note:
   1.    This is an option only when abutting residentially zoned property is
vacant or has substantial existing vegetation. In either instance the time
needed for growth of vegetation will not be detrimental to the buffering needs.
   TABLE B: SCREENING OPTION DESCRIPTION
 
Option Screening Type Purpose And Standards
                                         Screens vehicles in parking lot and
                                         decreases asphalt appearance, except
                                         when difference in topography offsets
                                         screening. Any berm shall have a
A 4' high berm                           minimum height of 4' and a stabilized
                                         side slope of no greater than 3:
                                         1 ratio of run to rise. A minimum
                                         width of 12' is required for this
                                         option.
                                         Screens parking lot and buffers
                                         building. Evergreen shrubs shall be of
                                         a locally adapted species such as
                                         pyracantha, yew, juniper, or evergreen
                                         euonymus. Shrubs shall be a minimum of
B Berm with shrubs sufficient to achieve 5 gallon size when planted and shall
  a 4' high screen                       be expected to reach a minimum height
                                         of 4' within 5 years of planting.
                                         Shrubs shall be planted at a maximum
                                         of 5' on center. The berm shall have a
                                         stabilized side slope no greater than
                                         3:1 ratio of run to rise.
                                         Screens parking lot except when
                                         difference in topography offsets
                                         screening. Buffers building which is
                                         close to property line. Shrubs shall
                                         be of a locally adapted evergreen
                                         species such as arborvitae (Thuja
                                         occidentalis or orientalis), juniper
C Evergreen hedge with an ultimate       (Juniperus virginiana or chinensis),
  height of at least 5'                  pyracantha, yew (Taxus media), or
                                         evergreen euonymus (Euonymus
                                         japonica). Shrubs shall be a minimum
                                         of 5 gallon size when planted and
                                         shall be expected to reach a height of
                                         at least 5' within 5 years of
                                         planting. Shrubs shall be planted at a
                                         maximum of 5' on center.
                                         Screens ground level lights, noise,
                                         objectionable views, provides privacy
                                         and access restrictions. Texture
  A 6' tall solid fence in either wood,  provides aesthetic relief. "Decorative
  vinyl or chainlink with interlocking   masonry" shall include split face
D opaque vinyl or a 6' tall decorative   block or brick, fluted block, or
  masonry wall with textured surfacing   masonry wall with stucco finish, but
  facing the residential use             shall not include openings in the wall
                                         surface below a height of 6'. Bumper
                                         guards set back a minimum of 2.5' from
                                         the fence shall be required when the
                                         fence abuts parking.
                                         Screens ground level lights, higher
                                         level lights, noise, objectionable
  A minimum 6' wide landscaped strip     views, provides privacy, access
  with trees and either a 6' tall solid  restrictions and additional noise
  fence of either wood, vinyl or         mitigation. Trees shall be a minimum
E chainlink with interlocking opaque     2" caliper spaced at a minimum of 20'
  vinyl or a 6' tall decorative masonry  on center. "Decorative masonry" shall
  wall with textured surfacing facing    include split face block or brick,
  residential use                        fluted block, or masonry wall with
                                         stucco finish, but shall not include
                                         openings in the wall surface below a
                                         height of 6'.
F 6' chainlink fence                     Provides security and access
                                         restriction.
                                         Provides security and access
  6' chainlink fence with inserts in the restriction. Inserts help screen
G fence fabric                           objectionable views. Inserts shall be
                                         of a durable opaque material and shall
                                         be kept in good repair.
                                         Screens ground level and higher level
                                         lights, provides security and access
                                         restrictions. Vegetative screen
                                         provides additional noise mitigation
                                         and screens objectionable views. Trees
                                         and shrubs shall be of a locally
  6' open fence with evergreen shrubs    adapted species such as pine, spruce,
H and trees                              arborvitae, juniper, pyracantha,
                                         evergreen euonymus, with a plant size
                                         of at least 15 gallons for trees and 5
                                         gallons for shrubs. Shrubs shall be
                                         expected to reach a height of at least
                                         5' within 5 years of planting. Trees
                                         shall be planted at a maximum of 20'
                                         on center and shrubs at 5' on center.
  Ornamental wrought iron or other       Provides some access restriction. Used
I decorative see through fencing         when this is the only impact from the
                                         proposed development.
 
      3.   Waivers: When one of the following conditions exist on a site and
based on those site conditions any of the required screening options would not
provide sufficient screening to the residential properties as described in
tables A and B of this section, the director may waive the screening
requirement in full or in part.
         a.   Topography: Immediate grade differences exist between the
development and residential zone to such an extent that no additional buffering
or protection of the residential zone would be provided by the fence.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4034.png]
         b.   Visual Screening: Existing vegetation along the zone boundary
provides adequate visual screening, provided that the adjacent residentially
zoned property is fully developed with other than a dwelling or dwelling units.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4036.png]
 
         c.   Substitution Of Building For Fence: The wall of a commercial
building facing a side or rear yard adequately serves as a screening fence,
provided that the yard setback area between the building and the property line
shall be entirely landscaped. It shall be unlawful to use any part of such area
for storage, dumping, garbage receptacle, loading and unloading, delivery,
other service access or parking.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4038.png]
      4.   Building Openings: Any building or structure proposed next to a
residential zone shall be designed so that door openings, freight and delivery
doors and docks, vents, exhausts, storage areas and other functions which
create noise, or unsightly views are located on sides of the building other
than the side facing the residential zone, except for emergency doors. If in
the design there are no other options available than to locate one or more of
these items on the residential side of the building the planning commission
shall review the plan to consider if it is appropriate to allow exceptions. The
planning commission may grant an exception if a site design mitigation plan is
proposed which increases landscaped setbacks, increases screening, or uses
grade alterations which would reduce the impacts which could be experienced by
those uses in the residential zone.
   G.   Screening Of Service And Storage Areas And Utilities: These
requirements apply to, but are not limited to, aboveground utility
appurtenances, storage areas, and open areas where machinery, vehicles or
equipment are stored or repaired.
      1.   Outdoor storage, trash collection or compaction, loading or other
such uses shall be located to the rear or side of the building, and not next to
public streets or public sidewalks.
      2.   Outdoor storage, truck parking, HVAC equipment, trash facilities and
other service functions shall be located and screened so that the visual and
acoustic impacts of these uses are fully contained and out of view from public
use areas. Landscape, plant and building elements shall be used to screen all
sides of such elements, except where an opening is required for access. If
access is only possible on a side that is visible from public use areas, a
removable screen shall be required. The screen shall prevent eighty percent
(80%) of the screened element from being visible.
      3.   When outdoor storage is the only use on the site the storage areas
shall be set back twenty feet (20') from any public street property line. The
twenty foot (20') setback area shall be landscaped according to the standards
of this section.
      4.   Screening measures shall be incorporated into the overall design of
the building, so that the architectural design of the building and screening is
compatible.
      5.   Acceptable screening materials include plants, walls, fences,
topographic changes or a combination of these techniques.
   H.   Fencing:
      1.   No fencing of commercial or manufacturing properties shall be
erected in any required front or side yard setback facing any of the following
streets: Wall Avenue, Washington, Harrison, 1200 West, Pennsylvania Avenue,
1900 West, 1200 South, 2000 South, 2100 South, 2400 South, 2550 South, 30th and
31st Street Expressway. If fencing is placed in the front or side yard setback
facing a street in any other area, the fencing shall be see through if
landscaping areas are immediately behind the fence.
      2.   The fence height in the front yard setback for other locations which
are zoned commercial or manufacturing not noted above shall be a maximum of
seven feet (7') high except at the corners of street intersections if the fence
obstructs the view according to the traffic code sight triangle. In those cases
fences shall be set back according to the traffic code sight triangle area.
Where driveways enter onto a public street, the fencing shall be on private
property and setback a minimum of twenty feet (20') from the curb line of the
public street for a distance of twenty feet (20') on either side of the
driveway in order to ensure view of oncoming traffic.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4040.png]
 
   I.   Exterior Illumination:
      1.   All development, except developments that contain only single-
family residential uses, shall submit for approval a proposed lighting plan.
      2.   All development shall design lighting to meet the safety and
security needs of the development. When exterior lighting is used, lighting
shall be designed to minimize glare and diffusion onto other properties. When
the use is next to a residential zone, direct and defused light shall be
shielded from the residential zoned area.
      3.   Site lighting that may be confused with warning, emergency or
traffic signals is prohibited.
   J.   Building Design:
      1.   Glare:
         a.   Building materials shall not create excessive glare. If highly
reflective building materials are proposed, the potential for glare from such
materials will be evaluated for their potential adverse impact on adjacent
property owner(s) in terms of vehicular safety, outdoor activities, privacy or
enjoyment of views.
         b.   Mirror glass with a reflectivity of greater than sixty percent
(60%) is prohibited.
      2.   Design And Placement Of Tall Buildings: Any building or structure
proposed to be in excess of thirty five feet (35') tall that is next to a
residential or open space zone shall be set back thirty five feet (35') plus
one foot (1') for every foot the building is taller than thirty five feet
(35'). A building or structure may stagger the height as long as the height of
the section that is over thirty five feet (35') meets this setback from the
residentially zoned property line.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4042.png]
 
      3.   Exterior Building Materials In Commercial Zones: The construction of
buildings in the commercial zones should use materials which are compatible
with the materials used in the construction of commercial buildings adjacent to
the property.
         a.   Metal sided premanufactured buildings are not permitted in the
commercial zones nor are exterior surfaces which are composed substantially of
metal, except as provided in subsection J3b of this section.
         b.   In the C-3 zone, building exteriors are allowed which use new
architectural metal that enhances the architectural design, provides interest
and are compatible with other buildings in the area if:
            (1)   The building front facade has sixty percent (60%) or more
glazing; or
            (2)   The planning commission approves the use of new architectural
metal as the main exterior surface material based on the following
considerations:
               (A)   The building front must have a minimum of twenty percent
(20%) glazing and use two (2) or more different types of architectural metals
and/or materials;
               (B)   The building has staggered roofline heights along with
flat cornices; and
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4044.png]
 
               (C)   The building front has varying depths and is not made up
of long flat walls.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4046.png]
 
         c.   If there is a question of the compatibility of the exterior
surface treatment an appeal on the appropriateness of the material can be made
to the planning commission.
(Ord. 2016-12, 3-1-2016)
15-4-6: EXPIRATION:
Unless the owner or developer has made all corrections or other changes to the
development plan, as required by the city, and obtained a building permit
within a period of one year from the date of the city's initial written
comments concerning corrections or other changes to the development plan, the
application shall expire and become void, and any vested rights thereunder will
be lost. The planning commission may grant a maximum extension of six (6)
months under exceptional circumstances. Once the application has expired, in
order to reintroduce the proposed development, the owner or developer must
submit a new application with all applicable fees.
(Ord. 2007-67, 9-18-2007)
CHAPTER 5
APPEALS, VARIANCES AND SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
SECTION:
15-5-1: Powers Of Board Of Zoning Adjustment
15-5-2: Vote Necessary For Reversal
15-5-3: Zoning Administrator
15-5-4: Time For Filing Appeals
15-5-5: Time Limitation On Variance
15-5-6: Filing Fee
15-5-1: POWERS OF BOARD OF ZONING ADJUSTMENT:
   A.   The board of zoning adjustment shall have the power to hear and decide:
      1.   Appeals from zoning decisions applying the zoning ordinance, as
provided in Utah Code Annotated section 10-9a-704, as amended;
      2.   Special exceptions to the terms of the zoning ordinance, when such
authority is specifically granted by other provisions of this chapter or of
this title; and
      3.   Variances from the term of the zoning ordinance, as provided in Utah
Code Annotated section 10-9a-707, as amended, or its successor provision,
except where the zoning ordinance gives express authority to grant a variance
to another person or body.
   B.   In addition, the board shall have the following powers:
      1.   Where a zone boundary line divides a lot in single ownership at the
time of the establishment of said boundary, permit a use authorized on either
portion of such lot to extend not more than thirty five feet (35') beyond the
zone boundary line. In reviewing such a request, the board shall consider that:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4049.png]
 
         a.   The expansion shall not adversely impact the adjacent
developments;
         b.   The expansion shall not create adverse impacts to the
neighborhood;
         c.   Any expansion of use be compatible with existing development in
the zone to which the expansion occurs or that with adequate requirements can
be;
         d.   The remaining lot, if any, can be developed according to the
development standards of its designated zone.
Any condition established by the board of zoning adjustment as part of the
approval of the request shall be considered as a minimum site development
standard notwithstanding any other site development of the zone in which the
development shall occur.
      2.   To permit the construction and use of a dwelling upon a lot which
does not have frontage on a street, but does have frontage on a dedicated right
of way.
      3.   To permit the splitting of a lot wherein such lot split creates a
lot which does not have the required width of the zone in which the lot is
located; provided, the created nonconforming lot meets the area requirements of
the zone and the structure placed on the lot meets all required site standards
of the zone; and furthermore, that before building permits are issued for the
nonconforming split lot, the lot split shall be reviewed and approved by the
engineering advisory committee.
(Ord. 2015-21, 5-26-2015)
15-5-2: VOTE NECESSARY FOR REVERSAL:
The concurring vote of three (3) members of the board shall be necessary to
reverse any order, requirement or determination of any administrative official,
or to decide in favor of the appellant on any matter upon which it is required
to pass under any such ordinance, or to affect any variation in such ordinance.
(1999 Code)
15-5-3: ZONING ADMINISTRATOR:
The director shall serve as zoning administrator, who may decide routine and
uncontested matters before the board of zoning adjustment. The board shall
designate which matters may be decided by the zoning administrator, and shall
establish guidelines for the zoning administrator to comply with in making
decisions. The decision of the zoning administrator shall be final unless an
appeal is made to the board of zoning adjustment within thirty (30) days of
issuance of the administrator's decision, in the same manner as appeals under
Utah Code Annotated section 10-9-704, as amended.
(1999 Code; amd. Ord. 2001-32, 6-5-2001, eff. 6-30-2001)
15-5-4: TIME FOR FILING APPEALS:
An appeal to the board of zoning adjustment, as provided in Utah Code Annotated
section 10-9a-704, as amended, shall be filed within thirty (30) days after
issuance of any final written decision involving the administering or
interpreting of a zoning ordinance.
(1999 Code; amd. Ord. 2006-44, 7-25-2006)
15-5-5: TIME LIMITATION ON VARIANCE:
In the event the board of zoning adjustment does grant a variance or special
exception as provided in accordance with the provisions of this chapter,
alterations in accordance with the variance must begin within six (6) months
after the date the variance is granted or the variance shall become null and
void. The time limit of the variance may be extended an additional six (6)
months by the board of zoning adjustment, and then only if the petitioner shows
adequate cause to the board that circumstances necessitate a time extension.
(1999 Code)
15-5-6: FILING FEE:
The city council shall establish under title 4, chapter 6 of this code an exact
fee for filing application to the board of zoning adjustment to cover
reasonable expenses of the board. No appeal or application shall be considered
by the board of zoning adjustment until the fee has been paid.
(1999 Code)
CHAPTER 6
NONCONFORMING REGULATIONS 1
SECTION:
15-6-1: Purpose And Intent
15-6-2: Noncomplying Structures
15-6-3: Nonconforming Uses
15-6-4: Nonconforming Certificate
15-6-5: Amortization
 
Notes
  1. Prior ordinance history: Ord. 90-52, 10-25-1990; Ord. 91-24, 7-18-1991;
1 Ord. 91-26, 7-25-1991; Ord. 92-30, 5-19-1992; Ord. 94-59, 11-15-1994; 1999
  Code; Ord. 2000-41, 7-18-2000; Ord. 2001-32, 6-5-2001.
15-6-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   This chapter shall apply to the existing use of a building, structure
or land lawfully established at the time of passage of the zoning ordinance,
other land use ordinance, or any amendments thereto, which does not conform to
the present regulations of the zone in which it is located. Because Ogden is a
community that has developed over a long period of time, the regulations of
this chapter are intended to allow continued use of such property or structure,
while at the same time protecting existing conforming development and
furthering orderly development and improvement of the community.
   B.   Nonconforming uses and noncomplying structures that are compatible and
complement existing or planned development should be allowed to expand or
improve. Improvement for better integration into the surroundings should be
sought as much as possible.
   C.   Nonconforming uses or noncomplying structures that hinder the
attainment of the General Plan, create a nuisance, or detract from or are a
hazard to a community or neighborhood, should be eliminated or brought into
compliance with the present provisions of this title to the extent allowable
under the law.
(Ord. 2005-32, 5-24-2005)
15-6-2: NONCOMPLYING STRUCTURES:
A noncomplying structure, or what has previously been referred to as a
nonconforming building, is any building or structure that legally existed
before its current land use designation, and because of one or more subsequent
changes to the zoning ordinance, or other land use ordinance, does not conform
to the setback, height restrictions, or other regulations now governing the use
of land, which regulations generally include yard regulations, lot coverage or
landscaping requirements, parking regulations governing the location, design or
number of parking stalls. Nonconformity as to regulations governing the use of
land such as area or density requirements or parking requirements, established
as a minimum requirement for the use of land in the applicable zone, shall
render any structure located on the land to be both a noncomplying structure
and a nonconforming use. For purposes of this chapter, an expansion to such
structure where the use is otherwise allowed in the applicable zoning district
shall be reviewed under subsection B of this section. If the use is not
otherwise allowed in the applicable zoning district, the expansion shall be
reviewed under subsection 15-6-3B of this chapter.
   A.   Ordinary Maintenance And Repair: A noncomplying structure may be
maintained or repaired so long as such work does not increase the noncomplying
or nonconforming conditions of the building or structure.
   B.   Addition Or Enlargement:
      1.   Authorization; Determination: A noncomplying structure shall not be
added to or enlarged in any manner, unless the Director finds that such
expansion is otherwise authorized under subsections B2 through B4 of this
section, or except by issuance of a noncomplying structure permit by the
Planning Commission. In reviewing a request to expand a noncomplying structure,
the Planning Commission shall determine:
         a.   That granting the expansion will not adversely impact the
attainment of the General Plan of the City;
         b.   That the expansion will improve the general appearance or safety
of the area;
         c.   That by expanding the building, the character of the neighborhood
is not adversely impacted;
         d.   That the expansion will improve the area by providing additional
or adequate parking;
         e.   That any expansion will be adequately screened or buffered, if
needed, so as not to increase impacts to the adjoining properties; and
         f.   That the expansion will not otherwise violate the standards
established in subsections B2 through B4 of this section for any particular
type of expansion.
      2.   Noncomplying As To Height: A main building noncomplying as to height
regulations can be expanded provided the addition meets all required setbacks
of the zone in which it is located and does not increase any other noncomplying
or nonconforming status of the property on which it is located. If only a
portion of the building is noncomplying as to height then the addition or
expansion must meet the height regulations of the zone in which it is located.
A noncomplying accessory building cannot be enlarged or expanded unless the
addition or expansion complies with the height regulation and required setbacks
of the zone and does not increase any other noncomplying or nonconforming
status of the property on which it is located.
      3.   Noncomplying As To Setbacks Or Yard Regulations:
         a.   A main building noncomplying to front yard setbacks may be
expanded and maintain the existing nonconforming front yard setback provided
such expansion will not displace required parking or otherwise require a
parking variance, or will not result in the removal of existing landscaping in
the required front yard setback.
         b.   A residential main building with noncomplying side yard setbacks
but having a minimum side yard of not less than three feet (3'), may be
extended in depth along the nonconforming building line to a maximum of the
depth of the existing dwelling if such extension is for the purpose of
enlarging and maintaining the existing dwelling or required parking and
provided, such enlargement does not increase any other nonconformity which may
exist and conforms to all other regulations of the zone in which it is located.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4051.png]
         c.   A main building noncomplying to rear yard setbacks may be
expanded provided the expansion does not increase the noncomplying rear yard
setback and does not require any other variance.
      4.   Single Family; Expansion Of Parking: A single-family detached
dwelling nonconforming as to the number of properly located off street parking
spaces located on the lot may add additional spaces not to exceed the minimum
required in accordance with the following standards:
         a.   Location And Design: If the lot has at least one properly located
off street parking space, or if legal off street parking does not exist and
cannot be developed, then one parking stall may be constructed in one required
side yard; provided that:
            (1)   The parking area and its associated driveway shall be hard
surfaced with the materials described in subsection 15-12-8G3 of this title;
            (2)   The parking area and driveway slab must be at least eight
feet (8') wide and of sufficient length, which may not be less than eighteen
feet (18'), to accommodate the vehicle with no portion of the vehicle extending
forward of the front face of the dwelling;
            (3)   The space above any slab constructed within a side yard
setback must remain open and unobstructed to the sky;
            (4)   All stormwater runoff from the hard surface of the slab must
be directed so as to prevent drainage onto adjacent properties;
            (5)   No off street parking slab is permitted within the twenty
foot (20') required side yard facing a street on a corner lot.
            (6)   Access to additional parking when one proper off street
parking space exists shall be provided by either:
               (A)   Widening the drive approach from the street to match the
width of the new driveway provided the other provisions of this Code can be
met; or
               (B)   A driveway taper from the sidewalk at no less than a forty
five degree (45°) angle with the remnant area in the front yard setback
landscaped with a minimum of shrubs and an approved ground cover, provided that
this option is not allowed if the remnant landscaped area is less than forty
five (45) square feet or if curb, gutter and sidewalk are not present.
   OPTION A
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4053.png]
 
   OPTION B
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4055.png]
         b.   Front Yard Parking: A maximum of two (2) hard surfaced parking
spaces may be added in the front yard setback, when all of the following
standards and conditions are met:
            (1)   (A) No legal parking has existed on the property or the
property has a garage/carriage house that may appear to provide legal parking,
but is incapable of accommodating modern vehicles due to having original
interior wall dimension space of twelve feet (12') or less in width, seven feet
(7') or less in height, and a depth of less than twenty feet (20'); and
               (B)   There is no reasonable access to locate legal parking
either in the side or rear yards;
            (2)   Front yard parking must remain open and unobstructed to the
sky;
            (3)   No portion of a vehicle parked in the front yard shall extend
beyond the front property line into the public right-of-way;
            (4)   Vehicle(s) parked in the front yard shall not exceed eight
feet (8') in width, twenty feet (20') in length, and seven feet (7') in height;
            (5)   The front yard parking area and its associated driveway shall
be a hard surface with the materials described in subsection 15-12-8G3 of this
title;
            (6)   The front yard parking area shall have a minimum width of
nine feet (9'); and
            (7)   Front yard driveways and parking areas installed after August
1, 2017, that are greater than nine feet (9') wide shall not exceed fifty
percent (50%) of the width of the home fronting the public street or twenty
feet (20'), whichever is less.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4057.png]
         c.   Nonconforming Or Noncomplying As To Lot Area:
            (1)   A single-family dwelling with inadequate lot area in a
residentially zoned district shall be allowed to expand or construct on the lot
provided that the construction will meet required setbacks or has received the
needed setback variances.
            (2)   A single-family dwelling shall be allowed to be constructed
on a vacant subdivided lot with inadequate lot area in a residentially zoned
district provided that the construction will meet required setbacks or has
received the needed setback variances.
            (3)   A multiple-family dwelling and associated buildings with
inadequate lot area may expand the buildings or structure on the lot; provided,
that:
               (A)   The construction will meet required setbacks or has
received the needed setback variances; and
               (B)   The expansion will create covered parking in areas that
are presently paved and used for parking.
            (4)   For purposes of subsection B4c(3) of this section, if a
multiple-family dwelling is not otherwise allowed in the zone, the required
setbacks shall be those applicable to single-family dwellings.
         d.   Reasonable Access: For purposes of subsection B4b(1) of this
section, reasonable access is defined as either:
            (1)   Having at least eight feet (8') of clearance in the side yard
setback on either side of the building without obstructions that cannot
reasonably be avoided, such as utilities, window-wells, a direct elevation
change of three feet (3') or greater, or retaining walls three feet (3') high
or greater; or
            (2)   Having a right-of-way or alley adjacent to the property with
established rights for access, where:
               (A)   The travel distance to the property line is less than one
hundred feet (100') from an improved street and the right-of-way or alley has
at least a minimum twelve foot (12') clearance that is, or could be paved; or
               (B)   The travel distance to the property line is more than one
hundred feet (100') from an improved street and the right-of-way or alley has
an existing minimum twelve foot (12') wide paved surface.
   C.   Damage Or Destruction:
      1.   A noncomplying structure that is involuntarily damaged or destroyed,
in whole or in part, by fire, flood, wind, earthquake or other natural disaster
or calamity may be restored or rebuilt; provided, that such restoration is
started within a period of one year and is diligently pursued to completion and
the noncompliance is not increased.
      2.   A noncomplying structure shall not be rebuilt or restored if:
         a.   The structure is allowed to deteriorate to a condition that the
building is rendered uninhabitable and is not repaired or restored within six
(6) months after written notice to the property owner that the structure is
uninhabitable and that the right to rebuild or restore such noncomplying
structure will be lost if the structure is not repaired or restored within six
(6) months; or
         b.   The property owner has voluntarily demolished or removed a
majority of the noncomplying structure.
(Ord. 2018-28, 10-16-2018)
15-6-3: NONCONFORMING USES:
A nonconforming use is a use of land, including the use of any building or
structure located thereon, that legally existed before its current land use
designation, has been maintained continuously since the time the land use
ordinance governing the land changed, and because of one or more subsequent
changes to the zoning ordinance, or other land use ordinance, does not conform
to the regulations that now govern the use of the land. Nonconformity as to
regulations governing the use of land such as area or density requirements or
parking requirements established as a minimum requirement for the use of land
in the applicable zone shall render any structure located on the land to be
both a noncomplying structure and a nonconforming use. For purposes of this
chapter, an expansion to such structure where the use is otherwise allowed in
the applicable zoning district shall be reviewed under subsection 15-6-2B of
this chapter. If the use is not otherwise allowed in the applicable zoning
district, the expansion shall be reviewed under subsection B of this section.
   A.   Right Of Use: Except as otherwise provided herein, a nonconforming use
may be continued by the present or any future owner.
   B.   Expansion Of Use:
      1.   Building Or Structure:
         a.   A nonconforming use may be extended through the same building or
structure provided no structural alteration of the building is proposed or made
for the purpose of the expansion.
         b.   A building or structure nonconforming as to use regulations shall
not be added to or enlarged in any manner if the expansion involves any
structural alterations of the building unless the director finds that such
expansion is otherwise authorized under subsection 15-6-2B of this chapter, or
except by issuance of a nonconforming use permit by the planning commission.
The planning commission shall find that:
            (1)   The expansion of the use would not adversely impact the
surrounding properties;
            (2)   The proposed expansion is compatible with the surroundings;
            (3)   The site of the proposed expansion conforms to all site
development requirements as much as physically possible given existing site
limitations;
            (4)   The proposed expansion shall not create new nonconformities
or conditions of noncompliance; and
            (5)   No expansion of a nonconforming use shall be allowed which
would extend beyond the original lot or tract of land.
      2.   Land: The nonconforming use of land, not related to the
nonconforming use of a building or structure, shall not be expanded or
extended.
   C.   Change Of Nonconforming Use: The nonconforming use of a building or
structure may not be changed to another nonconforming use, except by issuance
of a nonconforming use permit by the planning commission. No change of use
shall be permitted if the new use is more intensive than the existing use in
its zoning classification and its nature or character. A use shall be
considered to be more intensive in its zoning classification if it is not
allowed as a permitted use either in the zone where the existing nonconforming
use is first allowed as a permitted use or in a more restrictive zone. The
planning commission shall find that the proposed change of use:
      1.   Would not adversely impact the surrounding properties more than the
existing nonconforming use;
      2.   Would not intensify the use of the site or impacts to the
neighborhood;
      3.   Would not change the character of the existing building or site
unless the change would make the building or site more compatible with the
surroundings and existing zoning; and
      4.   Any site development meets all site development requirements as much
as physically possible, given existing site limitations.
   D.   Damage Or Destruction Which Affects Use: A building or structure which
contains a nonconforming use and is involuntarily damaged or destroyed by fire,
flood, wind, earthquake or other natural disaster or calamity may be restored
or rebuilt and the occupancy or use of such building, structure or part
thereof, which existed at the time of such destruction, may be continued or
resumed; provided, that such restoration shall be started within a period of
one year and diligently pursued to completion. In restoring such building or
structure, the nonconforming use shall not be changed, enlarged or expanded
except in accordance with the other provisions of this chapter and the
following:
      1.   The reconstruction and reuse of the structure shall not change the
character of the neighborhood by using construction materials that did not
exist previously on the building; provided that other building materials may be
approved by the director if the materials are determined to be compatible with
the neighborhood and make the building or site more compatible with the
surroundings;
      2.   The reconstruction shall not expand the floor area of the use,
increase its intensity or expand accessory uses from what had previously
existed; and
      3.   The new construction shall meet all site development requirements as
much as physically possible, given existing site limitations and the existing
development before damage occurred.
   E.   Signs; Permitted For Nonconforming Use:
      1.   Residential Zones:
         a.   A nonconforming use located in a residential zone is allowed one
business sign of a maximum of sixteen (16) square feet.
         b.   A nonconforming use located in a residential zone fronting on an
arterial street is allowed a maximum of two (2) square feet per linear foot of
building frontage on the arterial. Sign types are limited to a maximum of two
(2) of the following types: wall sign, monument sign, or awning sign. No single
sign shall be larger than one hundred twenty (120) square feet and the total of
all signage shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet.
         c.   Any sign associated with a nonconforming use in a residential
zone: may be lighted only by exterior lighting; if a freestanding or a monument
sign, shall not be higher than six feet (6') and not closer than ten feet (10')
to the property line if parallel to the street or twenty feet (20') if
perpendicular to the street; and shall not extend above the roof or parapet
wall if the sign is a wall sign.
      2.   All Other Zones: A nonconforming use located in any zone other than
residential may have such signs as permitted in the outdoor sign code (title 18
of this code) for the zone in which the use is located.
   F.   Loss Of Right:
      1.   A nonconforming use of a building or structure shall be terminated
if the building or structure in which the use is located is allowed to
deteriorate to a condition that the structure is rendered uninhabitable and is
not repaired or restored within six (6) months after written notice to the
property owner that the structure is uninhabitable and that the nonconforming
use shall be lost if the building or structure is not repaired or restored
within six (6) months.
      2.   A nonconforming use of a building or structure shall be lost if the
property owner voluntarily demolishes a majority of the building or structure
that houses the nonconforming use.
      3.   The nonconforming use of a building, structure or tract of land that
has been abandoned shall be terminated and the building or structure not
occupied or used thereafter except in conformance with the present use
regulations of the zone in which it is located. Any party claiming that a
nonconforming use has been abandoned shall have the burden of establishing the
abandonment.
      4.   A use shall be presumed to be abandoned if:
         a.   A majority of the primary structure associated with the
nonconforming use has been voluntarily demolished;
         b.   The use has been discontinued for a continuous period of one
year; or
         c.   The primary structure associated with the nonconforming use
remains vacant for a continuous period of one year, excluding vacancies due to:
            (1)   Remodeling or renovation under a valid building permit, or
            (2)   Pending court actions which affect occupancy or possession of
the property, i.e., probate, ownership disputes.
      5.   The property owner may rebut the presumption of abandonment under
subsection F4 of this section and shall have the burden of establishing that
any claimed abandonment has not in fact occurred.
      6.   The nonconforming status of a school district or charter school use
or structure shall terminate when the property associated with the school
district or charter school use or structure ceases to be used for school
district or charter school purposes for a continuous period of one year. Such
termination shall not prevent the reuse of such building or structure under the
other provisions of this chapter.
   G.   Reuse Of Residential Structures In Residential Zone: If a right to use
land nonconforming as to area or density requirements of residential uses is
lost pursuant to subsection F of this section, the residential buildings shall
not thereafter be occupied or used except in conformance with the area or
density requirements of the respective zone, except as otherwise provided in
this section or except as follows:
      1.   The loss of right shall not prohibit the use of an existing
residential building as a single-family dwelling in any zone permitting said
use.
      2.   The loss of right shall not prohibit the use of an existing
residential building located in other than a residential zone.
   H.   Reuse Of Nonresidential Structures:
      1.   Reuse Of Commercial Style Building In A Residential Zone: Structures
that were originally designed as commercial buildings, including a dwelling on
the same lot as the commercial building and traditionally associated with the
commercial use, may take advantage of this provision in order to establish a
reuse of the buildings. This provision applies to all residential zones and is
intended to be used as a method of providing uses in buildings which were
originally designed to house commercial uses or that have a commercial building
as part of the parcel or lot.
         a.   Allowed Uses: If the use is not specifically listed below it is
not permitted as a reuse option of the property and buildings.
            (1)   Services:
               Altering, pressing and repairing of wearing apparel.
               Business and professional offices.
               Dance rehearsal or instructional halls for the performing arts.
               Daycare centers or adult daycare facility, provided:
                  (A)   The facility shall conform to the occupancy
requirements of the current building code, as adopted by title 16, chapter 2 of
this code, or its successor provisions, whenever more than six (6) persons are
cared for; and
                  (B)   Child daycare centers shall include outdoor play areas
with a minimum of seventy five (75) square feet of area for each child using
the area at one time, and shall be completely enclosed.
                     (i)    Screening, planting or solid fencing around
portions of playground areas adjoining residential dwelling uses is required if
the planning commission determines it is necessary to minimize visual and noise
impacts; and
                     (ii)    The planning commission may require that
playground equipment be placed in a location which will minimize visual and
noise impacts and prevent trespassing on adjacent properties.
               Hairdressers, barbershops, manicurists, tanning salons.
               Laundromat.
               Photo studio.
               Residential vacation rental, provided that a vacation rental
under this provision:
                  (A)   May be either owner occupied or nonowner occupied; and
                  (B)   For a building in a single-family residential zone, is
not subject to any provision restricting nonowner occupied rentals to one per
linear block.
               Tailor.
               Travel agency.
            (2)   Sales:
               Antique, import or souvenir shop.
               Art and artist supply store.
               Automobile service station, provided it is in a structure
originally built for service stations.
               Bookstore, retail.
               Camera store.
               Clothing and accessory store.
               Fabric and textile store.
               Florist shop.
               Garden supplies and plant material sales within the confines of
the building.
               Gift store.
               Grocery store, including stores which may specialize in certain
types of food products such as dairy, bakery or health foods.
               Ice cream parlor.
               Needlework, embroidery and knitting store.
               On-line sales.
               Pharmacy.
               Restaurant.
               Shoe store.
               Small distribution center or warehouse only when the building
has existing overhead delivery doors designed for truck pull-in, provided that
this use may not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the building floor area.
               Toy store, retail.
            (3)   Residential:
               Single-family dwelling.
         b.   Common Requirements For All Reuses:
            (1)   Because of the location of the commercial style building in
the heart of the neighborhood, no expansion of the building is allowed on the
lot nor is building expansion or parking allowed on adjacent lots.
            (2)   No use is allowed to install a drive-up window or pick up
window. All transactions of exchange of merchandise must take place inside the
building.
            (3)   Exterior wall materials may not be replaced with new
materials that do not match the existing or original materials. No exterior
alterations are permitted which alter the original character of the building.
            (4)   Before the new use can occupy the structure the building must
meet all property maintenance and building codes applicable to the use.
Existing areas of landscaping must be maintained whether on the property or in
the public right of way.
            (5)   Any exterior service areas such as dumpster locations,
delivery areas other than the front door, and garbage pick up areas shall be
located out of the public view and in a location that is protected from
visibility and smell by adjacent neighbors. No trash compacting devices may be
located outside of the original building.
            (6)   Eighty percent (80%) of the area of ground level windows
shall remain clear of posters, banners, or other materials or objects which
block views through the window. Ordinary window coverings of the type of use
permitted, such as curtains, drapes or blinds are excluded from this
requirement.
            (7)   For all uses except restaurants and vacation rentals the
hours of operation are limited to eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to seven o'clock
(7:00) P.M. Restaurant hours of operation are limited to six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
            (8)   With the exception of outdoor dining, all uses and storage
must be contained inside the building.
            (9)   For the warehouse use, deliveries are limited to regular
business hours and delivery and pick-up vehicles exclude semi tractor-trailers.
         c.   Application: Application for the use permit may be filed by the
owner of the property for which the use is sought or an authorized
representative. If the reuse proposes no changes to the site, the building
exterior other than normal maintenance, or the use of outdoor areas, the
request shall be submitted to the development services counter for normal site
plan review and approval. If changes are proposed to the site, or to the
building exterior in seeking to restore the exterior to the original design,
the approval request will be submitted for review by the planning commission.
         d.   Basis For Planning Commission Approval: The planning commission
may approve the application for site or exterior revisions based on the
following provisions:
            (1)   Landscaping: The planning commission may require whatever
landscaping is necessary to integrate the building into the neighborhood, or to
provide visual buffers for parking or outdoor uses on the site. Parkway strips
shall be landscaped unless used for existing parking. In such instances, the
planning commission shall determine the amount of parkway which needs to be
landscaped.
            (2)   Parking: The property will be considered as having
nonconforming parking rights and any of the listed permitted uses will be
allowed without requiring additional parking. Any proposed new parking must
meet the requirements for parking as listed in chapter 12 of this title.
However, the planning commission may approve a lesser amount if it finds that:
               (A)   A building occupies the entire site or the existing site
limitations would restrict additional parking; and
               (B)   The reduction of such parking is not detrimental to the
neighborhood.
            (3)   Building Exterior: When building exterior changes are
proposed the planning commission shall determine if the changes alter the
original or existing character of the building. If the changes bring the
building back to its original design based on pictorial or physical evidence
the revisions may be approved.
         e.   Signs:
            (1)   Except as provided in subsection H1e(3) of this section,
signage shall be attached to the front face of the building and is limited to a
maximum of forty (40) square feet.
            (2)   Signs shall not be internally or externally lighted unless
the proposed use is located on Harrison or Washington Boulevard and the
planning commission determines such lighting will be compatible with the
surrounding neighborhood.
            (3)   The use may reuse existing sign structures that are:
               (A)   Sixty (60) square feet or less in size;
               (B)   No taller than the height of the building on the lot where
the sign is located; and
               (C)   Not internally or externally lighted unless the sign is on
Harrison or Washington Boulevard.
            (4)   Existing freestanding signage that does not meet the
requirements of subsection H1e(3) of this section shall be removed and has no
nonconforming rights.
            (5)   Electronic message display signage is not allowed.
      2.   Reuse Of A Permitted Nonresidential Building In Residential Zones:
Buildings which were constructed in a residential zone but were intended for
permitted nonresidential usage such as public or private schools, churches,
fire stations, libraries, public buildings or recreational facilities may be
reused either as a use permitted in the zone or by approval of a conditional
use permit by the planning commission for one of the following uses:
         a.   Conditional Uses:
            Art galleries and museums.
            College or university extension, provided parking is provided at
the rate of one space per teacher and staff member, plus one space per two (2)
students of the largest attendance period.
            Community and senior citizen center.
            Community cultural activities, including theater and dance
rehearsal or instructional halls for the performing arts and performing arts
theaters.
            Daycare centers, provided:
               (1)   The facility shall conform to the occupancy requirements
of the current building code, as adopted by title 16, chapter 2 of this code,
or its successor provisions, whenever more than six (6) children are cared for;
               (2)   Outdoor play areas shall be provided with a minimum of
seventy five (75) square feet of area for each child using the area at one
time, and shall be completely enclosed. The planning commission shall require
screening, planting or solid fencing around portions of playground areas which
adjoin residential dwelling uses if they determine it is necessary to minimize
visual and noise impacts;
               (3)   The planning commission may require that playground
equipment be placed in a location which will minimize visual and noise impacts
and prevent trespassing on adjacent properties; and
               (4)   The hours of operation may be restricted to assure
compatibility with surrounding neighborhood.
            Dwelling units at the density permitted by the underlying zone.
            Libraries, publicly operated.
            Maintenance caretaker residence.
            Nursing home.
            Personal service business.
            Private or educational institution, provided:
               (1)   Parking is provided at the rate of one space per teacher
and staff member, plus one space per two (2) classrooms;
               (2)   Play areas shall be screened with a minimum six foot (6')
high screening fence;
               (3)   The planning commission may require that playground
equipment be placed in a location which will minimize visual and noise impacts
and prevent trespassing on adjacent properties.
            Professional and business office.
            Professional, business or civic association hall; provided, that
within thirty (30) days of the issuance of a conditional use permit, a
neighborhood liaison committee shall have been established with representation
from neighborhood property owners, to consider and make recommendations on
complaints and concerns of neighbors, should they arise. The applicant shall
submit a statement explaining the proposed makeup and operating procedures of
this committee at the time of conditional use permit application.
            Public building.
            Retirement home, provided parking at 0.35 space per room, plus one
space per employee on the highest shift.
            Trade and vocational schools, provided parking is provided at the
rate of one space per three (3) students plus one space per employee at
capacity class attendance.
         b.   Specific Development Standards: In reviewing the request, the
development shall meet the following standards and procedures for application:
            (1)   Height limits of the underlying zone shall apply;
            (2)   No parking shall be permitted in the required front yard or
the side yard on the side street or corner lots;
            (3)   Building usage shall be limited to the amount of available
off street parking;
            (4)   Off street parking for all building users shall be as stated
herein or calculated based on the provisions set forth in chapter 12 of this
title;
            (5)   All yard areas not covered by buildings or required off
street parking shall be landscaped with living plant material and properly
maintained;
            (6)   In cases where no space exists on site for off street
parking, for buildings other than dwellings, parking may be provided off site,
but within five hundred feet (500') of the site.
         c.   Signs:
            (1)   The total area of all signs on the property shall be limited
to one square foot of sign area for each two hundred fifty (250) square feet of
gross floor area in a building or group of buildings in a common parcel;
            (2)   If the signs are illuminated, they shall be shielded so
direct rays from the light do not impact surrounding properties.
         d.   Site Plan Submittal:
            (1)   Application for a conditional use shall include a list of the
uses of conversion and conditions, a site plan showing the existing conditions,
any proposed structural modifications, existing and proposed parking and
access, abutting right of way width and street and sidewalk improvements, fire
access, existing vegetation and proposed landscaping, signs and exterior
lighting;
            (2)   A declaration of the reasons justifying the proposed
conversion and the steps taken to eliminate adverse impacts upon the
neighborhood;
            (3)   Disclosure of actions taken to explore feasibility of
conversion to permitted uses, and alleged difficulties which inhibit conversion
to a permitted use.
         e.   Basis For Issuance Of A Conditional Use Permit: In addition to
the standard conditions for issuing a conditional use permit listed in section
15-7-4 of this title, the planning commission shall not authorize a conditional
use permit unless evidence is presented to establish:
            (1)   That the converted use will not adversely impact the
desirability, stability and character of the areas in which it is located;
rather it will promote the desirability and character by rehabilitative
improvements upgrading the structure and neighborhood; and
            (2)   That the purposes of the general plan are promoted, while
encouraging, where appropriate, the conversion of vacant, nonresidential
structures in residential zones to enhance rather than adversely impact the
character and social fabric of neighborhoods; and
            (3)   That necessary provisions have been taken to provide adequate
hard surfaced off street parking, landscaping, screening and lighting;
preservation of open space, streetscapes, and to ensure that the building meets
all codes for occupancy, when considering the following:
               (A)   The size and scale of the building, in connection with the
intensity of the proposed use;
               (B)   The relative location of the building in the neighborhood,
i.e., on the edge or the interior of the neighborhood, a corner or midblock
lot;
               (C)   The size, type and condition of the street providing
access to the property;
               (D)   The convenience of access to public transportation.
            (4)   In considering applications for conditional use, the planning
commission may impose such conditions as it deems appropriate to achieve the
delicate balance of underlying purposes. This may include, but not be limited
to, requiring bonding of proposed improvements, limiting the amount of floor
space devoted to a particular use, establishing hours of operation, fencing
requirements and deferring action for up to one year to allow the applicant to
explore alternatives of permitted uses or to offer it for sale for a permitted
use before further consideration by the planning commission.
   I.   Reuse Of Historic Building:
      1.   Purpose: This special use provision is intended to be used as a
"last resort" method of preserving a historic building listed as an individual
site on the Ogden City register of historic resources. Special uses will be
granted only in exceptional cases when permitted or conditional uses in the
underlying zone do not allow any economically beneficial zoning use or the
original use of the historic building. This subsection does not apply to
buildings within the Jefferson or Eccles historic districts.
      2.   Special Use In Historic Buildings: In any zone, the planning
commission may permit as a special use in historic buildings, the following
uses:
         Art center or museum.
         Bed and breakfast inn.
         Multiple-family dwelling units only when the underlying zoning
designation permits them.
         Professional and business offices and accessory uses.
         Single-family home, if the building was originally constructed as a
single-family home.
      3.   Mixed Use: In some situations, the planning commission may feel that
a combination of residential or office space is desirable and that this mixture
would not negatively affect the architectural integrity of the building. Since
the purpose of this combination would be to mitigate some of the adverse
impacts the professional office or uses have on the residential neighborhood,
housing units should occupy more than fifty percent (50%) of the building to
maintain a strong residential character. Office use should supplement the
housing. The number of units shall not exceed that which is allowed in the
residential zone in which the structure is located.
      4.   Application: Application for special uses may be filed by the owner
of the property for which the special use is sought or an authorized
representative.
      5.   Basis For Issuance Of Special Use Permit: The planning commission
may approve an application for special use if the facts presented are such to
establish:
         a.   That such use or feature as proposed will not be detrimental to
the health, safety, convenience or general welfare of persons residing or
working in the vicinity, or injurious to property, improvement, or potential
development in the vicinity, with respect to aspects including, but not limited
to, the following:
            (1)   The size, shape and arrangement of structures;
            (2)   The accessibility and traffic patterns for persons and
vehicles, the type and volume of such traffic, and the adequacy of proposed off
street parking and loading;
            (3)   The safeguards afforded to prevent noxious or offensive
emissions such as noise, glare, dust and odor; and
            (4)   The desirability of providing landscaping, screening, open
spaces, parking and loading areas, service areas, lighting and signs.
         b.   That such use or feature as proposed will comply with the
applicable provisions of this title and will not adversely affect the general
plan.
         c.   That such proposed use or feature is conducive to the
preservation of the historic and/or architectural characteristics of the
building.
      6.   Requirements:
         a.   Listed Historic Register: Property must be listed on the Ogden
City register of historic resources. Buildings identified as eligible on the
Central Bench historic district map and not listed as individual resources on
the local register may be considered for reuse as multi-family dwellings only
and not for the other uses described in subsection I2 of this section.
         b.   Justification: Owner must submit written justification as to why
this property should qualify for a special use under the provisions of this
subsection. Such justification shall indicate:
            (1)   What efforts have been made to comply with existing zoning as
to permitted or conditional uses. When considering a special use that is for
multiple-family use no special use will be considered if the proposed
residential density is the maximum allowed by the zone;
            (2)   How the building's exterior architectural character and
setting would be damaged by the allowable uses in the zone and how they will be
preserved through the special use provided in this title;
            (3)   How the building is substantially different from similar
historic buildings in the neighborhood which do comply to the existing zoning
ordinance and what special considerations warrant a special use; and
            (4)   What way this use would enhance the neighborhood and meet the
objectives of the general plan.
         c.   Project Formulations And Supervision: An architect with
preservation expertise shall be retained by the owner to formulate and
supervise a rehabilitation program for the exterior if such work is proposed.
         d.   Landscaping: The planning commission shall require whatever
landscaping it feels is necessary to integrate the building into the
neighborhood, or to provide visual buffers for parking on the site in relation
to adjacent properties and the street. In no case will a special use be
permitted if the site design meets only the minimum standards of the ordinance
regarding landscaping and the amount of open space.
         e.   Parking: Any residential or commercial use must meet the required
off street parking requirements as listed in chapter 12 of this title.
         f.   Signs: Flat, or identification and information signs will be
permitted. The sign must be designed to be complementary to the structure in
terms of its size and placement, but not to exceed sixteen (16) square feet.
      7.   Landmarks Commission Review: The owner should be aware that, in
addition to presenting a proposal to the planning commission for review of the
special use, any proposed exterior alterations to a historic building listed on
the Ogden City register of historic resources must also be presented to the
landmarks commission which will review exterior alterations to any structures
or the installation or alteration of signs. The proposal will be reviewed on
the basis of the landmarks commission standards and guidelines for
rehabilitation. This review must be prior to the planning commission review for
the special use.
   J.   Nonconforming Rights Applicable To Sexually Oriented Businesses:
      1.   By virtue of ordinances 2000-38, 2000-39, and 2000-40, adopted July
18, 2000 (hereinafter "the date of passage"), cabarets meeting the definition
of adult live entertainment businesses on the date of passage were given until
January 2, 2001, to obtain a sexually oriented business license or conform
operations to new requirements for cabarets. Qualifying cabarets meeting the
separation requirements of subsection 15-13-13C of this title may continue as a
nonconforming adult live entertainment business at the existing location under
the provisions of this section and this chapter, if the premises are licensed
as a sexually oriented business by January 2, 2001, under title 5, chapter 15
of this code.
      2.   Any adult business or adult live entertainment business, including a
qualifying cabaret, which does not meet the separation requirements of
subsection 15-13-13C of this title, but which was constructed, operated,
maintained and licensed in compliance with all existing or previous ordinances
governing sexually oriented uses, may continue as a nonconforming use at the
existing location until April 30, 2010 (the "compliance period"). Upon petition
to the mayor filed on or before February 15, 2010, an extension of the
compliance period may be granted for up to an additional three (3) years, until
no later than April 30, 2013, to amortize an owner's or lessee's unrecovered
investment in the nonconforming use or upon a finding of extreme financial
hardship. No amortization or claim of extreme financial hardship is allowed to
recover either a decrease in lease revenue or a decrease in property value
resulting from the termination of the nonconforming use.
         a.   The time period during which an owner or lessee may amortize and
recover the amount of the unrecovered investment in the nonconforming use shall
be determined by dividing the unrecovered investment value by the average
monthly net income from the property. The resulting figure is the number of
months after the compliance period, not to exceed thirty six (36) months, which
the owner or lessee shall have to recover his investment in the nonconforming
use. For the purposes of this subsection, the following definitions shall
apply:
            AVERAGE MONTHLY NET INCOME: The average monthly lease payment or,
if the property is not leased, the average net monthly income after reasonable
operating expenses from September 1, 2008 to August 31, 2009.
            UNRECOVERED INVESTMENT VALUE: Any capital improvements installed by
the property owner or lessee which can only be reasonably used for the
nonconforming use, less net income (after reasonable operating expenses) from
the property since the improvements were installed. Unrecovered investment
value does not include personal property or capital improvements which can
reasonably be used for an allowed or conditional use in the zoning district.
Capital improvements must have been installed pursuant to a valid building
permit and the building permit must have been applied for prior to September 1,
2009.
         b.   Extreme financial hardship may be established only by a showing
that a lessee operating a business or applying for a business license on or
before September 1, 2009, who is obligated by a written lease entered into
prior to September 1, 2009, and which cannot be voluntarily terminated by the
end of the compliance period, will be unduly harmed by termination of the
nonconforming use.
      3.   The following provisions shall apply to the application of the
nonconforming use provisions of this chapter, as applied to sexually oriented
businesses:
         a.   Each of the following shall be considered a unique and separate
use: adult live entertainment businesses and adult businesses, including adult
movie theaters, adult bookstores and adult video stores.
         b.   No nonconforming use may be changed to a sexually oriented
business, nor any building put to reuse as a sexually oriented business under
the provisions of this section, unless it fully complies with the use
regulations, distance requirements, and site development standards applicable
to the type of sexually oriented business.
         c.   No building arranged or designed for or devoted to a
nonconforming sexually oriented business may be extended or enlarged, unless
such change is intended to bring the use into compliance with ordinance
requirements applicable to the type of sexually oriented business.
         d.   "Qualifying cabarets", for purposes of this section, shall only
apply to licensed drinking establishments which:
            (1)   Held a cabaret license on the date of passage hereof; and
            (2)   Provided performers in a "state of seminudity", as such term
is defined in title 5, chapter 15 of this code on a regular basis and for a
substantial period of time prior to the date of passage.
      4.   Notwithstanding anything contrary contained in this chapter, the
more restrictive standards applicable to nonconforming uses or buildings shall
prevail.
   K.   Relocation Of Nonconforming Parking Lots In Residential Zones:
Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection B of this section, the planning
commission, upon application, may approve the relocation of a nonconforming
parking lot provided the commission determines:
      1.   The parking lot considered for relocation is only used for
nonresidential uses in a residential zone that are either permitted by right or
are nonconforming uses.
      2.   The relocation of the parking lot brings the parking physically
closer to the use that it serves in order to provide better utilization of the
parking, improve the visibility of the lot from the use it serves and decreases
the impact of the parking on the surrounding neighborhood.
      3.   The new parking lot does not increase the number of parking stalls
from the lot it is replacing.
      4.   The replacement lot meets the setback, landscaping and screening
provisions of the land use regulations.
      5.   The physical removal of the parking lot being replaced occurs within
sixty (60) days after the completion of the new lot and is secured by a
demolition escrow.
   L.   Restoration Of Nonconforming Use: An existing residentially designed
building for two (2) or more units in a residential zone that has lost its
nonconforming right may by petition to the planning commission be considered
for restoration of the nonconforming right to use the building for up to the
number of residential units the building was originally built for when it was
constructed, provided it is determined by the planning commission that:
      1.   Reuse of the building for the original number of units it was
constructed for would enhance the neighborhood by providing improved housing
conditions for the neighborhood, remove nuisance potential to a neighborhood
based on the building design and its relationship to surrounding properties in
terms of building layout and architectural design;
      2.   The reuse will not adversely impact surrounding properties by
creating parking conflicts;
      3.   The entire exterior of the building is repaired and repainted (on
those wood portions of the building that traditionally are painted) to
eliminate any worn or dilapidated features of the exterior of the building;
      4.   All lot areas not used for parking or circulation are landscaped and
maintained;
      5.   Building upgrades are made in those areas that are identified in a
building report and concurred with by the building official as needed to be
made to make the building safe for habitation based on existing codes that
focus on the areas of concern of upgrade. The building report shall be made by
qualified people (e.g., licensed structural engineer, architect, mechanical
engineer, contractor) to determine the condition of the building and premises.
This report shall provide the following information:
         a.   The age of the building.
         b.   The general condition, useful life and capacity of the building,
including the roof, foundations, mechanical system, electrical system, plumbing
system.
         c.   An analysis of the structural elements of the building shall be
conducted by a licensed engineer and any deficiencies shall be noted and a plan
provided describing how the corrections are to be completed.
         d.   The property report shall identify how the building and premises
will conform to the property maintenance code, as adopted by title 16, chapter
2 of this code, or its successor provisions, including the addition of the
following listed items:
            (1)   All exterior and interior stairs, handrails and guardrails
meeting the requirements of current code standards.
            (2)   Bedrooms provided with emergency egress windows as required
by the current building codes.
            (3)   Smoke detectors and CO detectors installed as required by
current building code standards and city ordinance.
            (4)   Ground fault circuit interrupters (GFCI) and arch fault
interrupters installed as required as per current code standard.
            (5)   The adequacy of the drain, waste and vent systems and the
existing water service pressure based on the fixture unit, loading as
calculated from the currently adopted plumbing code.
            (6)   Individual gas and water shutoff valves for each unit and
each plumbing fixture within the unit.
            (7)   Each dwelling provided with its own heating system, except
when the building is provided with central water or steam facilities.
            (8)   Dwelling units within a building provided with means of
controlling the temperature within each unit.
            (9)   Each bathroom provided with an operable window or mechanical
vent, capable of providing five (5) air changes per hour.
      6.   After reviewing the information provided at the meeting the planning
commission may determine to either approve the restoration of the total number
of units originally in the building, approve a lesser number that would
mitigate any potential impacts by the restoration of the use or deny the
request. In approving the restoration the commission may impose conditions in
addition to the building code upgrades it determines are needful to ensure the
restoration will not create a nuisance to the neighborhood.
      7.   If the restoration of the nonconforming right is approved by the
planning commission the applicant shall have one year to complete all required
improvements to both the building and site that are required as part of the
approval. An extension of up to one additional year may be granted by the
planning commission upon the showing of good cause that efforts have been made
to complete the restoration. The restoration approval shall be void if building
permits to do the necessary work are not issued within six (6) months from the
restoration approval date.
(Ord. 2011-39, 6-28-2011; amd. Ord. 2012-4, 4-3-2012; Ord. 2015-46, 10-20-2015;
Ord. 2017-3, 2-21-2017; Ord. 2019-51, 12-3-2019; Ord. 2020-24, 6-23-2020)
15-6-4: NONCONFORMING CERTIFICATE:
The existence of any noncomplying building or nonconforming use will be
recognized by the city through issuance of a noncomplying structure or
nonconforming use certificate. The certificate shall describe the nature and
extent of any noncompliance or nonconformity. The certificate shall also
include any permits authorizing expansions, additions or changes of use
approved by the director or the planning commission under the provisions of
this title and any conditions imposed thereon.
   A.   Issuance: A noncomplying or nonconforming certificate shall be issued
by the director upon the applicant establishing the existence of the
noncomplying structure or nonconforming use right by a preponderance of the
evidence. Any application for a noncomplying structure or nonconforming use
certificate shall include:
      1.   A complete description of the nature and character of the
noncompliance or nonconformity, including any accessory uses;
      2.   A site plan showing all existing buildings, structures, parking
facilities and other improvements on the applicable lot;
      3.   Any evidence the applicant intends to submit to establish the
noncompliance or nonconformity; and
      4.   Whether the applicant requests at that time an administrative
hearing for additional submission of evidence.
   B.   Review Procedures:
      1.   Except as provided in subsection B4 of this section, the burden of
proving the existence of a noncomplying structure or nonconforming use shall be
upon the applicant. The director may investigate the accuracy or credibility of
any information submitted and may conduct its own investigation into any facts
pertaining to the existence or nonexistence of the noncomplying structure or
nonconforming use.
      2.   Once the application has been submitted and reviewed, the director
shall, within a reasonable period of time, request additional information or
make a decision on the request by either approving issuance of the certificate
or denying the application stating the reasons for denial.
      3.   The decision of the director is a final administrative decision,
subject to appeal to the board of zoning adjustment.
      4.   In regards to a building being used as a two-family dwelling
(duplex) on January 16, 2001, when the subject property was rezoned from R-2 to
R-1, there shall be a presumption that such dwelling was a legal nonconforming
use on such date, but shall not be afforded those privileges allowed under
section
15-13-28 of this title, if the director determines the following by a
preponderance of the evidence:
         a.   The two-family dwelling (duplex) was originally established as a
legal use but may have lost its nonconforming status prior to January 16, 2001,
due to its interim use as a single-family dwelling, and the dwelling's failure
to comply with subsequently adopted parking regulations upon its subsequent
conversion back to a duplex prior to January 16, 2001; and
         b.   The evidence does not show that:
            (1)   The dwelling was enlarged or expanded prior to its conversion
back to a duplex,
            (2)   The original duplex was removed and replaced with a new
dwelling, or
            (3)   Legally required parking was removed without being replaced.
   C.   Expansions, Additions, Or Changes Of Noncomplying Structures Or
Nonconforming Uses:
      1.   No expansions, additions or changes of a noncomplying structure or
nonconforming use under sections
15-6-2 and
15-6-3 of this chapter shall be approved unless and until a noncomplying
structure or nonconforming use certificate has been issued as described above.
      2.   Any noncomplying structure or nonconforming use permit approving an
expansion or change shall become a part of the original certificate and subject
to any conditions placed thereon.
      3.   Any approval granted by the planning commission or the director for
an expansion, addition or change of a noncomplying structure or nonconforming
use shall expire if, within a one year period, there is no substantial action
taken to complete the change or expansion.
      4.   The permit portion of a noncomplying structure or nonconforming use
certificate issued for an expansion, addition or change may be revoked by the
issuing body if any of the conditions or terms are violated. The holder of the
certificate shall first be afforded an opportunity to be heard before the board
or commission, as applicable, and show cause why the certificate should not be
revoked. In addition, a violation of a condition or term of the certificate
shall constitute a violation of this title, and the revocation of a certificate
shall not prohibit any other remedy provided herein.
   D.   Revocation; Incorrectly Issued Certificate: A noncomplying structure or
nonconforming use certificate may be revoked by the director if the director
determines that such certificate was incorrectly issued due to mistake or
misrepresentation, or upon the discovery of new evidence demonstrating that the
rights of a noncomplying structure or nonconforming use did not exist. Notice
of revocation is a final administrative decision and shall be mailed to the
owner of the property at the address shown in the records of the Weber County
recorder's office. The property owner or other affected parties of the decision
may appeal the final determination of the director to the board of zoning
adjustment within thirty (30) days of the mailing of the notice of final
determination. A decision revoking the permit does not restrict the right of
the property owner to make further application for a noncomplying structure or
nonconforming use permit after presentation of additional evidence or
information.
   E.   Building Permit: After the effective date hereof, no building permit
shall be issued which encompasses any nonconforming use or noncomplying
building without the prior issuance and except in accordance with the terms and
conditions of a nonconforming or noncomplying certificate. The city shall
continue to recognize any nonconforming use or noncomplying building previously
approved, but the character, nature and extent of the nonconforming use or
noncomplying building must hereafter be documented through the application and
certificate issuance process described in this section.
   F.   Loss Of Right; Procedure: If the director determines that a loss of a
nonconforming use or noncomplying structure right has occurred under the
provisions of this chapter, whether from the director's own information or by
way of information provided by others, the director shall notify the owner of
the property, at the address shown in the records of the Weber County
recorder's office, that the loss of nonconforming or noncomplying rights has
occurred. The notice is a final administrative decision and the owner may,
within thirty (30) days of the mailing of said notice, appeal to the board of
zoning adjustment.
(Ord. 2005-32, 5-24-2005; amd. Ord. 2005-69, 12-6-2005; Ord. 2011-48, 10-18-
2011)
15-6-5: AMORTIZATION:
The provisions of this chapter are not intended to restrict the city council's
authority under section 10-9a-511, Utah Code Annotated, to terminate all
nonconforming uses, except billboards, by providing a formula establishing a
reasonable time period during which the owner can recover or amortize the
amount of his or her investment in the nonconforming use, if any.
(Ord. 2005-32, 5-24-2005)
CHAPTER 7
CONDITIONAL USES 1
SECTION:
15-7-1: Purpose And Intent
15-7-2: Conditional Use Permit
15-7-3: Review Procedure
15-7-4: Basis For Issuance Of Conditional Use Permit
15-7-5: Determination
15-7-6: Appeal To And Review By Board Of Zoning Adjustment
15-7-7: Building Permit
15-7-8: Expiration
15-7-9: Amendment Of The Conditional Use Permit
15-7-10: Revocation
 
Notes
  1. Prior ordinance history: Ord. 90-52, 10-25-1990; Ord. 91-51, 12-19-1991;
1 Ord. 94-37, 8-23-1994; 1999 Code; Ord. 2001-32, 6-5-2001; Ord. 2005-67, 12-6-
  2005.
15-7-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to establish standards for land uses
listed in each zone as conditional uses with the exception of planned
residential unit developments and group dwellings which uses have their own
standards for consideration. Conditional uses are generally related to
permitted uses, but due to their unique characteristics or potential impacts on
surrounding uses or the goals of the city may be appropriate only in certain
locations and under specific conditions that mitigate potential impacts and may
not be compatible in some areas as impacts cannot be mitigated. Conditional
uses are intended to allow greater flexibility by providing a wider variety of
uses in a zone, while at the same time allowing conditions to be applied, if
conditions of mitigation or elimination of detrimental impacts would make the
use compatible with surrounding or planned development.
(Ord. 2006-3, 1-17-2006)
15-7-2: CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
   A.   A conditional use permit shall be required for all uses listed as a
conditional use in the respective zone. A conditional use permit shall be
issued only upon approval of the planning commission. The conditional use
permit shall list all requirements determined appropriate to mitigate the
impacts created by the use in order to make it acceptable at the specific
location.
   B.   A conditional use permit shall make the approved use allowable at the
specific location and the right of the approved use with its conditions shall
run with the property, unless the permit has expired as provided under section
15-7-8 of this chapter or has been revoked as provided under section
15-7-10 of this chapter. In the event a change is proposed from the conditions
of the original approval, an amendment to the original conditional use permit
shall be required. If the use is discontinued for a continuous period of one
year, a new conditional use permit is required.
(Ord. 2006-3, 1-17-2006)
15-7-3: REVIEW PROCEDURE:
   A.   Application: Application for a conditional use permit shall be made to
the planning commission at the department. An application shall include a
completed application form, payment of review fees, detailed location, site and
building plans, and any information needed to adequately describe the proposal.
For those applications where no changes are proposed to an existing structure,
the application form and fee, together with a site plan showing existing
conditions or proposed site changes, is required.
   B.   Meeting: The application shall be scheduled for the next eligible
planning commission meeting, according to the rules and procedures of the
commission.
   C.   Notice; Continuation: Notice shall be mailed, at least seven (7) days
in advance of the first hearing of a conditional use permit by the planning
commission, to the record owner of each parcel located within three hundred
feet (300') of the subject property regardless of whether such property is
located within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city. If the planning
commission determines it is in the public interest, consideration of the
application may be continued for final decision.
(Ord. 2006-3, 1-17-2006)
15-7-4: BASIS FOR ISSUANCE OF CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
Conditional use applications shall be reviewed and approved or denied in
accordance with compliance of the following criteria:
   A.   Detrimental To Persons Or Property: The proposed use will not, under
the circumstances of the particular case and the conditions imposed, be
detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare of persons, nor injurious
to property and improvements in the community, existing surrounding uses,
buildings and structures. It shall be demonstrated that the use and property
development:
      1.   Does not lead to deterioration of the environment by emitting
pollutants into the ground or air to cause detrimental effects to the property
or neighboring properties;
      2.   Does not introduce hazards or potentials for damage to neighboring
properties that cannot be mitigated;
      3.   Does not encroach upon rivers or streams or direct runoff into those
features; and
      4.   Is in keeping with the type of existing uses surrounding the
property and development as proposed will improve the character of the area by
encouraging reinvestment and upgrading of surrounding properties.
   B.   General Plan Consistency: The proposed use at the particular location
is consistent with the objectives and strategies established in the general
plan, particularly the community or corridor plans.
   C.   Use Compatibility: The proposed use at the particular location is
compatible with the character of the site, adjacent properties, surrounding
neighborhoods and other existing development. In determining the compatibility
of the use with the surrounding area, the planning commission may consider the
following:
      1.   The type of use and its location does not create unusual pedestrian
or vehicle traffic patterns or volumes that would not be expected with the
development of a permitted use. In determining unusual patterns the planning
commission shall consider:
         a.   The orientation of driveways and if they direct traffic to the
major streets or the local streets and if directed to the local streets the
impact it creates to the safety, purpose and character of the local street;
         b.   Parking locations and size and if they encourage street side
parking and walking to the proposed use which impacts the adjacent land uses;
and
         c.   Hours of peak land use, when traffic to the use would be greatest
and that such times and peaks would not impact the ability of the surrounding
uses to enjoy the use of their property.
      2.   The hours of operation of the proposed use when compared with the
hours of activity of the surrounding uses and the potential of such hours of
operation do not create noise, light or other nuisances not acceptable to the
enjoyment of the existing surrounding uses or common to the surrounding uses.
   D.   Design Compatibility: The proposed site and building design and
placement at the particular location is compatible with:
      1.   The character of the site in relationship with the surrounding uses
which includes buildings and site uses integrating with the topography of the
site, retaining trees of value, using natural features as site amenities,
developing landscaping along the public areas of the property to create an
improved streetscape, reducing expanses of large areas of asphalt or concrete,
and screening objectionable views that may exist on the site from all
surrounding property owners;
      2.   The character of the area by the site design location of parking
lots, accessways, delivery areas and on site vehicle circulation patterns
taking into consideration the adjacent uses and not adversely impacting the
adjacent use by exposing them to loss of privacy, objectionable views of large
parking or storage areas, or views and sounds of loading and unloading areas;
      3.   The character of the surrounding uses by the type of exterior
lighting and signage that will not detract by being bright or create unwanted
light onto adjacent properties;
      4.   The architectural character of the community and the surrounding
neighborhood, considering the building materials, colors, roof shapes, height,
mass, size and orientation of the proposed building and design. In determining
compatibility with the architectural character of the community, the design
shall be found to be generally consistent with those architectural and design
principles established in sections 7F (housing and urban design guidelines) and
8G (land use urban design guidelines) of the Ogden City general plan.
   E.   Compliance With Regulations: The proposed use will comply with the
regulations and conditions specified in the land use ordinances.
(Ord. 2006-3, 1-17-2006)
15-7-5: DETERMINATION:
The planning commission shall approve a conditional use permit if reasonable
conditions are imposed to mitigate the reasonably anticipated detrimental
effects of the proposed use of the adjacent properties and the public welfare.
If reasonably anticipated detrimental effects of a proposed conditional use
cannot be substantially mitigated by the proposal or imposition of reasonable
conditions to achieve compliance with the applicable standards, the commission
may deny a conditional use permit necessary for the protection of adjacent
properties and the public welfare.
(Ord. 2006-3, 1-17-2006)
15-7-6: APPEAL TO AND REVIEW BY BOARD OF ZONING ADJUSTMENT:
   A.   Decision; When Effective: The decision of the planning commission shall
not become final and effective until fifteen (15) days after a final decision
has been made by the planning commission. However, it shall not become final
if, prior to the expiration of that fifteen (15) days, any aggrieved person
files notice of appeal with the board of zoning adjustment.
   B.   Time Limitation: Any person aggrieved by decision of the planning
commission may appeal to the board of zoning adjustment by filing such appeal
with the department within fifteen (15) days after the final decision of the
planning commission.
   C.   Filing: Said appeal shall be filed in accordance with the board of
zoning adjustment rules of procedures.
   D.   Review: The board of zoning adjustment shall hear and decide appeals
where it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or
determination made by the planning commission. Information shall be provided by
the petitioner to the board of zoning adjustment, which explains those errors
in the requirement or decision which the appellant feels were made by the
planning commission.
(Ord. 2006-3, 1-17-2006)
15-7-7: BUILDING PERMIT:
Upon receipt of a conditional use permit, the applicant shall take such permit
to the building official who will review the permit and conditions attached.
Based on this review and compliance with any other items which might develop in
the pursuance of the building official's duties, the building official may
approve an application for a building permit and shall ensure the development
is undertaken and completed in compliance with said permit and conditions
pertaining thereto.
(Ord. 2006-3, 1-17-2006)
15-7-8: EXPIRATION:
   A.   Unless there is substantial action under a conditional use permit
within a period of one year of its issuance, as determined by the planning
commission, the conditional use permit shall expire. The planning commission
may grant a maximum extension of six (6) months under exceptional
circumstances.
   B.   An approved conditional use permit shall expire if a permitted use or a
different conditional use replaces the use allowed under the permit. The
conditional use permit shall also expire if the use is discontinued for a
continuous period of one year. Once the conditional use permit has expired, a
new conditional use permit shall be required in order to occupy the site.
(Ord. 2006-3, 1-17-2006)
15-7-9: AMENDMENT OF THE CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
Once issued, a conditional use permit shall not be enlarged, changed, extended,
increased in intensity, or relocated except by approval of the planning
commission. Application and review of a proposed amendment to the conditional
use permit shall follow the same procedures as outlined in this chapter for an
original application.
(Ord. 2006-3, 1-17-2006)
15-7-10: REVOCATION:
A conditional use permit may be revoked if any of the conditions or terms are
violated; however, the holder of the permit shall first be afforded an
opportunity to be heard before the planning commission and show cause as to why
the permit should not be revoked. A violation of a condition or term of a
permit shall constitute a violation of this code, and the revocation of a
permit shall not prohibit prosecution or any other legal action taken on
account of the violation. The decision of the planning commission to revoke a
conditional use permit may be appealed to the mayor, in writing, within fifteen
(15) days of the commission's decision.
(Ord. 2006-3, 1-17-2006)
CHAPTER 8
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PRUD)
SECTION:
15-8-1: Purpose
15-8-2: Definitions
15-8-3: Use Regulations
15-8-4: Density Determination
15-8-5: Minimum Development Requirements
15-8-6: Bonuses For Maximum Density
15-8-7: Bonus Density Calculations
15-8-8: Bonus Density Design Requirements
15-8-9: Submission And Approval Process
15-8-10: Applicability Of Subdivision Title
15-8-11: Final Plat Recordation
15-8-12: Conditional Use Permit And Final Plan
15-8-13: Amendments To Permit, Plan Or Recorded Plat
15-8-14: Time Limitation
15-8-15: Construction Parameters
15-8-16: Property Ownership
15-8-17: Phasing
15-8-18: Failure To Comply; Certificate Of Occupancy
15-8-19: Issuance Of Building Permits
15-8-20: Revocation Of Conditional Use Permit
15-8-21: Violations
15-8-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   The purpose of a planned residential unit development (PRUD) is to
encourage better utilization of land, to develop a sense of community and to
ensure compatibility with the surrounding neighborhoods. This is accomplished
by allowing flexibility in the placement and design of buildings and
infrastructure not ordinarily allowed in conventional zoning regulations. It
allows flexibility in development standards for creative design and yet
provides specific requirements to ensure surrounding properties and natural
features are protected.
   B.   A planned residential unit development is a residential development
planned as a whole, single complex. It incorporates a definite development
theme which includes the elements of usable open spaces, diversity of lot
design or residential use, amenities, a well planned circulation system, and
attractive entrances as part of the design. The incorporation of one or two (2)
of these elements into a development does not make a PRUD. The combination of
all of these elements is necessary for the development of a PRUD.
(Ord. 93-30, 7-23-1993)
15-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall mean:
ATTACHED DWELLING UNITS: Two (2) or more dwelling units connected by at least
one wall or floor of common construction.
DEVELOPED COMMON ACTIVITY AREA: Open green space which is designed to provide
activity areas for use by all residents such as playgrounds, recreational
courts, picnic pavilions, gazebos and water features. Common developed activity
areas shall be held by all residents in common ownership through a homeowners'
association or shall be available for use by all residents if the PRUD will be
held in single ownership.
FACADE: All exterior walls of a building or structure.
GROSS ACREAGE: The total amount of acreage in a PRUD development.
NET ACREAGE: The total amount of acreage in a PRUD development, excluding right
of ways or roads.
OPEN GREEN SPACE: A planned open area suitable for relaxation, recreation or
landscaping which may be held in common or private ownership. It should be
unoccupied and unobstructed by buildings and hard surface such as asphalt or
cement, except that such open green spaces may include walkways, patios,
recreational activity areas, picnic pavilions, gazebos and water features so
long as such surfaces do not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the required open
green space.
PERIPHERY: A one hundred foot (100') depth around the perimeter of the project
measured inward from the property line.
(Ord. 93-30, 7-23-1993)
15-8-3: USE REGULATIONS:
Uses in all PRUDs shall be limited to the permitted and conditional uses in the
zone where the PRUD is located, with the following exceptions:
   A.   Attached Dwelling Units: Attached dwelling units may be allowed in the
R-1 and R-2 zones to provide a variety of housing options, provided all other
requirements of this chapter are met.
   B.   Accessory Uses: Accessory uses to the PRUD which are located in a
common main building may be permitted. Accessory uses shall be limited to
daycares, personal services and recreational facilities so long as adequate
parking is provided as determined by the planning commission.
(Ord. 93-30, 7-27-1993)
15-8-4: DENSITY DETERMINATION:
   A.   Developable Acreage: Density in a PRUD shall be determined by using the
developable acreage of the entire proposed development. Developable acreage is
land under thirty percent (30%) slopes which is capable of being improved with
landscaping, recreational facilities, buildings or parking. Land devoted to
street usage (the right of way for public streets and the area from back of
curb to back of curb for private streets) shall not be considered developable
acreage and must be subtracted out of the total acreage used to determine
density.
   B.   Baseline Density: The maximum number of residential units allowed per
developable acre in a PRUD which meet only the minimum development requirements
per developable acre shall be calculated using the following chart. This shall
be referred to as the baseline density:
 
Zone Square Footage Baseline Density
                    Units/Acre
R-1-10 1 unit per 15,000 square feet 2.9
R-1-8  1 unit per 12,000 square feet 3.6
R-1-6  1 unit per 9,000 square feet  4.8
R-2    1 unit per 8,000 square feet  5.4
R-2A   1 unit per 7,000 square feet  6.2
R-2EC  1 unit per 7,000 square feet  6.2
R-3    1 unit per 6,000 square feet  7.3
R-3EC  1 unit per 5,000 square feet  8.7
R-4    1 unit per 6,000 square feet  7.3
 
(Ord. 93-30, 7-27-1993; amd. Ord. 2000-70, 1-16-2001, eff. 1-18-2001)
15-8-5: MINIMUM DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS:
All proposed PRUD developments shall comply with all minimum development
requirements as provided in this section:
   A.   General Regulations:
      1.   A minimum of five (5) acres of land in an R-1 or R-2 zone, eight (8)
acres in the R-3 zone and ten (10) acres in the R-4 zone is required for a
proposal to be developed as a PRUD.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4059.png]
 
      2.   The minimum setback for all buildings (excluding fences) and parking
in the periphery of the development shall be the front setback of the zone at
those locations where development abuts a street and thirty foot (30') setback
at those locations where development abuts other parcels of land.
Notwithstanding the above provision, if the development has subdivided single-
family lots which abut other parcels of land, the specific zone regulations
shall apply for rear yard setbacks and accessory uses of the subdivided lots.
The required setback area shall be landscaped.
      3.   Minimum distance between main buildings in the development shall be
ten feet (10') for single-story buildings, fifteen feet (15') for two-story
buildings, and twenty feet (20') for three (3) or more stories.
      4.   If fencing is proposed adjacent to a public or private street, the
maximum fence height shall be four feet (4') for fences located in the required
front yard and side yard setback facing a street as determined in the
underlying zone. The width of the setbacks shall be according to the required
setback of the zone in which the development is proposed. Fence heights located
outside of these setbacks shall be limited to a maximum height of seven feet
(7'). The planning commission may vary the height or location if it determines
the proposed fence design, materials and location will not create a safety
hazard due to obstructed vision of approaching vehicles or pedestrians and
will:
         a.   Not isolate the surrounding neighborhoods;
         b.   Be consistent with the theme of the development; and
         c.   Be compatible with the neighborhood.
If fencing isolates property between the fence and the public street, the
development shall provide means to ensure continued maintenance of this area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4071.png]
 
      5.   The development shall provide two (2) parking stalls, or for
properties within six hundred sixty feet (660') (1 block) of the CBD or mass
transit stops/stations, then one and one- half (1.5) parking stalls for each
unit. All parking and access shall be hard surfaced. Required parking for the
unit shall be located within a one hundred foot (100') radius measured from any
entrance to the dwelling unit. Units which have an attached garage shall have
the garage set back a minimum of eighteen feet (18') from the road, street or
from the walkway if a walkway is designed along the road or street. Units with
an attached garage shall also have the garage recessed a minimum of five feet
(5') from the front of the building.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4077.png]
 
      6.   Developments shall be designed to preserve and incorporate the
natural features of the land into the development. Natural features include
drainage swales, rock outcroppings, streams, and concentrated native stands of
large shrubs or trees.
      7.   If a group RV parking area is provided for the development, it shall
be at a minimum of one RV space per five (5) dwelling units. The RV parking
area shall not be located in the periphery of the development and shall be
completely screened.
      8.   All utilities shall be placed underground where possible.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4063.png]
 
   B.   Compatibility:
      1.   The number of units per building within the periphery of the project
shall be the same as seventy five percent (75%) of the surrounding neighborhood
within three hundred feet (300') of the project boundary line; provided
however, that where an adjacent residentially zoned property is vacant or
occupied by schools or churches, then only single-family units are allowed
along that side. The corner of the periphery development shall be developed
with the least intense number of units when sides of the periphery development
are different. The limitation on units per building does not apply if adjacent
to a commercial, manufacturing, open space zone or property used for parks or
cemeteries.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4061.png]
 
      2.   The front of the units developed on the periphery of the project
shall front onto the public streets. When units abut two (2) parallel streets,
the fronts of the units shall face the public street bordering the PRUD. Units
which are on corners may front either street. The planning commission may waive
this provision due to unusual topographic features or unusual conditions,
provided such waiver does not negatively impact the continuity of the existing
streetscape.
      3.   The height of the buildings within the periphery shall not exceed
the average height of the existing residential structures adjacent to each side
of the development. When the periphery is next to vacant residentially zoned
land, the maximum height shall be limited to thirty five feet (35'). The
maximum height allowed beyond the internal edge of the periphery shall be
limited to the height allowed in the periphery plus one additional foot in
height for every ten feet (10') from the internal edge of the periphery.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4065.png]
 
      4.   The type of exterior building material and ratio of surface coverage
for the proposed facade for other than single-family dwelling units shall be
similar in material and ratio of coverage to fifty one percent (51%) of the
existing residential structures adjacent to the development (e.g., the majority
of the existing buildings have the lower 1/3 of the facade in brick on the
front and the rest is siding, the new development shall have as a minimum 1/
3 of the front in brick and the rest in siding). This provision shall not limit
the use of brick in place of other material.
      5.   If a building has an attached garage and the garage doors are
located along the front of the building facing a public or private street, the
garage doors shall not occupy more than forty percent (40%) of the ground level
building frontage facing the street. The portion of the building facing the
street shall have ten percent (10%) of the wall surface area on the main level
in glazing.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4067.png]
 
   C.   Design Theme:
      1.   Entrance designs to the development are required. The minimum
entrance design to the development shall consist of a monument sign naming the
development, surrounded by a variety of ground cover, shrubs, and trees.
      2.   All dumpsters shall be stored in screened enclosures which are
architecturally compatible in style and materials with the architecture of the
development. Dumpsters shall be located so they are not visible from the main
circulation routes and do not restrict vehicular movement or parking.
Enclosures shall not be located within the periphery of the project.
      3.   Attached dwelling units shall have visual relief in facade and
roofline which adds variety and rhythm to the design and avoids monotonous
straight lines.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4069.png]
 
   D.   Open Space:
      1.   A minimum of forty percent (40%) of the entire site shall be in open
green space. Each phase of development shall provide its proportionate required
open green space needed for that phase.
      2.   Developed common activity area for single-family and attached
dwelling units shall be provided as follows:
         a.   Developments with attached dwelling units shall provide developed
common activity area at a ratio of one square foot of developed common activity
area per one square foot of floor area of living space. Each phase of
development shall provide its proportionate required open green space needed
for that phase. At a minimum, developed common activity area shall include
either a playground with play equipment or pathways with benches and tables
through a natural or planted landscaped area.
         b.   Subdivided, single-family lots shall provide developed common
activity area at a ratio of one thousand (1,000) square feet per lot. Each
phase of development shall provide its proportionate required open green space
needed for that phase. At a minimum, developed common activity area shall
include either a playground with play equipment or pathways with benches and
tables through a natural or planted landscaped area.
      3.   Developments shall be designed to incorporate existing large trees,
clusters of trees or clusters of large shrubs. The planning commission shall
review the appropriateness of removal of portions of these types of vegetation
if proposed in the development plan. The planning commission may approve
removal of some or all vegetation based on a determination of the benefits of
the existing plant material and the efforts made to save and incorporate the
existing plant material into the design of the project versus the problems the
plant materials may create for the project in terms of general construction
techniques, impact removal will have to the character of the area, the
topography of the site, and harmful conditions the vegetation may create.
As one of the purposes of a PRUD is to protect natural features, the planning
commission may deny approval of a PRUD if it is determined there has been
removal of trees or shrubs prior to submittal.
      4.   A minimum of two (2) 2-inch caliper deciduous trees shall be
required to be planted for each unit in the development and one 4-foot tall
evergreen tree for every two (2) units in the development. The placement and
types of deciduous trees shall take into consideration use of the trees for
summer cooling and winter solar access. Evergreen trees should be used as wind
breaks, screening, and accent plantings.
   E.   Street Design: PRUDs shall be designed to meet the circulation
requirements of the transportation element of the general plan, the design
needs of the surrounding area, and the project. Projects which are located on
or next to a collector or arterial street shall be designed and developed so
the public street continues through the project in a logical, safe design.
Projects which are located at the end of stubbed local public streets may be
required to extend the street through the development based on the proposed
circulation needs of the area as determined by the planning commission. The
planning commission, upon recommendation of the engineering division, shall
determine if the street should be extended as a through street or as a cul-de-
sac during the concept or preliminary approval.
Local streets which are internal to the development and do not provide access
through the project may be designed as either public or private streets,
provided they meet the following criteria:
      1.   Public Street Requirements:
         a.   Right Of Way Width: Public streets shall meet the appropriate
right of way widths as required in the subdivision ordinance or the general
plan, based on the function of the road for either a local, collector, or
arterial road.
         b.   Neighborhood Local Streets: Projects may develop neighborhood
local streets with a fifty foot (50') right of way (37 foot width from back of
curb to back of curb) as part of a PRUD, provided the street meets one of the
following criteria:
            (1)   The road is a cul-de-sac which does not exceed three hundred
fifty feet (350') in length;
            (2)   The roadway is internal to the development, intersects at
each end with a roadway which has a right of way of sixty feet (60') or larger,
does not provide for access through the development, and is less than seven
hundred feet (700') in length or is intersected by a standard width right of
way.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4075.png]
 
         c.   Unusual Cross Sections: In cases where unusual topography or
other exceptional conditions exist which would make the installation of
required public street cross sections impractical to develop, variations from
the standards may be considered. The planning commission shall consider the
reasons for the request, the impact to the existing land, the development and
the ability of the city to deliver services with the unusual cross section
before any variation from the standard is approved.
         d.   Public Sidewalk: The sidewalks generally required to be installed
in the public right of way may be varied in location. If the sidewalk is placed
immediately next to the curb with no parkway in between, the sidewalk shall be
six feet (6') wide. The applicant may request that a public sidewalk be located
independent of the public street right of way due to topography or other design
considerations, provided the design has reasonable access from one end of the
development to the other, allows the public to pass through the neighborhood in
a logical manner and is within the common area of the development. A public
easement for such a walkway shall be required. Because such sidewalk is
established independent of the street right of way, the sidewalk shall be
maintained by a homeowners' association.
      2.   Private Street Requirements:
         a.   Street Design: Private street designs shall provide for the
location of sidewalk, curb and gutter, parallel curbside parking on both sides
of the street, and a two-way travel surface similar to a public street;
however, flexibility in the location of these elements is allowed, provided the
intent of each element is maintained. The minimum size for each street element
is:
            (1)   Two-way travel lanes, twenty four foot (24') width of
pavement.
            (2)   One-way travel lane, twenty foot (20') width of pavement.
            (3)   Curb and gutter, two and one-half foot (21/2') width on each
side.
            (4)   Sidewalk, four feet (4') wide on each side of the street.
            (5)   Curbside parking, six and one-half feet (61/2') on each side
of the road.
A private street shall include curb and gutter on both sides of the road. If
curbside parking is not provided for on the street, "no parking" shall be
posted along the street and the parking shall be provided elsewhere in the
project at a requirement of one stall per twenty two (22) linear feet of curb
length. This parking shall be located within reasonable distance to areas the
curbside parking would have served and is additional to the required parking
for the dwelling units. No angled parking shall be permitted along those
streets which are used for through access in the development.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4073.png]
         b.   Private Sidewalk: The required sidewalks may be varied in
location. The sidewalk may be located independent of the street, provided the
design provides reasonable access for the development.
         c.   Maintenance And Cost: Homeowners' associations are responsible
for maintenance, repair and replacement of private streets and sidewalks. To
ensure adequate funds are set aside for the maintenance of private roads and
sidewalks, the developer shall provide a cost analysis of the life expectancy
of the entire private road and sidewalk system. The cost analysis shall include
maintenance schedule and projected cost for sealing, resurfacing, and
replacement of the road and the repair and replacement of sidewalks and an
estimate of the annual homeowner fee to cover these projected costs.
(Ord. 2015-23, 5-26-2015)
15-8-6: BONUSES FOR MAXIMUM DENSITY:
Density in excess of the baseline density for the underlying zone may be
considered for projects which comply with the bonus density design
requirements. The amount of density bonus shall be determined by the type of
bonus density design requirements incorporated in the development proposal. In
no case shall the density bonus exceed the maximum density allowed for the zone
in which the development occurs according to the following chart:
 
Zone Baseline Density Maximum Density
   R-1-2.9 units/acre 4.3 units/acre
   R-1-3.6 units/acre 5.4 units/acre
   R-1-4.8 units/acre 7.2 units/acre
   R-2 5.4 units/acre 7.2 units/acre
   R-2A6.2 units/acre 8.7 units/acre
   R-2E6.2 units/acre 8.7 units/acre
   R-3 7.3 units/acre 20.3 units/acre
   R-3E8.7 units/acre 20.3 units/acre
   R-4 7.3 units/acre 26.0 units/acre
 
(Ord. 93-30, 7-27-1993; amd. Ord. 2000-70, 1-16-2001, eff. 1-18-2001)
15-8-7: BONUS DENSITY CALCULATIONS:
For applicants requesting a density greater than the baseline density, the
planning commission shall determine whether the applicant has complied with the
necessary design components as provided in section
15-8-8 of this chapter and shall assign density points as applicable. The
additional units per acre allowed above the baseline density for the PRUD shall
be determined by multiplying the total number of density bonus points by the
density coefficient of the underlying zone. This figure is the additional
number of units per acre allowed above the baseline density. This number, when
added to the baseline, will determine the total density per acre for the
project; provided, that the number shall not exceed the maximum density allowed
in the zone. (Example: The project is in an R-3 zone and the design is awarded
75 bonus points. 75 x 0.0441 = 3.3 additional units per acre. 3.3 + 7.3
[baseline density] = 10.6 maximum units per acre for the development.) The
density coefficient for each underlying zone and the total amount of points
needed for the maximum density are listed below:
 
Zone Density Coefficient Maximum Density Points
   R-1-0.0175 80
   R-1-0.02   85
   R-1-0.024  100
   R-2 0.02   90
   R-2A0.0177 85
   R-2E0.0177 85
   R-3 0.0441 295
   R-3E0.043  270
   R-4 0.0492 380
 
(Ord. 93-30, 7-27-1993; amd. Ord. 2000-70, 1-16-2001, eff. 1-18-2001)
15-8-8: BONUS DENSITY DESIGN REQUIREMENTS:
If greater density is requested above the baseline density, a PRUD development
shall comply with one or more of the bonus density design requirements outlined
in this section, depending upon the desired density increase. The planning
commission shall review and determine if the proposed design complies with the
intent of the design requirement before the points are granted. The density
bonus points for each individual design component are in parentheses at the end
of each requirement. In order to receive the maximum density allowed in the
zone, the development shall have received bonus density points from at least
one design component in each of the following categories: energy efficiency or
building design, design theme, landscaping, and open green space. A design
component cannot be used to obtain points in more than one category. The bonus
density design requirements are as follows:
   A.   Energy Efficiency:
      1.   All dwellings and main buildings shall have R-19 wall insulation and
R-38 ceiling insulation. (10)
      2.   All dwellings are designed with an active or passive solar feature.
The solar feature shall be a solar water heater, trombe wall, earth insulation
of a majority of the walls, the building designed so that the main exposure
faces south and has windows to allow solar access, or other features as
approved by the planning commission. (Single feature per unit throughout the
entire project, 20 points. Combination features per unit throughout the entire
project, 30 points.)
   B.   Building Design:
      1.   All facades of each dwelling structure, exclusive of windows or
doors, have a minimum coverage of eighty percent (80%) of the exterior surface
in either brick or stone. (30)
      2.   Required parking for each unit is provided for by an attached
garage. (25)
      3.   All required dwelling unit parking is covered by carports. (10)
   C.   Design Theme:
      1.   Theme lighting is used throughout the development for street
lighting, lighting of walkways, entrances and building exteriors. (15)
      2.   Landscaping is designed and installed along all streets of the
development according to a theme which provides unity and interest to the
development. (20)
      3.   Architectural details of all buildings have a common theme which
unifies the entire development. This theme is not so dominant, however, that
all buildings are identical. (20)
      4.   Special features such as fountains, streams, ponds, sculptures,
buildings or other elements which establish a strong theme for the development
and are utilized in highly visible locations in the development. (25)
      5.   Large special features such as lakes and golf courses which define
the theme of the development and are utilized throughout the entire project.
(40)
   D.   Parking Areas:
      1.   Parking lots of twenty (20) or more stalls are screened from view by
means of berming or landscaping around the perimeter of the parking lot. (20)
      2.   Parking lots of twenty (20) or more stalls or a continuous row of
parking over ninety feet (90') in length has a landscaped island which provides
landscaping at a ratio of one square foot of landscaping per thirteen (13)
square feet of hard surface. (15)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4079.png]
 
      3.   Areas with five (5) or more uncovered parking stalls are designed to
include a sufficient number of two inch (2") caliper trees located in such a
manner as to shade fifty percent (50%) of the parking area upon maturation of
the trees. (15)
   E.   Recreation Amenities:
      1.   The PRUD development includes a recreational amenity primarily for
the use of the residents of the development. Recreational amenities include
swimming pools, sports courts, spas, or other features as approved by the
planning commission. The planning commission may determine the points based on
the cost of the amenity, its benefit to the residents of the development, its
size and the number of amenities in the development. (5 to 35)
      2.   Development of a common building which shall be used for meetings,
indoor recreation, or other common uses as approved by the planning commission.
(20)
      3.   Dedication of land for public park, public access along a stream, or
public access along a planned trail. The city must be willing to accept the
proposed dedication before points are awarded. (Public access 15 points, public
park 30 points)
      4.   Construction according to city standards of trail or park which has
been dedicated to the city according to subsection E3 of this section. (Trail
15 points, public park 40 points)
   F.   Landscaping:
      1.   Design and planting a minimum of four (4) 2-inch caliper deciduous
trees for each dwelling unit in the development and two (2) 4-foot tall
evergreen trees for every two (2) dwelling units in the development. (20)
      2.   Increasing caliper size of all the required trees from a minimum two
inch (2") caliper to:
 
3" caliper   (5)
4" caliper   (10)
6' evergreen (5)
8' evergreen (10)
 
      3.   Increasing caliper size of all elected bonus design requirement
trees to:
 
3" caliper   (10)
4" caliper   (20)
6' evergreen (10)
8' evergreen (20)
 
      4.   The majority of new plant material used for landscaping the
development are drought tolerant plants. The landscaping design shall locate
plant materials in similar water usage demand zones to ensure proper irrigation
coverage and reduce wasteful watering. (20)
      5.   For the purpose of water conservation, the use of turf grass is
limited to areas of high foot traffic, play areas, and other appropriate areas
as determined by the planning commission. All other areas which are normally
planted in lawn shall be planted with ground covers, shrubs or trees. (35)
      6.   Drip irrigation systems are designed and installed to irrigate all
shrub and tree areas as needed. (20)
      7.   Areas which are to be screened use a solid non-see through wood or
masonry fence and landscaping which acts to soften the appearance of the fence.
Landscaping may be vines, shrubs or trees. (15)
   G.   Open Green Space:
      1.   Open green space is designed (not leftover space between buildings)
and flows uninterrupted through the entire development, linking dwellings and
recreation amenities. (25)
      2.   Stormwater detention facility areas are designed and used for
multiple purposes which blend with the overall theme of the open space design,
i.e., shape of the area is free flowing, the grading and landscaping are
carried out in such a manner that the use as a detention pond is not
discernible. (20)
   H.   Public Streets: All streets within the development are dedicated public
streets. (25)
(Ord. 2015-23, 5-26-2015)
15-8-9: SUBMISSION AND APPROVAL PROCESS:
   A.   Steps Outlined: The PRUD approval process consists of three (3) basic
review steps. The first step is submission and review of a conceptual sketch
plan. The purpose of this step is to evaluate the appropriateness of the
development as PRUD based on the consideration of the existing features of the
proposed site and the relationship to adjacent properties. The second step is
submission and review of a preliminary development plan and conditional use
permit based on the conceptual sketch plan. The purpose of this step is to
determine if the preliminary plan/conditional use permit shall be granted. The
third step is submission and review of a final development plan. The purpose of
this step is to review compliance with the conditional use permit and the
preliminary plan. For purposes of recordation, the PRUD shall be recorded as a
subdivision. Upon compliance with final approval, a final plat shall be
recorded.
   B.   Conceptual Sketch Plan Approval Process: Prior to the submission of a
PRUD proposal, the applicant shall meet with the current planning staff to
discuss their proposal and its appropriateness for development as a PRUD. Upon
completion of the preapplication meeting with the current planning staff, the
applicant may choose to present the conceptual sketch plan to the Planning
Commission. The purpose of this presentation is to provide the applicant with
an opportunity to present why the PRUD proposal is appropriate for the site.
The Planning Commission may comment as to the potential suitability of the site
for a PRUD and present any concerns or comments they may have for the applicant
relative to the proposed PRUD. If the applicant chooses to not present the
conceptual sketch plan, it shall be done as part of the preliminary plan
approval. For sites located in the Sensitive Area Overlay Zone, a conceptual
review by the Planning Commission is required to determine if and what geo-
technical studies are required in accordance with the zone. The application
shall provide a conceptual sketch plan which shall include the following:
      1.   Basic site analysis which includes existing features of the site,
such as existing plant materials, steep slopes or rock outcroppings, views and
how they will be incorporated into the proposed development;
      2.   Traffic flow patters into, through and out of the proposed
development, including vehicular, pedestrian, and other;
      3.   The general location of the housing units by type (i.e., detached
dwelling units and attached dwelling units), along with other appropriate uses
and amenities; and
      4.   The existing land uses bordering the proposed site.
   C.   Preliminary Development Plan/Conditional Use Permit Submission: An
application for a PRUD preliminary plan/conditional use permit shall be
presented to the Planning Commission and shall include the following
information:
      1.   Topographic maps of the entire site, including contour intervals of
no greater than ten feet (10');
      2.   A tabulation of the total acreage of the site and the percentages to
be designated for parking, streets and travel ways, various types of
residential units, other buildings and structures, open space, and waterways,
along with other relevant aspects of the site;
      3.   The proposed circulation patterns, including private and public
streets, and any other path systems;
      4.   The proposed location of all parking and ingress and egress;
      5.   The proposed location of parks, common open spaces, playgrounds,
school sites, recreation facilities, and other similar types of improvements;
      6.   The proposed location of all dwellings by type and number of
dwelling units per building, along with other buildings (e.g., recreational
buildings or club houses) or structures (e.g., fencing, lighting, and signage);
      7.   The proposed location of each phase, if the project is to be done in
phases;
      8.   A table of densities for each development phase with a overall
density for the development;
      9.   A general landscape plan showing the areas to be landscaped and the
retention of existing plant materials and landscape features, along with the
use of plant materials for buffers and screening;
      10.   Preliminary building elevations with notation of building materials
of all building types proposed within the development, excluding detached
single-unit dwellings;
      11.   A preliminary subdivision design, showing a general lot layout and
buildable area;
      12.   A preliminary utility plan showing the manner in which adequate
sewage disposal, subsurface drainage, storm drainage, and water are to be
provided to the site, including the location from which said services will need
to be extended;
      13.   If located in the Sensitive Area Overlay Zone, all necessary
reports or information required for compliance with
Chapter 27 of this Title; and
      14.   Such other information as may be necessary to determine whether the
proposed PRUD is desirable and in accordance with the applicable standards.
   D.   Preliminary Development Plan Review Process:
      1.   The Planning Commission, subject to the requirements of this
Chapter, may approve, deny or approve with conditions, the preliminary
development plan for the proposed PRUD. Approval of a preliminary development
plan shall result in the issuance of a conditional use permit. During the
preliminary review process, notice shall be given to the public of the PRUD
proposal in accordance with Planning Commission rules for conditional use
permits.
      2.   In reviewing the proposed PRUD, the Planning Commission shall
determine if the PRUD:
         a.   Encourages better utilization of the land, develops a sense of
community and is compatible with the neighborhood;
         b.   Meets the minimum requirements in this Chapter;
         c.   Meets the requirements for any bonus density requested for the
PRUD;
         d.   Provides an adequate traffic circulation system and whether
streets should be designated as public or private; and
         e.   Meets the general intent and purpose of this Chapter and the
General Plan.
   E.   Final Development Plan Submission: The final development plan, based on
the conceptual sketch and preliminary plans, shall be presented to the Planning
Commission and include the following information:
      1.   All of those items required by the Planning Commission as part of
the approval of the preliminary development plan and conditional use permit;
      2.   A complete and accurate legal description of all property proposed
for development;
      3.   A detailed site plan showing the precise location of all buildings
and structures, the location of developed common activity area and recreational
uses, waterways, detailed circulation patterns, including proposed ownership of
common areas, streets and trails, along with other relevant aspects of the
site;
      4.   Parking layout showing the location of individual stalls and all
areas of ingress and egress;
      5.   Design of entryways, along with elevations of proposed signage;
      6.   A detailed landscape plan showing the location, types and sizes of
all plant materials, sprinkling or irrigation systems, screening and fencing;
      7.   Final elevations of all buildings proposed within the development
with notation of building materials, excluding detached single-unit dwellings;
      8.   A final plat of the PRUD, along with all covenants, conditions and
restrictions which the City deems necessary to provide adequate guarantees for
retention and maintenance of the development as approved;
      9.   Detailed engineering plans including site grading, street
improvements, drainage and public utility locations; and
      10.   A time schedule for the completion of landscaping and amenities
(e.g., common buildings, playground equipment, recreational facilities, trails
and entry signage).
   F.   Final Development Plan Review Process:
      1.   The Planning Commission, subject to the requirements of this
Chapter, may approve, deny, or approve with conditions, the final development
plan for the proposed PRUD and the accompanying conditional use permit.
      2.   The Planning Commission review of the final development plan shall
include the following:
         a.   Whether or not the requirements imposed addressed by the Planning
Commission during the conceptual, preliminary processes and the conditions
established by the conditional use permit have been adequately addressed in the
final development plan;
         b.   Any additional changes from the preliminary development plan
proposed by the developer; and
         c.   Any additional information relevant to the success of the
proposed development.
(Ord. 93-30, 7-27-1993)
15-8-10: APPLICABILITY OF SUBDIVISION TITLE:
   A.   Exceptions: A PRUD shall comply with the provisions of Title 14,
Subdivision Regulations, of this Code, or any successor title, except as
follows:
      1.   A PRUD need not comply with those requirements of the Subdivision
Title which are specifically waived under the provisions of this Chapter.
      2.   The procedures for preliminary and final plan approval required
under the Subdivision Title shall be fulfilled upon approval of the preliminary
development plan and final development plan as provided in this Chapter.
   B.   Plat Filing: A PRUD for which all of the real property is intended to
be maintained as one lot, held in single ownership, shall require the filing of
a plat as a single lot subdivision as part of the final development plan
approval process, in order to provide for the dedication of public property,
the recording of covenants, conditions and restrictions, notice to third
parties of the requirements imposed under this Chapter, and the elimination of
existing lot lines.
(Ord. 93-30, 7-27-1993)
15-8-11: FINAL PLAT RECORDATION:
   A.   Required: For purposes of recordation, the final approved plat shall be
recorded as a subdivision and be included in the subdivision plat records of
the Weber County Recorder's office. Recordation by the City shall only take
place after all of the necessary signatures are obtained, all approvals given,
and all bonds and fees are posted with the Public Works Department.
   B.   Covenants, Conditions And Restrictions:
      1.   The City may require the applicant to submit for recording
covenants, conditions and restrictions which will provide adequate guarantees
for the permanent retention and maintenance of open space area, landscaping,
natural features, architectural design standards and design components used to
achieve density bonus. The covenants, conditions and restrictions shall
include, at a minimum, provisions for:
         a.   The establishment of a homeowners' association, unless the
property will continue to be held in single ownership by either a corporation,
partnership or an individual and restrictions are recorded requiring
establishment of a homeowners' association in the event that the unity of title
is not maintained; and
         b.   A notice to subsequent owners of the need to obtain City approval
of changes to the PRUD which may require either an amendment to the final
development plan or to the conditional use permit.
      2.   Streets not constructed to City standards for public roads shall be
noted in a required covenant. Such covenant shall provide that such streets
cannot be dedicated in the future unless brought up to City standards.
      3.   Each phase submitted for review shall include the covenants,
conditions and restrictions for approval.
      4.   Where covenants, conditions and restrictions are imposed upon a
PRUD, two (2) copies of the declaration of covenants, conditions and
restrictions shall be submitted to the City, signed and prepared for recording
at the Weber County Recorder's office prior to approval of a final plat.
(Ord. 93-30, 7-27-1993)
15-8-12: CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT AND FINAL PLAN:
A conditional use permit stipulating all required conditions of development
shall be maintained with a final approved site plan.
(Ord. 93-30, 7-27-1993)
15-8-13: AMENDMENTS TO PERMIT, PLAN OR RECORDED PLAT:
   A.   Any changes in the proposed final development plan which involves a
substantial change to the conditional use permit used in the preliminary plan
review process shall be approved by amendment to the conditional use permit
after notice as required in the Planning Commission's rules and procedures for
issuance of a conditional use permit.
   B.   All development shall conform to the final plan. Minor changes in the
location, siting or character of buildings and structures may be authorized by
the director if required by engineering or other circumstances not foreseen at
the time the final development plan was approved. No change authorized under
this section may cause any of the following:
      1.   A change in the use or character of the development.
      2.   An increase in the overall density or intensity of use.
      3.   An increase in overall coverage of structures in designated common
areas.
      4.   A reduction or change in character of approved open space.
      5.   A reduction of required off-street parking.
      6.   A detrimental alteration to the pedestrian, vehicular and bicycle,
circulation and utility networks.
      7.   A reduction in required street pavement widths.
      8.   Any substantial changes to the conditional use permit.
   C.   Any major changes in use, or rearrangement of lots, blocks, building
tracts or grouping, or any changes in the provision of open space and
significant changes as noted above, must be approved by the planning commission
as an amendment to the conditional use permit. In case of amendments after
final approval, such amendments may be made only if they are shown to be
required by changes in conditions that have occurred since the final
development plan was approved. Any major changes must be recorded as amendments
and be reviewed and approved in accordance with procedures established for
final development plan review.
(Ord. 93-30, 7-27-1993; amd. Ord. 2001-32, 6-5-2001, eff. 6-30-2001)
15-8-14: TIME LIMITATION:
   A.   Final Development Plan: A final development plan shall be submitted for
approval within twelve (12) months of the issuance of the conditional use
permit for the PRUD, and the preliminary development plan approved as part of
the permit. Failure to submit a final development plan within the specified
time period shall result in a revocation of the conditional use permit, and the
permit and approved preliminary development plan shall be null and void;
provided, however, that one extension of six (6) months may be granted by the
planning commission for a showing of good cause.
   B.   Recording Subdivision Plat: A final subdivision plat shall be recorded
within six (6) months after approval of the final development plan. Failure to
record the subdivision plat within the specified time period shall result in
the final development plan becoming null and void, and the conditional use
permit shall be revoked. If phased development for the PRUD was approved by the
planning commission, the above time limitation shall apply only to the
recording of a final subdivision plat for the first phase.
   C.   Conditional Use Revocation: Any property for which a conditional use
permit has been revoked or a plan determined to be null and void for failure to
comply with the above time limitations shall thereafter be subject to the
zoning and subdivision ordinances otherwise applicable to said property.
(Ord. 93-30, 7-27-1993)
15-8-15: CONSTRUCTION PARAMETERS:
   A.   Financial Guarantees: Prior to the recording of a PRUD subdivision plat
and prior to the issuance of any building permit on property covered by a PRUD
final development plan, financial guarantees acceptable to the city as follows:
      1.   A financial guarantee meeting the requirements of section
15-13-23 of this title, sufficient in amount to cover the cost of all private
infrastructure, amenities and required landscaping in common open space, and,
public infrastructure improvements, if such financial guarantee mechanism is
approved by the city engineer;
      2.   For public improvements, a financial guarantee meeting the
requirements of the subdivision title.
   B.   Completion Of Improvements:
      1.   Infrastructure: All street improvements, sidewalks, curb and gutter,
storm drainage facilities, water and sewer lines, and all other such surface
and underground improvements shall be completed prior to occupancy.
      2.   Amenities And Landscaping: Notwithstanding the provision above, all
amenities shall be completed prior to occupancy unless inclement weather
prevents their completion, in which case one extension of six (6) months for
amenities and landscaping may be granted. If not completed at the end of the
six (6) month period, the city will review the progress and may proceed to use
the guarantee funds to make the improvements in accordance with the approved
plan.
   C.   Property Ownership: Plans submitted for preliminary and final
development review may be filed jointly by multiple owners, provided all owners
have signed the proposed plans. The applicant shall submit a title report
demonstrating compliance with this subsection. The area proposed for a PRUD
shall be in single ownership or corporate ownership prior to recording of the
final plat in order to provide for full supervision and control of said
development, and to ensure conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
   D.   Phasing: If the sequence of construction of various portions of the
final development plan is to occur in stages, then the open space or
recreational facilities shall be developed in proportion to the number of
dwelling units intended to be developed during any given stage of construction.
A phasing plan, including size and order of phases, shall be approved by the
planning commission. Such phasing plan shall have the written approval of all
property owners. In addition, the approved phasing shall be submitted to the
city recorder for recordation with the county recorder's office as a covenant
to run with the land.
(Ord. 93-30, 7-27-1993; amd. Ord. 98-37, 6-16-1998)
15-8-16: PROPERTY OWNERSHIP:
Plans submitted for preliminary and final development review may be filed
jointly by multiple owners, provided all owners have signed the proposed plans.
The area proposed for a PRUD shall be in single ownership or corporate
ownership prior to recording of the final plat in order to provide for full
supervision and control of said development, and to ensure conformance with the
provisions of this chapter. The applicant shall submit a title report
demonstrating compliance with this section.
(Ord. 93-30, 7-27-1993)
15-8-17: PHASING:
If the sequence of construction of various portions of the final development
plan is to occur in stages, then the open space or recreational facilities
shall be developed in proportion to the number of dwelling units intended to be
developed during any given stage of construction. A phasing plan, including
size and order of phases, shall be approved by the planning commission. Such
phasing plan shall have the written approval of all property owners. In
addition, the approved phasing shall be submitted to the city recorder for
recordation with the county recorder's office as a covenant to run with the
land.
(Ord. 93-30, 7-27-1993)
15-8-18: FAILURE TO COMPLY; CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
In case of failure or neglect to comply with any and all of the provisions of
this chapter, and the conditions and stipulations herein established, and as
specifically made applicable to a PRUD, the building official shall not
authorize occupancy of any structure. Such failure or neglect shall be cause
for termination of the approval of the project. Such failure or neglect to
comply with the requirements and to maintain the buildings and premises in
accordance with the conditions or approval thereafter shall also be deemed to
be a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 93-30, 7-27-1993; amd. Ord. 2001-32, 6-5-2001, eff. 6-30-2001)
15-8-19: ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMITS:
The building official shall not issue a permit for any proposed building,
structure, or use within the project unless such building, structure or use is
in accordance with the approved plan and any conditions imposed in conjunction
with its approval.
(Ord. 93-30, 7-27-1993; amd. Ord. 2001-32, 6-5-2001, eff. 6-30-2001)
15-8-20: REVOCATION OF CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
A conditional use permit may be revoked if any of the conditions or terms are
violated; however, the holder of the permit shall first be afforded an
opportunity to be heard before the planning commission and show cause as to why
the permit should not be revoked. A violation of a condition or term of a
permit shall constitute a violation of this code, and the revocation of a
permit shall not prohibit prosecution or any other legal action taken on
account of the violation. The decision of the planning commission to revoke a
conditional use permit may be appealed to the mayor, in writing, within fifteen
(15) days of the planning commission's decision.
(Ord. 93-30, 7-27-1993)
15-8-21: VIOLATIONS:
   A.   The conditional use permit, the preliminary development plan approved
as part of the conditional use permit, and the final development plan which
have been issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall have
the full force of this title. Any violation of such approved plan or permit
shall be grounds for the city to order that all construction be stopped, and to
order that building permits and certificates of occupancy be withheld until the
violation is removed or adequate guarantee of such removal is provided to the
city.
   B.   Violations of any plan approved under this chapter or of the
conditional use permit issued in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, or failure to comply with any requirements of this chapter, including
any agreements and conditions attached to any approved plan or permit, shall be
considered a violation of this title as provided in section
15-1-14 of this title.
(Ord. 93-30, 7-27-1993)
CHAPTER 9
CLUSTER SUBDIVISIONS; SPECIAL REGULATIONS
SECTION:
15-9-1: Purpose And Intent
15-9-2: General Regulations
15-9-3: Site Development Standards
15-9-4: Open Space Provision
15-9-5: Open Space Preservation And Maintenance
15-9-6: Procedure
15-9-7: Streets
15-9-8: Common Open Space; Other Requirements Authorized
15-9-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
Cluster subdivisions are intended to allow flexibility in neighborhood and
subdivision lot design by permitting the development of single-family and two-
family dwellings on lots smaller than normally required for the zone in which
the subdivision is located and by dedicating or reserving the land so saved to
needed open space. It is not intended that this type of subdivision be
universally applied, but only when circumstances or natural features and land
use make it appropriate and of special benefit to the residents of the
subdivision and surrounding area.
(Ord. 72-13, 7-6-1972)
15-9-2: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Permitted Zones; Number Of Units: A cluster subdivision shall be a
permitted use in R-1-10, R-1-8, R-1-6, and R-2 Zones and notwithstanding any
other provisions of this title, the provisions as hereinafter set forth shall
be applicable if any conflict exists; provided however, that no such cluster
subdivision shall contain less than twenty five (25) dwelling units.
   B.   Minimum Lot Area Reduction: Where land is proposed for subdivisions
into lots and a subdivider dedicates or permanently reserves land within the
subdivision for recreational use or open space, a reduction in the minimum lot
area required for the zone in which the cluster subdivision is located, may be
approved by the Planning Commission, provided the provisions of this chapter
are met; and further provided, that the cluster subdivision receives
subdivision approval.
(Ord. 72-13, 7-6-1972)
15-9-3: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Minimum Lot Area: The minimum lot area for dwellings may be reduced
below the area normally required in the zone in which the cluster subdivision
is located, but no lot shall have an area less than two-thirds (2/3) of the
minimum lot area required for such dwelling in the respective zone.
   B.   Minimum Lot Width And Yard Setbacks: The minimum lot width, front yard
setback and side yard setback may be reduced below the width, front yard and
side yard normally required in the zone in which the cluster subdivision is
located, but no lot shall have a width, front yard or side yard of less than
three-fourths (3/4) of the minimum lot width, front yard or side yard required
in the respective zone nor shall the front yard be less than eighteen feet
(18') even if the application of this subsection would otherwise allow a
greater reduction.
   C.   Zero Side Yard: Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection B of this
section, one zero side yard may be permitted when approved by the Planning
Commission and Mayor, and only if the following requirements are met:
      1.   The remaining one side yard is equal to the combined total of the
required two (2) side yards of the zone in which it is located;
      2.   No window or other similar opening shall be installed in the
building or any accessory building along the side having a zero side yard; and
      3.   No zero side yard will be permitted on the lot side bordering a
nonresidential zone, or on a residential lot not utilizing zero side yard
provisions.
   D.   Yard Use And Height Regulations: Yard use and height regulations shall
be the same as for the zone in which the cluster subdivision is located.
(Ord. 72-13, 7-6-1972; amd. Ord. 91-51, 12-19-1991; Ord. 2017-46, 10-24-2017)
15-9-4: OPEN SPACE PROVISION:
There shall be permanently reserved within the subdivision for recreation and/
or open space, parcels of land whose total area is not less than the amount by
which the areas of the residential lots are reduced below the minimum area
normally required in the zone in which the cluster subdivision is located.
(Ord. 72-13, 7-6-1972)
15-9-5: OPEN SPACE PRESERVATION AND MAINTENANCE:
Recreation and/or open space areas to be permanently reserved shall be
improved, landscaped, and maintained in accordance with a plan approved by the
Planning Commission and the cluster subdivision provisions of the subdivision
title.
(Ord. 72-13, 7-6-1972)
15-9-6: PROCEDURE:
A preliminary plan of the cluster subdivision showing the areas within the
subdivision to be permanently reserved for recreation and/or open space, and
plans showing the proposed use, improvements and method of maintenance of such
areas shall be approved by the Planning Commission before the cluster
subdivision proposal becomes a permitted use in the zone in which it is
proposed.
(Ord. 72-13, 7-6-1972)
15-9-7: STREETS:
Streets shall be designed as to take advantage of open space vistas and to
create drives with a rural or open-space character.
(Ord. 98-37, 6-16-1998)
15-9-8: COMMON OPEN SPACE; OTHER REQUIREMENTS AUTHORIZED:
   A.   The subdivider of a cluster subdivision shall submit plans of
landscaping and improvements for the common open space. The subdivider shall
also explain the intended use of the open space maintained. A cluster
subdivision must assure proper use, construction, and maintenance of open space
facilities and must result in a development superior to conventional
development in terms of its benefits to future owners of the subdivision,
surrounding residents and the general public.
   B.   The Planning Commission may place whatever additional conditions or
restrictions it may deem necessary to ensure development and maintenance of the
desired character for common open space, including plans for disposition or
reuse of property if the open space use is not maintained in the manner agreed
upon or is abandoned by the owners.
(Ord. 98-37, 6-16-1998)
CHAPTER 10
GROUP DWELLINGS 1
SECTION:
15-10-1: Purpose And Intent
15-10-2: Types Of Group Dwellings
15-10-3: Area Requirements
15-10-4: Minimum Design Standards
15-10-5: Density Increases For Neighborhood Group Dwellings
15-10-6: Density Increase Design Standards For Neighborhood Group Dwellings
15-10-7: Submission And Approval Process
15-10-8: Time Limitations
15-10-9: Financial Guarantee; Installment Of Improvements
15-10-10: Failure To Comply; Certificate Of Occupancy
15-10-11: Revocation Of Conditional Use Permit
15-10-12: Violations
 
Notes
  1. Prior ordinance history: Ord. 97-35, 5-27-1997; Ord. 97-78, 10-21-1997;
  Ord. 97-90, 12-16-1997; Ord. 98-37, 6-16-1998; Ord. 99-8, 1-26-1999; Ord. 99-
1 9, 1-26-1999; Ord. 99-10, 1-26-1999; Ord. 99-37, 9-28-1999; Ord. 2000-25, 5-
  16-2000, eff. 7-1-2000; Ord. 2000-52, 10-17-2000; Ord. 2000-70, 1-16-2001,
  eff. 1-18-2001; Ord. 2000-71, 1-16-2001, eff. 1-18-2001; Ord. 2001-32, 6-5-
  2001)
15-10-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   The purpose of a group dwelling is to encourage better utilization of
parcels of land up to ten (10) acres in size, to ensure neighborhood
compatibility, and to provide land development patterns which meet the needs of
those living in the developments and the surrounding community. This is
accomplished by allowing more than one building on a lot, flexible placement of
buildings, and allowing private infrastructure systems not ordinarily allowed.
   B.   A group dwelling is a residential development which has more than one
residential building on a lot and which is planned as a single complex. The
ownership may be either in single ownership or units sold according to the
condominium requirements. It incorporates a definite development theme which
includes usable open space, a well defined circulation system, and is designed
to be compatible with the land and the surrounding neighborhood.
(Ord. 2004-28, 7-13-2004)
15-10-2: TYPES OF GROUP DWELLINGS:
There are two (2) types of group dwellings: a small lot group dwelling and a
neighborhood group dwelling. Because of the different character and impact of
these two (2) types of developments, some development standards may be
different. The types of group dwellings are distinguished by their size:
   A.   Small Lot Group: Small lot group dwelling is development on a small
parcel of land which is less than one acre in total area; and
   B.   Neighborhood Group: Neighborhood group dwelling is a development on
property which is between one and ten (10) acres in total area.
(Ord. 2004-28, 7-13-2004)
15-10-3: AREA REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Lot Area Requirements: A group dwelling may be developed on a parcel of
property which is between ten thousand (10,000) square feet and five (5) acres
in an R-2 zone, eight (8) acres in an R-3 zone, ten (10) acres in R-4, R-5, PI,
C-2, C-3 and CBD zones. If contiguous parcels are combined for the development,
the entire acreage of the combined properties shall be considered for the total
lot area of the group dwelling.
   B.   Minimum Lot Area: The minimum lot area required per unit shall be based
on the following square footage requirements. In addition to these minimum lot
area requirements, the development shall also meet the minimum design standards
and the approval process of this chapter.
 
                        Small Lot Group            Neighborhood Group
Zone                    Dwelling Minimum Square    Dwelling Minimum Square
                        Footage Per Unit Type      Footage Per Unit Type
                        6,000 sq. ft. per single-  6,000 sq. ft. per single-
                        family dwelling (7.26      family dwelling (7.26
R-2                     dua1).                     dua1).
                        12,000 sq. ft. per duplex  14,000 sq. ft. per duplex
                        (7.26 dua1).               (6.2 dua1).
                        5,000 sq. ft. per single-  5,000 sq. ft. per single-
                        family dwelling (8.7       family dwelling (8.7
R-2EC                   dua1).                     dua1).
                        10,000 sq. ft. per duplex  12,000 sq. ft. per duplex
                        (8.7 dua1).                (7.26 dua1).
                        6,000 sq. ft. per single-  6,000 sq. ft. per single-
                        family dwelling (7.26      family dwelling (7.26
                        dua1).                     dua1).
R-3                     7,500 sq. ft. for each     7,500 sq. ft. for each
                        duplex, plus 4,000 sq. ft. duplex, plus 5,000 sq. ft.
                        for each dwelling unit     for each dwelling unit
                        over 2 in each building    over 2 in each building
                        (11.14 dua1).              (9.7 dua1).
                        5,000 sq. ft. per single-  5,000 sq. ft. per single-
                        family dwelling (8.7       family dwelling (8.7
                        dua1).                     dua1).
R-3EC                   7,500 sq. ft. for each     7,500 sq. ft. for each
                        duplex, plus 3,000 sq. ft. duplex, plus 4,000 sq. ft.
                        for each dwelling unit     for each dwelling unit
                        over 2 in each building    over 2 in each building
                        (13.52 dua1).              (11.14 dua1).
                        6,000 sq. ft. per single-  6,000 sq. ft. per single-
                        family dwelling (7.26      family dwelling (7.26
                        dua1).                     dua1).
R-4, R-5, PI, C-2/CP-2, 7,500 sq. ft. for each     7,500 sq. ft. for each
C-3/CP-3                duplex, plus 2,000 sq. ft. duplex, plus 3,000 sq. ft.
                        for each dwelling unit     for each dwelling unit
                        over 2 in each building    over 2 in each building
                        (18.28 dua1).              (13.52 dua1).
                        6,500 sq. ft. for each     6,500 sq. ft. for each
                        triplex, plus 750 sq. ft.  triplex, plus 1,150 sq.
CBD                     for each dwelling unit     ft. for each dwelling unit
                        over 3 in each building    over 3 in each building
                        (46.74 dua1).              (32.57 dua1).
 
Note:
   1.    Dwelling units per acre (dua) are for reference purposes only.
(Ord. 2004-28, 7-13-2004)
15-10-4: MINIMUM DESIGN STANDARDS:
   A.   Building Setbacks:
      1.   Any building which is adjacent to a public street shall meet the
minimum front yard setback required for the respective zone. If the building is
on a corner, then the shortest side facing a street or either side of a square
building shall meet the corner side yard setback of the respective zone. Only
the building closest to the corner shall meet the corner side yard setback.
Other buildings adjacent to the public street shall be required to meet the
front yard setback of the respective zone. The minimum setbacks for all
buildings from the interior property lines shall be based on the orientation
and the comparative length of the sides of the buildings. If the longest
portion of the building orients to the property line, then a thirty foot (30')
setback shall be the minimum setback for that building. If the narrow part of
the building orients to the property line, then a ten foot (10') setback shall
be the minimum setback for the building. If the building is square, then the
thirty foot (30') setback from the interior property line shall be the minimum
setback.
      2.   If any main building is adjacent to any residential zoned property
and is over two (2) stories in height, it shall be set back an additional ten
feet (10') from the interior property lines for every additional story the
building is over two (2) stories (e.g., if the building is 4 stories, then the
interior property line setback is 10 feet [the original setback], plus 20 feet
[2 stories x 10 feet], for a 30 foot setback. If the interior setback is 30
feet, then the setback is 30 feet plus 20 feet [2 stories x 10 feet]).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4081.png]
 
   B.   Distance Between Buildings: The minimum distance between buildings
shall be ten feet (10') for single-story buildings, fifteen feet (15') for two-
story buildings, and twenty feet (20') for three-story buildings. Buildings
which are over three (3) stories in all zones except the CBD shall have a
separation of twenty feet (20'), plus ten feet (10') for every story over three
(3) stories. In the CBD, twenty feet (20') shall be the minimum separation. If
a lower building is next to a taller building, then the larger separation
distance will apply.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4083.png]
   C.   Building Orientation:
      1.   Requirement: Those buildings which are adjacent to a public street
shall have the front elevation of the building face the public street in order
to retain the front yard appearance of the community. If the building is on a
corner which abuts two (2) streets, only one front elevation is required for
the building.
      2.   Exception: The planning commission may consider other orientations
of the building if there is not an existing neighborhood which fronts the
street or if other conditions exist which restrict such development and the
planning commission determines that the surrounding neighborhood identity,
front yard appearances and streetscape continuity will not be impacted by such
a design. If it is determined that the front elevation should not face the
street, an additional ten foot (10') setback shall be added to the front yard
setback. This ten foot (10') area shall be landscaped with trees and plants in
order to provide a transition from the public street to the private
development. Any fencing which is installed shall not be placed in this ten
foot (10') area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4085.png]
 
   D.   Building Design:
      1.   All four (4) sides of the building, excluding doors and windows,
shall have the same proportionate use of exterior finish materials (e.g., if
brick is used on the front of the building it also is used on the other 3
elevations of the building). The use of vinyl siding materials on fifty percent
(50%) or more of all four (4) sides is not acceptable. The planning commission
may consider other options to having all four (4) sides of the building
finished in the same materials. In considering other options the design needs
to bring continuity to the entire building, development and neighborhood (e.g.,
privacy fences made of similar building materials which block the view of other
portions of the building, quoins used to give relief to corners, facades having
physical changes in the vertical planes so a flat facade is avoided). The
commission may also consider other options when there are substantial grade
differences from one side of the building to another and variations in the
material will not impact neighborhood continuity.
      2.   Architectural detailing is required in order to provide interest and
theme to the buildings. At a minimum, the building designs shall have a covered
entry porch and at least two (2) of the following architectural elements which
provide a defined character to the building:
         a.   Bay windows.
         b.   Quoins.
         c.   Dormers.
         d.   Cantilevered floor.
         e.   Decorative cornice work.
         f.   Corbeling on wall.
         g.   Decorative lintel.
         h.   Roof style other than gable.
      3.   The architecture shall be visually compatible with the common
elements of the existing architecture in the area. The planned architectural
theme shall as a minimum use the common elements of the existing architecture
in the area with respect to: a) the roof design and pitch, provided that pitch
shall in all cases be four to twelve (4:12) or greater, b) the ratio of solid
materials (walls) to glazing materials (windows). In the event the neighborhood
is in transition or does not have a dominant architectural theme, the
commission may approve architecture designs which enhance the neighborhood
fabric.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4087.png]
 
      4.   The architecture of the dwellings shall have visual relief in facade
and rooflines that add variety and rhythm to the design, and avoids monotonous
straight lines.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4089.png]
 
      5.   The front of each dwelling structure shall be designed so that:
         a.   If a building has an attached garage or an area where a garage
can be built along the front of the building, the garage doors or area where
the garage can be built shall not occupy more than forty percent (40%) of the
ground level building frontage.
         b.   If the attached garage or area where the garage can be built is
accessed from the front the garage or area where the garage can be built shall
be set back a minimum of five feet (5') from the building front.
         c.   The front of the building has as a minimum the design elements of
a main entry door and ten percent (10%) of the wall surface area on the main
level in glazing.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4091.png]
 
   E.   Site Layout: The materials and height of the building are to be
sensitive to the existing topography and vegetation that exist on site. The
buildings shall be built into the existing topography so that no major cuts
occur (i.e., if for example the site slopes the building should be stepped into
the hill). The existing vegetation shall be identified and shown how it will be
preserved on site. In the event that areas of vegetation are proposed to be
removed, removal shall occur only upon approval by the planning commission
based upon a site analysis and revegetation plan that is sensitive to the
existing topography and vegetation.
   F.   Building Height: The height of the main buildings shall be limited to
the maximum height allowed in the respective zone of the project. Accessory
buildings shall be one story with a maximum height of fifteen feet (15').
   G.   Parking Requirements And Design:
      1.   Two (2) parking stalls per dwelling shall be required for each unit
in the development in all zones except the CBD and properties within six
hundred sixty feet (660') (1 block) of the CBD or mass transit stops/stations.
All parking and access shall be hard surfaced. Garages attached to the unit and
used for required parking shall be set back eighteen feet (18') from the road
or street or eighteen feet (18') from the walkway if a walkway is designed
along the road or street. Detached unit parking shall be located within a one
hundred foot (100') radius measured from any entrance to the dwelling unit. In
the CBD zone and for properties within six hundred sixty feet (660') (1 block)
of the CBD or mass transit stops/stations, one and one-half (1.5) stalls per
unit shall be required for each unit in the development. Parking in the CBD
shall be located within a five hundred foot (500') radius measured from any
main entrance to the dwelling.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4093.png]
 
      2.   Driveways shall be a minimum of twenty eight feet (28') in width
whenever the driveway is used to provide ingress and egress to any parking
space between dwellings including parking within attached garages.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4095.png]
 
      3.   Parking adjacent to any public street and any access parallel to the
street shall be set back the required front yard setback for the respective
zone of the development. Parking stalls and access lanes shall be set back a
minimum of eight feet (8') from any property line which is not adjacent to a
street. The eight foot (8') setback area shall be landscaped. The planning
commission may reduce the eight foot (8') setback for access lanes if it is
determined that the accessway is adequately screened, the proximity and amount
of traffic will not adversely impact existing neighboring uses, and there is
adequate landscaping to soften the appearance of the access area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4099.png]
 
      4.   Landscaped islands shall be required at the end of each row of
stalls if the row exceeds ten (10) parking stalls in length. A row of parking
that has over twenty (20) parking stalls shall have one landscaped island
placed between every twenty (20) stalls in the row. Required parking areas
shall install landscaped islands with raised curbs. Islands shall not be placed
over hard surface. The landscaped island shall be a minimum width of nine feet
(9') and a minimum length of eighteen feet (18').
   H.   Open Green Space And Landscaping:
      1.   Required Yard Setbacks: All required yard setbacks shall be
landscaped.
      2.   Parkways: All parkways within the public right of way which abut the
development shall be landscaped with grass, or other material approved by the
planning commission, and two inch (2") caliper shade trees spaced no farther
than forty feet (40') apart. Street trees are required along interior roads
whether public or private at a maximum spacing distance of forty feet (40')
apart. A "private road" shall be defined as any interior road that is accessed
from a public street, that has no parking backs onto the road, and is used for
primary circulation within the development.
      3.   Incorporation Of Natural Features: Developments shall be designed to
incorporate existing trees, clusters of trees or clusters of shrubs and natural
settings along rivers, streams or canals. The planning commission shall review
the appropriateness of removal of portions of these types of vegetation if
removal is planned. The planning commission may approve removal of some or all
vegetation based on a determination of the benefits of the existing plant
material and the efforts made to save and incorporate the existing plant
material into the design of the project versus the problems the plant materials
may create for the project in terms of general construction techniques, impact
removal will have to the character of the area, the topography of the site, and
harmful conditions the vegetation may create. If existing vegetation is removed
prior to submittal or not in keeping with the approved plan, the maximum
density allowed for the development shall be the area requirement for single-
family units in the zone of the project.
      4.   Use Of Turf Grass Limited: Grass shall not be the ground cover used
in areas which are eight feet (8') or less in width within the property lines.
Shrubs or planted ground covers shall be used in these areas and shall be
planted at such a spacing that they will cover the entire designed area within
five (5) years. Mulches shall be part of the initial planting design in these
areas. The use of turf grass shall be limited to areas of high foot traffic,
recreation areas and planned open spaces.
      5.   Minimum Plantings Required: A minimum of one 2-inch caliper tree and
five (5) 5-gallon shrubs (at least 1 shrub a flowering shrub) shall be planted
on the property for each unit in the development of a small lot group dwelling.
Neighborhood group dwellings require a minimum of two (2) 2-inch caliper trees
and five (5) 5-gallon shrubs (at least 1 shrub a flowering shrub) to be planted
on the property for each unit in the development. Group dwellings located in
the CBD zone shall require one 2-inch caliper tree and five (5) 5-gallon shrubs
for each three (3) units in the development.
      6.   Minimum Landscaped Area Abutting Parking Or Access Lanes: A minimum
six foot (6') landscaped area excluding sidewalk is provided between the unit
and any parking or access lanes.
      7.   Entrance Feature Required: An entrance feature to the development is
required. The minimum entrance feature shall consist of a monument sign naming
the development surrounded by a variety of ground covers, shrubs and trees.
      8.   Screened Enclosures: All dumpsters shall be stored in screened
enclosures which are architecturally compatible in style and materials with the
architecture of the development. Dumpsters shall be located so they are not in
the required setback areas, not visible from the public street and do not
restrict vehicular parking or circulation.
      9.   Stormwater Detention Facilities: Stormwater detention facilities are
designed and used for multiple functions. The design of the facility shall
blend in with the overall theme of the open space. Factors which will be used
in determining compliance may include, but not be limited to, freeform design,
grading and landscaping to provide gradual transitions, or artistic design
elements.
      10.   Small Lot Group Dwellings: Rear and abutting dwelling units within
small lot group dwellings shall be separated by a minimum thirty foot (30')
landscaped area.
      11.   Neighborhood Group Dwelling: All neighborhood group dwellings shall
include open space designed as either visual passive open space, courtyard open
space, active area open space or natural features open space as provided
herein. Such open space shall be a minimum of thirty percent (30%) of the total
lot area. The required yard setbacks from property lines shall not be included
in meeting the thirty percent (30%) open space minimum.
         a.   Visual Passive Open Space: Common open space designed to create a
viewing or garden path experience by having planting areas with minimal or no
sod that creates a visual experience provided that all of the following
conditions are met:
            (1)   A minimum of eighty percent (80%) of the open space area
needs to be covered with a variety of plants, including trees, shrubs, annuals
and perennials to create a garden atmosphere that can be viewed from windows or
pedestrianways.
            (2)   The size of the passive area shall be a minimum of ten
percent (10%) of the required thirty percent (30%) open space.
            (3)   The plants used shall provide a variety of colors, textures
and leaves for all seasons.
            (4)   Fountains, sundials, statues or other similar elements shall
be included in the design and shall take into account the scale of the space in
which they are located.
            (5)   A maintenance plan shall be submitted that will identify how
these areas will be cared for in the future.
         b.   Courtyard Open Space: Common open space whose perimeter is
defined by the placement of buildings or walls that enclose the open space area
provided that all of the following conditions are met:
            (1)   Dimensions:
               (A)   Minimums: The minimum width and length of the courtyard
shall be two (2) times the height of the surrounding buildings.
               (B)   Exception: The distance may be reduced by the planning
commission in the CBD zone if the courtyard area is designed with a decorative
paved plaza having a combination of plantings, seatings, lighting and artistic
features as shown below.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4097.png]
 
            (2)   Views And Access: The building elevation of the dwelling
units facing the courtyard shall be designed to allow views of and access to
the adjacent courtyards.
            (3)   Minimum Coverage Of Plantings: A minimum of forty percent
(40%) of the courtyard areas shall be covered with a variety of trees, shrubs
and ground covers. For group dwellings in the CBD zone this coverage may be
reduced by using an appropriate amount of decorative paving material in
combination with plantings, seating, lighting and artistic features.
            (4)   Private Space: The courtyard space shall be designed to
create a private space for the development. In addition to the buildings a low
fence or wall, low plantings or a combination of these shall be used to define
the boundaries of each area. A fence or wall should have a gate or entryway
that provides easy access to the open space area as shown below:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4101.png]
 
            (5)   Playground: If a children's playground area is to be part of
the courtyard it shall be visible from the main living space of the adjacent
dwelling units.
            (6)   Shaded Areas: Thirty percent (30%) of the courtyard area
needs to be designed to provide shade during the midday of the summer months.
The use of trees, buildings, awnings and pergolas can be used to provide for
shade in the courtyard areas. If a swimming pool is used then the swimming pool
area is excluded.
         c.   Active Area Open Space: Common open space designed to provide
active recreation such as basketball, volleyball, soccer, trails, open field
play or swimming pool. In developing active area it can be one or a multiple of
the above mentioned uses provided that all of the following conditions are met:
            (1)   Playgrounds shall be separated by a minimum of thirty feet
(30') from sport areas (i.e., tot lots would not be closer than 30 feet from a
basketball court).
            (2)   Active areas shall not be located in areas next to local,
collector or arterial streets.
            (3)   The active area needs to be more than an open field.
            (4)   Elements of shade need to be provided in the active area.
            (5)   When trails are used they shall meet the following
requirements:
               (A)   The length of trail shall be a minimum of 0.5 mile long,
except if it ties into another trail that meets this minimum.
               (B)   The trail shall be located a minimum of thirty feet (30')
from the rear of any dwelling units and fifteen feet (15') from the side of any
dwelling units and separated with shrubs, trees or landforms so the trail and
the back of the units have a visual separation.
               (C)   Trail width needs to be a minimum of four feet (4') wide
and pavement materials are limited to concrete or asphalt.
               (D)   The trail needs to lead to destination areas or focal
points within the open space.
               (E)   When lighting is provided along the trail it shall be
directed downward so it does not impact adjacent residence. The lighting shall
not be taller than two feet (2').
            (6)   The required active areas shall begin at a point fifteen feet
(15') from the rear of any dwelling unit.
         d.   Natural Features Open Space: A site that has unique natural
features such as woodlands, ponds, ravines, canals, streams and wetlands
provided that all of the following conditions are met:
            (1)   If a natural feature is used an analysis of the site needs to
be submitted which identifies how the natural features will be preserved and
how it will function as an open space.
            (2)   A plan is submitted that identifies how the natural features
will be integrated into the landscaped areas.
            (3)   Shrubs, trees and ground covers shall be added to the natural
features that would enhance the setting of the natural features.
            (4)   If a trail system is used, the trail system needs to be
accessible from the units to these areas that lead to a focal point or
destination area. The trail shall meet the following conditions:
               (A)   The trail shall be located a minimum of thirty feet (30')
from the rear of any dwelling units and separated with vegetation and/or
landforms so the trail and the back of the units have a visual separation.
               (B)   The width and material needs to be a minimum of four feet
(4') wide and constructed out of crushed gravel or a material approved by the
planning commission that is compatible with the natural features in the area.
               (C)   When lighting is provided along the trail it shall be
directed downward so it does not impact adjacent residence. The lighting shall
not be taller than two feet (2').
   I.   Street Design: Group dwellings shall be designed to meet area
transportation plans. Developments which are located on or next to a collector
or arterial public street shall be designed and developed so the public street
continues through the project in a logical, safe design. Projects which are
located at the end of stubbed local streets or in areas where local streets may
be of benefit to the development of the general area may be required to design
and install a local public street through the development. The planning
commission shall review the future and existing circulation needs of the area,
existing road patterns, and emergency access needs in determining if a local
public street should be required or extended. Interior private streets shall
have a minimum twenty four foot (24') pavement width.
   J.   Fencing:
      1.   Requirements: The portions of the development that do not front a
street shall be fenced with a maximum seven foot (7') high fence. The fence
needs to be constructed out of either masonry, wood, vinyl or black powder
coated chainlink. Fencing in the front yard is optional. The maximum height for
a fence in the front yard setback is four feet (4') high. Front yard fencing
shall be constructed out of masonry, wood, vinyl or decorative wrought iron.
      2.   Exceptions; Maintenance; Waivers:
         a.   The planning commission may vary the height of the fence fronting
a street if the buildings do not front the street and it is determined the
proposed fence design, materials, and location will not create a safety hazard
due to obstructed vision of approaching vehicles or pedestrians and will:
            (1)   Not isolate the surrounding neighborhoods;
            (2)   Be consistent with the theme of the development; and
            (3)   Be compatible with the neighborhood.
         b.   If fencing isolates property between the fence and the public
street, the development shall provide a means to ensure continued maintenance
of this area.
         c.   The planning commission may waive the seven foot (7') high
fencing requirement provided it is determined that:
            (1)   Waiving such fencing will not impact adjoining properties by
creating potential trespassing conditions; and
            (2)   There is a natural or manmade feature that fencing would
hinder access to or damage the aesthetic attributes of the feature as it
relates to the development.
(Ord. 2015-23, 5-26-2015)
15-10-5: DENSITY INCREASES FOR NEIGHBORHOOD GROUP DWELLINGS:
   A.   Neighborhood group dwellings may receive additional density
considerations. The planning commission shall review the proposed development
plan and determine if the proposed design complies with the intent of the
density increase design standards. Once compliance with one or more standards
is determined, a proportionate increase in density can be considered. The
proportionate increase shall be based on the points earned by complying with
the density increase design standards in section
15-10-6 of this chapter, as determined by the planning commission. Once
compliance is determined by the planning commission to all requirements of this
chapter, the appropriate number of points will be added to the development to
determine the total number of units allowed in the development. The chart below
is used to determine the total number of units allowed:
 
                      Points Needed To                  Group Dwelling
Zone                  Reduce 1 Sq. Ft.  Maximum         Minimum Square
                      Of Lot Area Per   Points Possible Footage Per Unit
                      Unit From Minimum
R-2EC                 33.33 points      60              12,000 sq. ft. per
                                                        duplex
R-2                   11.11 points      180             14,000 sq. ft. per
                                                        duplex
                                                        7,500 sq. ft. for each
                                                        duplex, plus 5,000 sq.
R-3                   8.1 points        307             ft. for each dwelling
                                                        unit over 2 in each
                                                        building
                                                        7,500 sq. ft. for each
                                                        duplex, plus 4,000 sq.
R-3EC                 5.36 points       373             ft. for each dwelling
                                                        unit over 2 in each
                                                        building
                                                        7,500 sq. ft. for each
R-4, R-5, PI, C-2/CP-                                   duplex, plus 3,000 sq.
2, C-3/CP-3           3.125 points      480             ft. for each dwelling
                                                        unit over 2 in each
                                                        building
                                                        6,500 sq. ft. for each
                                                        triplex, plus 1,500 sq.
CBD                   1.25 points       480             ft. for each dwelling
                                                        unit over 3 in each
                                                        building
 
   B.   Each zone has a maximum number of points needed to reach the maximum
density. If fewer points than the maximum are obtained, then the maximum number
of units allowed is determined by dividing the number of points by the points
needed to reduce one square foot of lot area per unit. This number is then
subtracted from the minimum lot area needed per unit of the respective zone and
then used to calculate how many units are maximum given the lot area of the
development. (Example: The development is in an R-3 zone and 180 points are
earned. 180 [points earned] x 8.1 [R-3 points needed to reduce 1 square foot] =
1,458 [square foot reduction from minimum square footage]. This number is then
subtracted from 5,000 square feet [the minimum lot area per unit in the R-
3 zone] to give a sum of 3,542. The requirement for the project then is 7,500
square feet per building, plus 3,542 square feet for each dwelling unit over 2
in each building.)
   C.   The maximum number of units allowed shall not exceed the following
maximum square footage requirements for the respective zone:
 
Zone                             Neighborhood Group Dwelling
                                 Maximum Square Footage Per Unit
R-2EC                            10,000 sq. ft. per duplex (7.2 to 8.7 dua1)
R-2                              12,000 sq. ft. per duplex (6.2 to 7.2 dua1)
                                 7,500 sq. ft. for each duplex, plus 2,500 sq.
R-3                              ft. for each dwelling unit over 2 in each
                                 building (9.7 to 15.4 dua1)
                                 7,500 sq. ft. for each duplex, plus 2,500 sq.
R-3EC                            ft. for each dwelling unit over 2 in each
                                 building (11.1 to 18.3 dua1)
                                 7,500 sq. ft. for each duplex, plus 1,500 sq.
R-4, R-5, PI, C-2/CP-2, C-3/CP-3 ft. for each dwelling unit over 2 in each
                                 building (13.5 to 23 dua1)
                                 6,500 sq. ft. for each triplex, plus 550 sq.
CBD                              ft. for each dwelling unit over 3 in each
                                 building (32.57 to 52.74 dua1)
 
   Note:
      1.    Dwelling units per acre (dua) are for reference purposes only.
(Ord. 2004-28, 7-13-2004)
15-10-6: DENSITY INCREASE DESIGN STANDARDS FOR NEIGHBORHOOD GROUP DWELLINGS:
In order to receive increased density for neighborhood group dwellings, the
development shall comply with one or more of the following design features. The
three (3) main design considerations are architecture, parking and circulation,
and landscaping. The points awarded for successful use of these elements are in
parentheses at the end of each design option.
   A.   Architecture; Building Materials: All facades of each dwelling
structure exclusive of windows or doors have a minimum coverage of eighty
percent (80%) of exterior surface in either brick or stone. (60 points)
   B.   Development In Specified Zones: The development is located in the R-
3EC, C-2, CP-2, C-3, CP-3, or CBD zones. (80 points)
   C.   Parking And Circulation:
      1.   The development provides covered carports for two (2) cars for each
dwelling unit, or, if the property is within six hundred sixty feet (660') (1
block) of the CBD or mass transit stops/stations, for one and one-half (1.5)
cars for each dwelling unit. (25 points)
      2.   The circulation system of the development is designed to provide a
circulation hierarchy. The main circulation road does not have perpendicular
parking which backs out into the travel lane, but branches off into development
areas which have parking areas. The parking needs to be designated so that more
than one building shares the parking area. (80 points)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4103.png]
 
      3.   The development provides a garage which is attached to the dwelling
structure for two (2) cars for each unit, or, if the property is within six
hundred sixty feet (660') (1 block) of the CBD or mass transit stops/stations,
for an average of one and one-half (1.5) cars for each unit. (50 points)
      4.   Each dwelling unit has an attached garage that is side or rear
loaded for two (2) cars, or, if the property is within six hundred sixty feet
(660') (1 block) of the CBD or mass transit stops/stations, for an average of
one and one-half (1.5) cars for each unit. (70 points)
      5.   The development provides one covered parking stall for each unit
located below grade and under the habitable floor space of the building. (80
points)
      6.   The development provides below grade covered parking stalls under
the habitable floor space of the building for two (2) cars for each unit, or,
if the property is within six hundred sixty feet (660') (1 block) of the CBD or
mass transit stops/stations, for one and one-half (1.5) cars for each unit.
(120 points)
   D.   Landscaping:
      1.   The development has a unified landscaping design of trees, shrubs,
theme lighting, natural features, ponds, streams, fountains, waterfalls,
sculptures and other design elements which create interest and visual unity and
display creativity in providing usable open space for the residents of the
development. (50 points)
      2.   The landscaping plan for the development provides ten (10) 5-gallon
shrubs (4 of which are a flowering shrub) for each dwelling unit. (10 points)
      3.   The landscaping plan for the development provides three (3) 2-inch
caliper trees for each dwelling unit. (20 points)
      4.   The landscape plan provides additional five (5) gallon shrubs above
the ten (10) per unit and additional two inch (2") caliper trees above the
three (3) per unit. Additional points will be awarded at ten (10) points per
every five (5) additional shrubs per unit up to fifty (50) points maximum and
twenty (20) points per additional tree per unit up to one hundred (100) points
maximum.
      5.   The entire landscape design of the project takes into consideration
the need to conserve water. In addition to the principles of limiting turf
grass areas to high foot traffic areas and recreational areas, the plant
selections of shrubs and ground covers shall use drought tolerant plants. Shrub
areas shall be mulched to reduce watering demands. The irrigation system shall
be designed to water plants of similar water needs and avoid wasteful watering.
No more than ten percent (10%) of the entire landscaping surface area can be in
rocks or other nonliving ground cover. The ten percent (10%) limitation does
not include areas where the ground cover is rocks or other material and is
planted with plants spaced so they will completely cover the area in five (5)
years. (100 points)
      6.   The design retains natural settings along streams or rivers and
provides a trail and public easement, in cases where the city is willing to
accept it, for public access. (80 points)
      7.   In the CBD zone, the landscape plan provides two (2) 2-inch caliper
trees per three (3) units (20 points) or ten (10) 5-gallon shrubs per three (3)
units. (10 points)
   E.   Recreation Center:
      1.   A recreation building which provides the following amenities:
meeting room with a minimum floor area of fifteen (15) square feet per unit for
residents of the development, restroom facilities, manager's office, exercise/
spa area with equipment. (50 points)
      2.   Swimming pool with a minimum water surface area of six hundred (600)
square feet and a concrete deck of eight feet (8') wide around the pool. (70
points)
(Ord. 2015-23, 5-26-2015)
15-10-7: SUBMISSION AND APPROVAL PROCESS:
   A.   General Review Process:
      1.   Two Step Process: The group dwelling process consists of a two (2)
step review process. The first step is submission and review of a preliminary
plan conditional use permit. The purpose of this review is to determine general
compliance with the regulations of this chapter and the appropriateness of the
development through a conditional use permit review. The second step is
submission and review of a final plan. The purpose of the final review is to
ensure all conditions and details needed to build the project are met. For
group dwellings which are permitted uses (8 or less total units in the R-3 or
higher zone) compliance with sections
15-10-3,
15-10-4,
15-10-9 and
15-10-10 of this chapter are required for approval.
      2.   Group Dwelling Condominiums: If the development is to be developed
as a condominium, the condominium approval process can either occur together
with the general approval process or as a condominium conversion after
development approvals have been given.
      3.   PRUD Subdivision: A group dwelling may not be subdivided with
individual lots unless it complies with the conditions of final approval and
the requirements of title 14, chapter 5 of this code. Any subdivision of
existing group dwelling construction shall first comply with the requirements
of the building code, as adopted by title 16, chapter 2 of this code, or its
successor provisions, regarding construction in relation to property lines.
   B.   Preliminary Plan/Conditional Use Permit Submission: A complete
application for a conditional use permit for a group dwelling shall be
submitted to the planning office for review and comment. Once the plan has been
reviewed and found meeting the minimum site plan requirements for submittal, it
shall be scheduled for the next appropriate planning commission meeting for
review of the project to consider whether or not the request should be
approved. The minimum site plan requirements for the submittal shall include
the following accurate information:
      1.   The property boundary location, direction and length;
      2.   Contour lines at no greater than five foot (5') intervals if there
is more than a ten foot (10') grade difference on any portion of the site;
      3.   Existing vegetation, buildings, canals, ditches, streams, easements,
utility poles, or other existing features whether manmade or natural;
      4.   Any adjacent buildings, parking lots, streets, sidewalks and curbs
within thirty feet (30') of the property boundary;
      5.   The proposed location of buildings, parking, carports, driveways,
sidewalks and fences. These shall be dimensioned. The distance of these items
from property lines and from each other shall also be dimensioned;
      6.   A general landscaping plan which shows areas to be landscaped,
general types of landscaping to be used (i.e., trees, shrubs and grass), areas
to be preserved in their existing conditions, and any open space amenities;
      7.   A table which indicates total acreage of the development, total hard
surface, building coverage and landscape area square footage;
      8.   Preliminary building elevations of all four (4) sides and the types
of materials proposed to be used on the building;
      9.   Preliminary utility plan showing the manner in which water, sewer
and storm sewer services will be provided; and
      10.   If located in the sensitive area overlay zone, all necessary
reports or information required for compliance with the sensitive area overlay
zone.
   C.   Preliminary Plan Conditional Use Permit Review And Consideration: The
planning commission, subject to the requirements of this chapter, may approve,
approve with conditions or deny the preliminary plan/conditional use permit for
a group dwelling. In reviewing a preliminary plan/conditional use permit, the
planning commission shall consider if the group dwelling:
      1.   Meets the minimum lot area and design standard requirements of this
chapter;
      2.   Provides an adequate interior traffic circulation system which does
not adversely impact neighboring properties. In considering impacts to the
neighbors, such things as car lights, visibility of parking areas, screening,
access location and distance of parking areas from neighboring buildings shall
be considered;
      3.   Interrupts or restricts future local or community traffic patterns;
      4.   Site design is compatible with the topography and other existing
features of the site;
      5.   Architecture is compatible with the character of the neighborhood.
In determining compatibility, the planning commission shall consider types of
building materials, color, architectural relief to the face of the building,
roof style and height of the building;
      6.   Site design and building design does not adversely impact
neighboring properties. Such things as building location and orientation,
landscaping, screening, privacy and other specific site issues shall be
considered in determining if the neighborhood is adversely impacted beyond
permitted development possibilities;
      7.   Open space development meets the needs of the residents of the
development by providing private outdoor areas, common play areas and areas of
interest;
      8.   Meets the design requirements of this chapter for increased density.
   D.   Final Development Plan Submission: Once preliminary plan/conditional
use permit approval has been given, a final development plan shall be submitted
for review and approval. The final plan shall meet all the conditions
established when the preliminary plan/conditional use permit was approved. A
small lot group dwelling may submit for a conditional use permit/final approval
without going through the preliminary plan/conditional use review, provided the
submitted plan has all information needed as required for submittal for both
approval processes. Only upon approval of the final development plan shall the
conditional use become effective. The final development plan shall include the
following accurate information:
      1.   The property boundary with bearings and length of each property
line;
      2.   Final site grading plan at no more than two foot (2') contour
intervals showing all walls, cuts and fills proposed;
      3.   A detailed site plan showing the precise location and size of all
buildings and structures, parking areas, access lanes, canals, ditches,
streams, easements, utility poles, sidewalks, and public street, curb, gutter
and sidewalk;
      4.   A final landscape plan showing the location, types and sizes of all
plant material;
      5.   Final building elevations of all four (4) sides and the types of
materials proposed to be used on the building;
      6.   Detailed engineering plan including site drainage, street
improvements, and utility plans (showing location, sizes and slopes of lines);
and
      7.   All conditions established with the preliminary plan conditional use
permit approval.
   E.   Final Development Plan/Conditional Use Permit Approval: The planning
commission may approve, deny or approve with conditions the final development
plan/conditional use permit for the group dwelling. The planning commission
review of the final development plan/conditional use permit approval shall
consider the following:
      1.   Whether or not the issues addressed as conditions for preliminary
plan/conditional use permit have been adequately addressed.
      2.   Any changes from the preliminary plan/conditional use permit which
are now being proposed by the developer.
      3.   Compliance with all applicable requirements of this chapter and the
development code.
(Ord. 2011-39, 6-28-2011)
15-10-8: TIME LIMITATIONS:
A final development plan/conditional use permit shall be submitted for approval
within twelve (12) months of the preliminary plan/conditional use permit
approval. Failure to submit a final development plan/conditional use permit
within the year time period shall result in a revocation of the preliminary
approval/conditional use permit and the permit and approval shall be null and
void. Once a final development plan/conditional use permit has been approved,
the applicant has six (6) months to obtain a building permit and begin
construction. Failure to obtain a building permit within the six (6) month time
period shall result in a revocation of the approval of the project and all
approvals shall be null and void.
(Ord. 2004-28, 7-13-2004)
15-10-9: FINANCIAL GUARANTEE; INSTALLMENT OF IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Prior to issuance of any building permit on the property approved for a
group dwelling, a financial guarantee in accordance with section
15-13-23 of this title shall be required. The guarantee shall be sufficient to
cover the cost of all infrastructure, right of way improvements and landscaping
shown on the final approved plan. Unless otherwise approved pursuant to
subsection B of this section, landscaping and site improvements shall be
installed prior to occupancy of any structure within the group dwelling unless
inclement winter weather prevents their completion. In no case shall time for
completion be extended beyond June 1 immediately following the completion date.
If the development is to occur in phases, then the landscaping and other
improvements which make the phase functional shall be installed prior to
occupancy.
   B.   In a neighborhood group dwelling, the director, or the director's
designee, may approve occupancy of one or more of the buildings without
completion of all improvements, if all of the following required improvements
have been installed and determined to be in compliance with the approved plan
and an adequate financial guarantee is in place to ensure completion of the
remaining improvements:
      1.   All private roads and utilities within the group dwelling;
      2.   All landscaping within the common open space to be established for
the entirety of the group dwelling and along the private roads;
      3.   Entryway signage and associated landscaping;
      4.   All accessways and parking associated with the building to be
occupied; and
      5.   All landscaping around and associated with the building to be
occupied.
(Ord. 2004-28, 7-13-2004)
15-10-10: FAILURE TO COMPLY; CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
In case of failure or neglect to comply with any and all of the provisions of
this chapter and the conditions and stipulations herein established and as
specifically made applicable to a group dwelling, the building official shall
not authorize occupancy of any structure. Such failure or neglect shall be
cause for termination of the approval of the project. Such failure or neglect
to comply with the requirements and to maintain the buildings and premises in
accordance with the conditions or approval thereafter shall also be deemed to
be a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 2004-28, 7-13-2004)
15-10-11: REVOCATION OF CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
A conditional use permit may be revoked if any of the conditions or terms are
violated; however, the holder of the permit shall first be afforded an
opportunity to be heard before the planning commission and show cause as to why
the permit should not be revoked. A violation of a condition or term of a
permit shall constitute a violation of this code, and the revocation of a
permit shall not prohibit prosecution or any other legal action taken on
account of the violation. The decision of the planning commission to revoke a
conditional use permit may be appealed to the mayor, in writing, within fifteen
(15) days of the planning commission's decision.
(Ord. 2004-28, 7-13-2004)
15-10-12: VIOLATIONS:
Violations of any plan approved under this chapter or of the conditional use
permit issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, or failure to
comply with any requirements of this chapter, including any agreements and
conditions attached to any approved plan or permit, shall be considered a
violation of this title as provided in section
15-1-14 of this title.
(Ord. 2004-28, 7-13-2004)
CHAPTER 11
RESIDENTIAL INFILL DEVELOPMENTS
SECTION:
15-11-1: Purpose And Intent
15-11-2: Definition
15-11-3: General Regulations
15-11-4: Reduction Of Minimum Street Width
15-11-5: Review Criteria
15-11-6: Plan Submission
15-11-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The physical layout of the East Central Community and the R-1-6 zones in the
city reflect the typical patterns of early Utah cities. The typical ten (10)
acre blocks were divided into one acre parcels and designed to accommodate food
production. Subsequently, these lots have been divided and redivided leaving an
assortment of lots which have been bypassed by earlier development because of
the lack of adequate access or other physical constraints. This has resulted in
vacant and underutilized lots in the center of many blocks, some of which are
not developable under the existing development regulations. Some of these
vacant inner blocks have become a detriment to the surrounding neighborhoods
because of the growth of weeds, the collection of trash and by providing access
for criminal activity. For these reasons, the purpose of this chapter is to
encourage well designed residential development by recognizing the need to ease
the constraints discouraging such development of vacant inner blocks. This
chapter is intended to help preserve the low intensity residential character of
the neighborhood and provide additional housing options.
(Ord. 2015-52, 11-24-2015)
15-11-2: DEFINITION:
Residential infill is the development of residential dwelling units on vacant
or underutilized land located within the inner portion of a block which is
otherwise generally developed around the periphery. A residential infill
development may include parcels of land on the periphery of the block only if
these parcels are required to establish or improve access, or are required to
accomplish other design objectives necessary for a quality residential
development as determined by the planning commission. Residential infill
development is a conditional use and subject to the provisions of
chapter 7 of this title.
(Ord. 91-25, 7-25-1991)
15-11-3: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Ownership: The land involved in a residential infill development shall
be in one ownership or an application must be filed jointly by the owners of
all the property to be included in the development.
   B.   Subdivision Title: Any part of a residential infill development which
is proposed as a subdivision will be subject to the provisions of the
subdivision title.
   C.   Compatibility With General Plan: A residential infill development shall
be compatible with the intent and policies established in the general plan.
   D.   Conditional Use: As a conditional use, residential infill development
shall be subject to the provisions of chapter 7 of this title.
(Ord. 91-25, 7-25-1991)
15-11-4: REDUCTION OF MINIMUM STREET WIDTH:
Because of the historic development patterns which may have limited the
possibility of access to the inner block, the planning commission may approve
the use of alleys within a residential infill development under section
14-3-2 of this code, if the planning commission determines that the use of
residential infill alleys as public right of way is necessary for development
and the following conditions are met:
   A.   Purpose Of Chapter: The use of residential infill alleys substantially
meets the purpose of this chapter, as described in section
15-11-1 of this chapter;
   B.   Hindering Of Services: The reduction of the width of the public right
of way does not hinder the provision of public services by the city or create
situations which endanger the life or safety of residents;
   C.   Compliance With Fire Code: The reduction of the width of the public
right of way shall comply with the requirements of the Fire Code;
   D.   Standards: The design of the residential infill alley meets the
standards established by the City Engineer; and
   E.   Minimum Width: No residential infill alley shall have a width of less
than twenty feet (20').
(Ord. 91-25, 7-25-1991)
15-11-5: REVIEW CRITERIA:
   A.   Compatibility With Existing Neighborhood: The proposed use and site
plan for a residential infill development shall be compatible with the
character of the site, adjacent properties and the surrounding neighborhood.
      1.   In determining the compatibility of the proposed density and the
number of units per structure, the Planning Commission shall consider among
other things the density of the surrounding neighborhood, number of dwelling
units in existing structures and setbacks from existing structures.
      2.   In determining the compatibility of the site and building plan, the
Planning Commission shall consider:
         a.   Compatibility With Surrounding Neighborhood: The Planning
Commission shall consider the relationship of landscaping, screening, parking
location, traffic circulation, building design (e.g., mass, height,
architectural style, site work needed to place the building on the lot),
building materials, color and location of uses which have the potential of
emitting light and noise to the existing neighborhood.
         b.   Compatibility Of Site Design: The Planning Commission shall
consider among other things landscaping, parking location, traffic circulation,
building design (e.g., mass, height, architectural style, site work needed to
place the building on the lot), building materials and color and their
relationship to the general site design.
      3.   In determining the compatibility of any proposed demolition of
residential structures to accommodate the construction of a residential infill
development, the Planning Commission shall consider among other things the
purpose for the demolition, the effect such demolition may have on the
surrounding neighborhood and the effect the demolition may have on the
character of the block.
   B.   Site Development Standards:
      1.   Minimum Lot Width, Lot Size And Yard Setbacks; Single-Family And
Two-Family Dwellings: The minimum lot width, lot size and yard setbacks for
single-family and two-family dwellings shall be the same as required in the
zone in which the residential infill development is located.
      2.   Site Development Options; Four Or More Detached Dwelling Units:
         a.   Zero Side Yard; Single-Family Dwellings: Any subdivision which is
proposing to use zero side yards is subject to the following provisions:
            (1)   The remaining side yard shall not be less than seventy five
percent (75%) of the sum of the required two (2) side yards of the zone in
which it is located;
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4106.png]
            (2)   No window, door or any other similar opening shall be
installed in the building or any accessory building along the zero side yard;
            (3)   The minimum yard setbacks of the underlying zone shall be
required around the perimeter of the zero side yard development;
            (4)   The entire subdivision shall be designed to be compatible
with the zero side yard provisions of this Chapter. In no instance shall a
structure not utilizing a zero side yard be set back less than ten feet (10')
from a structure which is utilizing a zero side yard.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4108.png]
            (5)   All lots adjacent to a zero side yard structure shall have a
recorded four foot (4') wide easement which provides access for maintenance of
the structure built on the zero side yard; and
            (6)   The buildable area for each lot shall be designated on the
approved final subdivision linen.
         b.   Reduced Lot Area, Lot Width And Yard Setbacks For Single- Family
And Two-Family Dwellings:
            (1)   The planning commission may consider a reduction of the
minimum lot area, lot width and yard setbacks for single-family and two-family
dwellings if they determine the subdivision plan is of exceptional quality and
design. In determining this, the planning commission shall consider the
proposed site plan in relation to: public services and facilities, surrounding
residential density and land use, access to the site, topographic
considerations, proposed amenities, and other related conditions.
            (2)   In no instances shall the planning commission grant a
reduction of greater than twenty five percent (25%) of the minimum lot area,
lot width or yard setbacks required in the underlying zone.
      3.   Minimum Lot Size And Yard Setbacks For Multiple-Family Dwellings Or
Group Dwellings:
         a.   Minimum lot size, two (2) acres.
         b.   Minimum yard setbacks, same as required for multiple-family
dwellings or group dwellings in the underlying zone.
   C.   Density: Residential infill developments shall be restricted to the
density permitted in the zone in which the development is to be located.
However, the planning commission may approve a density which is greater than
the density allowed in the underlying zone, if the planning commission
determines the site plan is of exceptional quality and design considering: the
identity and character created by the development, the preservation of
additional open space which encourages the interaction of residents, the use of
design features such as fountains, plazas, theme lighting, recreational
facilities and decorative entrances, and the use of landscaping, beyond the
requirements of this code, which provides additional buffering between the
residential infill development and adjacent uses. The planning commission may
award a density within the range of eleven (11) to fourteen (14) units per acre
in the R-2EC zone and twenty (20) to twenty four (24) units per acre in the R-
3EC zone.
(Ord. 91-25, 7-25-1991)
15-11-6: PLAN SUBMISSION:
The developer of a residential infill development shall submit development
plans to the department prior to review by the planning commission. The
preliminary development plans shall include:
   A.   Site Layout: A generalized layout of the site including building types,
locations sizes, height, number of residential units, parking, areas to be
landscaped, and location of property lines and buildings on adjacent lots; and
   B.   Building Elevations: Building elevations showing the design of the
structure and materials to be used.
(Ord. 91-25, 7-25-1991; amd. Ord. 2001-32, 6-5-2001, eff. 6-30-2001)
CHAPTER 12
PARKING AND LOADING SPACE, TRAFFIC AND ACCESS REGULATIONS
SECTION:
15-12-1: Provision, Applicability And Maintenance; Responsibility Of Owner Or
Operator
15-12-2: Procedure And Administration
15-12-3: Number Of Parking Spaces Required
15-12-4: Handicap Parking Requirements
15-12-5: Calculations Of Parking Space Requirements
15-12-6: Stacking Space For Drive-Throughs, Parking Attendants Or Paid Parking
Collection Devices
15-12-7: Overlapping And Shared Parking Reductions
15-12-8: Parking Area Location, Dimensions And Design
15-12-9: Parking Lot
15-12-10: Walkways
15-12-11: Vehicular Access Location And Size
15-12-12: Off Street Truck Loading Design
15-12-13: Restrictions
15-12-14: Recreational Vehicle And Accessory Parking
15-12-1: PROVISION, APPLICABILITY AND MAINTENANCE; RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER OR
OPERATOR:
Off street parking shall be provided with any use generating demand for parking
according to this chapter. Owners or operators of property shall maintain
attractive and convenient parking, ample area for fire lanes, maneuvering, snow
storage, retention of drainage, landscaping and public safety. "Provide and
maintain" also means that the off street parking area shall remain free from
deterioration, chuckholes, and weeds.
(Ord. 99-38, 10-19-1999)
15-12-2: PROCEDURE AND ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Development of a land use on a parcel of property shall require parking
to be in place. The design and location of the parking areas shall be in
compliance with the terms of this section. The proposed method of complying
with this section shall be indicated on all plans required to be submitted to
the City as a part of an application and on any site development plan submitted
for a building permit.
   B.   When any addition to or enlargement of an existing building or use
increases the building or the developed area of the use or the parking
requirements of the building or structure, the parking requirements of this
Code must be met. Moreover, if the addition, enlargement, or change in use
increases the building or the developed area of the use, or the required
parking by twenty percent (20%) or more, then the parking for the entire
building shall be brought into conformance with all requirements of this Code,
including required number of spaces, access, landscaping, lighting, screening,
and other applicable standards.
   C.   Any change in the use of a building or lot which increases the off
street parking as required under this Code, shall be unlawful and a violation
of this Code until such time as the off street parking complies with the
provisions of this Code.
   D.   Nothing in this Code shall be deemed to deprive the owners or operators
of property generating a need for parking the right to maintain control over
such property devoted to off street parking not inconsistent with this Code or
to charge whatever fees they deem appropriate to off street parking users.
(Ord. 99-38, 10-19-1999)
15-12-3: NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES REQUIRED:
   A.   Requirements: All uses shall provide the number of off street parking
spaces listed below. Buildings with more than one use shall provide parking
required for each use.
 
Use Number Of Spaces Required
Dwelling units:                            
                                          2 side by side parking spaces. If
                                          more than 2 domestic staff are
                                          employed on a regular basis on the
                                          premises of a dwelling or other
                                          residential facility, 1 additional
 Single-family                           parking stall is required for each
                                          staff person over 2. If such domestic
                                          staff are employed on a shift basis,
                                          and no more than 2 staff persons are
                                          at the residence during any 1 shift,
                                          then no additional parking shall be
                                          required
 2 to 4 units                            2 side by side parking spaces for
                                          each dwelling unit
                                          2 stalls per unit. In the CBD and
                                          properties within 660 feet (1 block)
                                          of the CBD or within 660 feet of mass
 More than 4 units                       transit stops/stations measured by
                                          legal public walking distance from
                                          property line to transit stop, then
                                          1.5 stalls per unit
                                          1 space per unit for the first 30
                                          units, 0.75 space per elderly unit
 Multiple-unit housing for seniors       for the next 20 units, and 0.5 space
                                          per unit for each unit in excess of
                                          50 in the development
Group living:                              
 Assisted living facility                1 stall per 3 bed capacity
 Bed and breakfast                       2 stalls for dwelling, plus 1 stall
                                          per guestroom
 Boarding house                          0.75 stall per person to whom a room
                                          is rented
 Nursing homes                           1 stall per 2.5 bed capacity
 Protective housing facility             1 stall per 500 square feet of
                                          building
 Rehabilitation treatment facility       1 stall per 400 square feet of floor
                                          area
                                          1 space per unit for the first 30
                                          units, 0.75 space per elderly unit
 Retirement home                         for the next 20 units, and 0.5 space
                                          per unit for each unit in excess of
                                          50 in the development
 Sororities, fraternities                1 stall per 2 beds
 Transitional housing facility           1 stall per bedroom
Commercial:                                
 Automobile service, repair and sales:    
  Auto repair or body shop              6 stalls per repair bay of which 4
                                          stalls per bay may park tandem
  Automobile sales                      1 stall per 100 square feet of office
                                          area
  Car wash, full service                5 stalls per bay plus required
                                          stacking spaces
  Car wash, self-service                3 stacking spaces in front of each
                                          bay
                                          1 stall per 200 square feet of floor
  Convenience store                     area plus stacking for drive-up
                                          window
  Gun range                             2 stalls per firing station plus 1
                                          stall per employee
  Service station, auto lube center     2 stalls per service bay plus
                                          required stacking spaces
Retail, entertainment and office:          
  Banks (including branch and drive-      1 stall per 300 square feet plus
 through)                                required stacking space for drive-
                                          through
 Dining and drinking establishments      1 stall per 75 square feet of
                                          building
  If dancing and/or entertainment is    1 stall per 50 square feet of
    provided                              building
 Funeral home, mortuaries and            1 stall per 300 square feet of
  crematoriums                            building
                                          1 stall per 300 square feet plus
 General commercial and retail sales     requirement for storage areas listed
                                          above
  Health and athletic clubs, aerobics,    1 stall per 125 square feet of
 recreational amusement, and             building
  entertainment facilities
 Hotels and motels                       1 stall per room
 Medical offices, clinics                1 stall per 150 square feet of
                                          building
  Office (including finance, real estate, 1 stall per 300 square feet of
 business professional offices, and      building plus 1 space for each
  telecommunication facilities with       company owned vehicle
  employees)
                                          1 stall per 1,000 square feet for the
 Rental with on site warehouse storage   first 10,000 square feet then 1 stall
                                          per 10,000 square feet for the
                                          remaining area
 Restaurants:                             
                                          1 space per 75 square feet of
  Fast food with drive-through          building but not less than 5 stalls
                                          plus required stacking
  Serving food and beverages for        1 space per 100 square feet of
    consumption inside a building         building
 Stadiums or arenas                      1 stall per 5 fixed seats
 Theaters                                1 stall per 40 square feet of gross
                                          floor area in the main seating area
Public, quasi-public and institutional:    
 Adult daycare                           1 stall per each employee, plus 1
                                          space per 5 clients
 Community correctional facility (e.g.,  1 stall per 5 bed capacity
  jail, youth detention, prison)
  Community service facilities (e.g.,
  Post Office, courts, community health
  building). All other community service  1 stall per 250 square feet of
 facilities shall be determined by the   building
  City based on an analysis of parking
  requirements for similar uses or on
  anticipated parking demands
 Daycare or nursery                      1 stall per each employee, plus 1
                                          space per 5 children
 Hospitals                               1 stall per 2 bed capacity
 Library, museum or gallery              1 stall per 300 square feet of
                                          building
 Places of worship                       1 stall per 40 square feet in primary
                                          meeting room
  Public assembly and civic association   1 stall per 40 square feet of gross
 halls (includes all facilities used for floor area in the primary meeting
  receptions and conventions)             room or assembly area
 Schools:                                 
  Grades K - 9                          2 stalls per classroom
  High schools                          10 stalls per classroom
  School auditoriums                    1 stall per 40 square feet in
                                          auditorium
  Public or private college or trade or 1 stall per 500 square feet of
    vocational school                     building
  Housing associated with schools       Number of stalls for type of school
                                          plus 1 stall per 2 beds
                                          1 stall per 300 square feet of office
 Utilities                               area plus 1 stall for each company
                                          vehicle
Manufacturing and industrial uses:         
 Contractors' yards, business services   1 stall per 500 square feet of
                                          building
  Junk or salvage yards, recycling or     1 stall per employee; minimum of 4
 processing centers, and towing or       stalls for customers
  impound lots
 Laboratories and research and           1 stall per 300 square feet
  development
 Manufacturing, processing or assembly   1 stall per 500 square feet of
                                          building
 Self-service storage facilities         1 stall per 5,000 square feet of
                                          building
 Sheltered workshop                      1 stall per 1,000 square feet of work
                                          area
 Warehouse with freight movement         1 stall per employee
 Wholesale sales                         1 stall per 500 square feet of sales
                                          area
 
   B.   Determination Of Requirements For Uses Not Listed: Off street parking
and loading spaces for all land uses not herein specified shall be in accord
with probable estimates of need based on an analysis of parking requirements
for similar uses or on anticipated parking demands and shall be determined by
the Director after study and recommendation which should include all relevant
factors, including, but not limited to:
      1.   Vehicle occupancy studies;
      2.   Comparable requirements from other relevant municipalities;
      3.   Requirements of comparable uses listed in this chapter;
      4.   Suitable and adequate means will exist for provision of public,
community, group or common facilities;
      5.   Provision of adequate loading facilities and for a system for
distribution and pick up of goods;
      6.   Use is in the interest of the area to be affected and in the
interests of the City at large;
      7.   Use will not be detrimental to adjacent properties or improvements
in the vicinity to the area; and
      8.   That the proposed use will not confer any special privilege or
benefit on the properties or improvements in the area, which privilege or
benefit is not conferred upon similarly situated properties elsewhere in the
City.
(Ord. 2018-28, 10-16-2018; amd. Ord. 2020-24, 6-23-2020)
15-12-4: HANDICAP PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Designation Of Spaces: The required number of parking spaces designated
for the handicapped shall be provided according to this section. The spaces
required by this section shall be allocated from the required parking stalls of
this chapter. In no way does this designation apply to single-family homes.
   B.   Required Spaces: The required number of parking spaces intended for the
physically handicapped shall be provided at a rate based on the following:
 
Total Parking Spaces Minimum Required Number
In Lot Or Garage     Of Accessible Spaces
   1 - 25   1
   26 - 50  2
   51 - 75  3
   76 - 100 4
   101 - 1505
   151 - 2006
   201 - 3007
   301 - 4008
   401 - 5009
   501 - 1,02 percent of total spaces
   Over 1,0020 spaces plus 1 space for every 100 spaces, or fraction
               thereof, over 1,000
 
Notwithstanding the chart above, medical offices shall provide ten percent
(10%) of their parking spaces as accessible parking, hospitals shall provide
twenty percent (20%) of their parking spaces as accessible parking and
apartment buildings shall provide two percent (2%) of their parking spaces as
accessible parking. The required spaces shall be located to provide the least
travel distance to accessible facilities served. They shall be located, where
feasible, to allow those parking in the spaces to access the associated
building without crossing vehicle traffic area. The distance between the most
remote principal entrance of a building and any one space shall not exceed two
hundred feet (200').
   C.   Size: Required spaces shall be not less than eight feet (8') wide and
shall have an adjacent access aisle not less than eight feet (8') wide for the
first access aisle then five feet (5') wide for each additional stall aisle.
Two (2) adjacent spaces may share a common access aisle. Such aisles shall
provide an accessible route of travel to the building or facility entrance.
Boundaries of the required parking spaces and aisles shall be marked to
identify the use of such spaces.
   D.   Signage: Every parking space required by this section shall be
identified by a sign centered from three feet (3') to five feet (5') above the
ground at the head of the required space. The sign shall be marked with the
international symbol of access. Such signage shall not be less than twelve
inches (12") in height. The symbol shall be proportioned according to the
figure below. The lettering shall be not less than one inch (1") nor more than
two inches (2") in height and shall be on a background of contrasting value.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4110.png]
 
   E.   Surface: Parking spaces and access aisles shall slope not more than one
inch (1") in forty eight inches (48") and shall be firm, stable, smooth and
slip resistant.
(Ord. 99-38, 10-19-1999)
15-12-5: CALCULATIONS OF PARKING SPACE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   When measurements determining number of required parking spaces result
in a fractional space, any fraction up to one-half (1/2) shall be disregarded,
and fractions including one-half (1/2) and over shall require one parking
space. The off street parking space required for two (2) or more uses shall be
the sum of the standards of all the various uses.
   B.   Unless otherwise noted in section
15-12-3 of this chapter floor areas used in calculating the required number of
parking spaces shall be gross floor areas of the building calculated from the
exterior outside wall without regard to specific inside use(s). In mixed use
facilities calculations shall be based on gross square footage of each
identifiable use within the building and the total square footage of each
identifiable use shall be the same as the gross floor area calculated from
outside wall to outside wall.
(Ord. 99-38, 10-19-1999)
15-12-6: STACKING SPACE FOR DRIVE-THROUGHS, PARKING ATTENDANTS OR PAID PARKING
COLLECTION DEVICES:
   A.   Requirements: The applicant's plans shall show the location, size and
dimensions of all such facilities. The plans shall follow the stacking space
schedule and shall demonstrate that such facilities will not result in the
stacking of vehicles on public rights of way, and that an adequate area is
reserved for the safe transfer of the motor vehicle between any parking
attendant or valet and the driver of the vehicle. In no event shall parking
attendants, paid parking collection devices, drive- throughs or areas
associated with such uses be located in a public street or right of way, or
interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic on a public street, sidewalk or
other right of way.
      1.   Drive-through facilities shall be located in side or rear locations
that do not interrupt direct pedestrian access along connecting pedestrian
frontage.
      2.   The length of stacking spaces shall be twenty feet (20').
   B.   Stacking Space Schedule:
 
Use Minimum Number     Measured From
    Of Stacking Spaces
Attended parking lot or   3                       Attendant
structure
Automated pay for parking 3                       Ticket disbursement machine
lot or structure
Automated teller machine  3                       Teller
Bank teller lane          4                       Teller or window
Car wash stall, automatic 6                       Entrance
Car wash stall, self-     3                       Entrance
service
Gasoline pump             3                       Each end of pump island
Restaurant drive-through  8 (may be split between Order box
                          multiple order boxes)
                                                  Determined by the city of
Other                                            Ogden's community and
                                                  economic development director
 
(Ord. 99-38, 10-19-1999; amd. Ord. 2001-32, 6-5-2001; Ord. 2016-17, 3-15-2016)
15-12-7: OVERLAPPING AND SHARED PARKING REDUCTIONS:
   A.   Overlapping Parking: The use of one parking stall for two (2) uses on
separate lots in a commercial or manufacturing zone is allowed if:
      1.   Both uses are nonresidential.
      2.   Either use is no further than five hundred feet (500') from the
parking area measured from property line to property line.
      3.   It can be established the uses characteristically result in peak
accumulations of parked vehicles at different hours, days or seasons.
      4.   Appropriate signage is posted in the parking lot and building which
states the location of the parking.
      5.   All participating parties enter into a signed written agreement
which shall be recorded with the participating properties at the Weber County
Recorder's Office and copy of such recorded document filed with the Community
Development Department. The document shall state the hours of operation for
each use, and the number and location of stalls which will overlap. If at any
time the agreement lapses, the businesses shall provide sufficient individual
parking to meet the ordinance requirements.
      6.   In addition to the preceding provisions, schools, churches and
public buildings in residential zones may allow shared parking arrangements, as
a permitted use, with commercial or manufacturing uses in another zone provided
that such uses either face across the street or are adjacent to the use which
is sharing the parking.
   B.   Shared Parking: Shared parking (the use of 1 stall for more than 2 uses
on the same lot as the parking space) in a commercial or manufacturing zone is
allowed if it can be established the uses characteristically result in peak
accumulations of parked vehicles at different hours, days or seasons.
   C.   Parking Reduction: Parking reduction of ten percent (10%) of the
required parking for more than two (2) uses on the same lot is allowed if it
can be shown that there are mixed parking demand uses, (e.g., residential and
retail, office and retail, residential and office, restaurant and office) or
the number of commercial uses exceeds ten (10) individual businesses on the
lot.
(Ord. 99-38, 10-19-1999)
15-12-8: PARKING AREA LOCATION, DIMENSIONS AND DESIGN:
   A.   Location: Parking spaces shall be on the same lot with the main
building, or in case of buildings and parking in commercial or manufacturing
zones, the parking may be located no further than five hundred feet (500') from
the building for which it provides parking.
   B.   Hard Surface: All required commercial and manufacturing stalls and
residential developments over two (2) units shall have the parking stalls
delineated on the hard surface.
   C.   Streets, Ways And Alleys: Public streets, ways, or alleys shall not be
used for vehicle storage or for providing the required parking spaces.
   D.   Design: The parking area for all uses except single-family residential
or duplexes shall be designed so those vehicles do not back out into the public
right-of-way or use the public right-of-way for their parking maneuvers. The
parking area shall be designed so that vehicle backing and turning movements
will not conflict or obstruct public sidewalks or public streets.
   E.   Orientation Of Drive Aisles: Potential conflicts with on-site
pedestrian circulation shall be minimized by orienting drive aisles
perpendicular to the destination use.
   F.   Yards: For all uses permitted in the zone districts, none of the
required front yard setback area of the respective zones shall be used for
parking, but shall be completely landscaped, except access across and over the
required front yard setback is allowed to the side or rear yards. In the case
of multiple-family dwellings and nonresidential uses in a residential zone, not
more than fifty percent (50%) of the required side and rear yards shall be used
for parking or vehicular access lanes. Commercial and manufacturing zones may
use the side and rear yard building setbacks for parking or access unless the
property line is next to a residential zone and then the required setback on
that side which adjoins the residential zone shall not be used for parking or
access but shall be landscaped and meet the screening requirements of
subsection 15-4-5F of this title.
   G.   Parking Space And Driveway Surface: Driveways and parking spaces
required by this title shall be developed and maintained according to the
following standards:
      1.   Any vehicle driveway or accessway that leads from property onto a
public street shall be paved with the materials described in this subsection G.
      2.   Materials used for driveway and parking areas for manufacturing,
commercial or multi-family residential uses are limited to the following:
         a.   Concrete: Minimum four inch (4") depth that covers the entire
area used for access, maneuvering, and parking;
         b.   Asphalt: Minimum two and one-half inch (21/2") depth that covers
the entire area used for access, maneuvering, and parking; or
         c.   Masonry or stone pavers rated for vehicle weight that cover the
entire area used for access, maneuvering, and parking.
      3.   Materials used for driveway and parking areas for any single family
or duplex use are limited to the following:
         a.   Concrete;
         b.   Asphalt;
         c.   Sod block; or
         d.   Masonry or stone pavers rated for vehicle weight.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4112.png]
 
      4.   Driveway and parking spaces for single family and duplex uses can be
formed as continuous pad or as drive strips of the same materials listed in
subsection G3 of this section and designed to accommodate the wheels of the
vehicle.
         a.   Each drive strip should be between sixteen inches (16") and
twenty four inches (24") wide.
         b.   The interior space between the drive strips may be filled with
landscaping or gravel, but not dirt or road base.
         c.   Road-base, crushed concrete, gravel, or similar materials are not
allowed for required parking pads, driveways or drive strips.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4116.png]
 
      5.   Materials used for driveway and parking areas in the Open Space Zone
are limited to the following:
         a.   Concrete: Minimum four inch (4") depth that covers the entire
area used for access, maneuvering, and parking.
         b.   Asphalt: Minimum two and one-half inch (21/2") depth that covers
the entire area used for access, maneuvering, and parking.
         c.   Masonry or stone pavers rated for vehicle weight; or
         d.   Permeable materials such as gravel, crushed concrete, or stone;
provided that compacted soil or road-base alone are not considered allowed
permeable surfaces.
      6.   Parking spaces shall have appropriate bumper guards or curbs where
necessary as determined by the site plan review, to protect adjoining property
owners or persons using a sidewalk.
      7.   Paved areas may not drain onto adjacent properties nor is surface
drainage allowable to cross the public sidewalk.
   H.   Parking Stall Design And Maintenance: Parking stall design and
maintenance of required off-street parking shall be subject to the following
requirements:
      1.   Parking Space Size: Unless specifically designated for small car
parking, each ninety degree (90°) space shall encompass not less than one
hundred fifty three (153) square feet of net area. Each space shall be not less
than 8.5 feet wide and eighteen feet (18') long. Small car ninety degree (90°)
spaces shall be not less than one hundred twenty eight (128) square feet of net
area. Minimum width of a designated small car space shall be not less than
eight feet (8') in length and not less than sixteen feet (16') long. Parking
spaces for grocery, supermarket or convenience stores shall not be less than
nine feet (9') wide.
      2.   Small Car Parking: A maximum of thirty percent (30%) of required
spaces may be compact car size in lots containing twenty (20) or more spaces,
provided such spaces are clearly marked.
      3.   Parking Modules: Parking lot designs shall have the following
minimum dimensions:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4114.png]
 
   STANDARD SIZE PARKING MODULES
 
  A           B       C         D     E       F
  Stall Width Stall   Stall     Aisle Wall    Interlock
  Parallel    Depth   Depth To  Width To Wall To
  To Aisle    To Wall Interlock               Interlock
45 degrees:                        
 81/2' stall 12.0 17.0 15.0 13.0 47.0 43.0
 9' stall    12.7 17.0 15.0 12.0 46.0 42.0
60 degrees:                        
 81/2' stall 9.8  18.5 17.0 17.0 55.0 52.0
 9' stall    10.4 18.5 17.0 16.0 54.0 51.0
75 degrees:                        
 81/2' stall 8.8  19.0 18.0 23.0 61.0 59.0
 9' stall    9.3  19.0 18.0 22.0 60.0 58.0
90 degrees:                        
 81/2' stall 8.5  18.0 18.0 25.0 61.0 61.0
 9' stall    9.0  18.0 18.0 24.0 60.0 60.0
 
   COMPACT SIZE PARKING MODULES
 
  A           B       C         D     E       F
  Stall Width Stall   Stall     Aisle Wall    Interlock
  Parallel    Depth   Depth To  Width To Wall To
  To Aisle    To Wall Interlock               Interlock
45 degrees:
 9.0' stall 11.3 15.5 13.5 13.0 44.0 40.0
60 degrees:
 8.0' stall 9.2  16.8 15.3 14.0 48.0 45.0
75 degrees:
 8.0' stall 8.3  17.0 16.3 17.0 51.0 50.0
90 degrees:
 8.0' stall 8.0  16.0 16.0 20.0 52.0 52.0
 
(Ord. 2018-28, 10-16-2018)
15-12-9: PARKING LOT:
   A.   Landscaping And Screening: Whenever parking spaces for five (5) or more
cars and their associated access driveways are located in a residential zone,
screening is required to protect residential properties from potential impacts
of lights, noise, increased pedestrian and automobile traffic, invasions of
privacy and physical intrusions on property. Based on the applicant's site
plan, the department will determine the potential impacts resulting from
location, site design and layout as they relate to the areas of concern
identified in table A of this section. The nature of surrounding topography may
be considered in determining whether impacts exist. The applicant may then
choose from among those screening options in table A of this section that will
mitigate all of the identified impacts. The specified standard for each option
is identified in table B of this section. Determinations may be appealed to the
planning commission. If there are no potential impacts, screening is not
required. The fencing and landscaping required under this section shall be
maintained and replaced as needed in order to provide an effective screen.
Whenever a fence abuts parking, bumper guards shall be required, set back a
minimum of two and one-half feet (21/2') from the fence, in order to protect
the fence from traffic. Landscaping shall be protected from automobile
overhang.
   TABLE A: SCREENING OPTIONS
 
IMPACTS ON ADJACENT RESIDENTIALLY ZONED PROPERTY
Area Of  Lights         Noise       Privacy      Objectionable   Access
Concern                                          Views           Restriction
Dumpster C1,D, E, or H1 C1,E, or H1 C1,D,E or H1 C1, D, E, G, or D,E,F,G,H or I
                                                 H1
 
      1.      This is an option only when abutting residentially zoned property
is vacant or has substantial existing vegetation. In either instance the time
needed for growth of vegetation will not be detrimental to the buffering needs.
   TABLE B: SCREENING OPTION DESCRIPTIONS
 
Option Screening Type Purpose And Standards
                                         Screens vehicles in parking lot and
                                         decreases asphalt appearance, except
                                         when difference in topography offsets
A 4' berm                                screening. Any berm shall have a
                                         minimum height of 4' and a stabilized
                                         side slope of no greater than 3 to 1
                                         ratio of run to rise. Berms shall be a
                                         minimum width of 12'.
                                         Screens parking lot and buffers
                                         building. Evergreen shrubs shall be of
                                         a locally adapted species such as
                                         pyracantha, yew, juniper or evergreen
                                         euonymus. Shrubs shall be a minimum of
B Berm with shrub landscaping sufficient 5 gallons when planted and shall be
  to achieve a 4' high screen            expected to reach a height of at least
                                         4' within 5 years of planting. Shrubs
                                         shall be planted at a maximum of 5' on
                                         center. The berm shall have a
                                         stabilized side slope no greater than
                                         3 to 1 ratio of run to rise.
                                         Screens parking lot except when
                                         difference in topography offsets
                                         screening and buffers building which
                                         is close to property line. Shrubs
                                         shall be of a locally adapted
                                         evergreen species such as arborvitae
                                         (Thuja occidentalis or orientalis),
C Evergreen hedge with an ultimate       juniper (Juniperus virginiana or
  height of at least 5'                  chinensis), pyracantha, yew (Taxus
                                         media), or evergreen euonymus
                                         (Euonymus japonica), with a 5 gallon
                                         minimum planted size, and shall be
                                         expected to reach a height of at least
                                         5' within 5 years of planting. Shrubs
                                         shall be planted at a minimum of 5' on
                                         center.
                                         Screens ground level lights, noise,
                                         objectionable views, provides privacy
                                         and access restriction, and texturing
  A 6' tall solid fence of either wood,  provides aesthetic relief. "Decorative
  vinyl or chain link with interlocking  masonry" shall include split-face
D opaque vinyl or a 6' tall decorative   block or brick, brick, fluted block,
  masonry wall with textured surfacing   or masonry wall with stucco finish,
  facing residential use                 but shall not include openings in the
                                         wall surface below a height of 6'.
                                         Bumper guards set back a minimum of
                                         21/2' from the fence shall be required
                                         when fence abuts parking.
  A 6' wide landscaped strip and either  Screens ground level lights, higher
  a 6' tall solid fence of either wood,  level lights, noise, objectionable
  vinyl or chain link with interlocking  views; provides privacy, access
E opaque vinyl, or a 6' tall decorative  restriction and additional noise
  masonry wall with textured surfacing   mitigation. Trees shall be a minimum
  facing residential use                 of 2" caliper in size, spaced at a
                                         minimum of 20' on center.
                                         Provides security and access
                                         restriction. Used only when these are
F 6' chainlink fence                     the major impacts. Bumper guards, set
                                         back a minimum of 21/2' from the
                                         fence, shall be required when fence
                                         abuts parking.
                                         Provides security and access
                                         restriction. Inserts help screen
                                         objectionable views. Inserts shall be
G 6' chainlink fence with inserts in the of a durable opaque material and shall
  fence fabric                           be kept in good repair. Bumper guards,
                                         set back a minimum of 21/2' from the
                                         fence, shall be required when fence
                                         abuts parking.
                                         Screens ground level and higher level
                                         lights, provides security and access
                                         restriction. Vegetative screen
                                         provides additional noise mitigation
                                         and screens objectionable views. Trees
                                         and shrubs shall be of a locally
                                         adapted evergreen species such as
H 6' open fence with evergreen trees and arborvitae, juniper, pyracantha,
  shrubs                                 evergreen euonymus, pines or spruces,
                                         with a planted size of at least 15
                                         gallons for trees and 5 gallons for
                                         shrubs, and shall be expected to reach
                                         a height of at least 5' within 5 years
                                         of planting. Trees shall be planted at
                                         20' on center and shrubs at 5' on
                                         center.
                                         Provides some access restriction. Used
                                         when this is the only impact from the
I Ornamental wrought iron fence or other proposed development. Bumper guards,
  decorative see through fencing         set back a minimum of 21/2' from the
                                         fence, shall be required when fence
                                         abuts parking.
 
   B.   Parking Lot Perimeter Landscaping: Parking lots with four (4) or more
spaces shall be buffered from public streets. At least seventy percent (70%) of
the length of the parking lot fronting the street shall be screened to a height
of thirty six inches (36"). To screen the parking area, the landscaped area may
either be bermed, planted with shrubs or evergreen trees, or be a decorative
masonry wall of three feet (3') in height.
   C.   Parking Lot Interior Landscaping:
      1.   Required parking areas shall install landscaped islands with raised
curbs. Islands shall not be placed over asphalt or concrete. A curb shall be
provided along all interior roadways to prevent vehicular intrusion into
landscape areas. Whenever a landscaped island under this provision is required
it shall be a minimum width of nine feet (9') and the length of the parking
stalls it abuts. Landscaped islands shall be required for each of the following
conditions:
         a.   The end of each row of stalls if the row exceeds ten (10) parking
stalls in length.
         b.   A row of parking has over twenty (20) parking stalls. One island
shall be placed between every twenty (20) stalls in the row. In manufacturing
zones, if the parking is located behind the building and is not in public view
from the street, or if in the DDR zone along 600 West from 2nd Street to 300
North, 700 West from 1st Street to 300 North, 800 West from 1st Street to 400
North, 930 West from 2nd Street to 200 North, 1000 West from 2nd Street to 200
North and 1070 West from 2nd Street to 200 North, the island placed between
every twenty (20) stalls can be relocated and placed as one large island. The
area for the large island shall be the cumulative square footage of the
separate islands. Such combined area shall be located at the entrance to the
row of parking which is most visible from the public street.
         c.   To define parking lot entrances.
         d.   To define the main interior circulation road pattern.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4118.png]
 
      2.   When landscaped islands are required, a minimum of one deciduous
tree shall be planted in each island. This tree requirement is in addition to
the number of trees required on the remainder of the lot. The surface of the
island shall be planted in grass or shrubs. If shrubs are used they shall meet
the requirement of seventy five percent (75%) of the landscaped area covered
with living plant material within three (3) years. Plantings shall be
maintained at a height not to exceed three feet (3').
      3.   Required public and employee parking areas over two hundred (200)
stalls shall be divided by a minimum ten foot (10') wide landscaped planting
island perpendicular to the parking stalls. The planting island shall be placed
along every fourth row of parking. Trees shall be planted in the island at
forty feet (40') on center and shall be a minimum two foot (2') caliper size.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4120.png]
 
      4.   A minimum of six percent (6%) of the interior space (as measured by
drawing a rectangular shaped area around the maximum extent of each parking
area) of all parking lots with less than one hundred (100) spaces, and ten
percent (10%) of all parking lots with one hundred (100) or more spaces shall
be landscape areas.
(Ord. 99-38, 10-19-1999; amd. Ord. 2001-31, 5-22-2001; Ord. 2001-32, 6-5-2001;
Ord. 2003-60, 11-18-2003)
15-12-10: WALKWAYS:
   A.   A designated, paved, pedestrian pathway shall connect customer parking
to any general office or space devoted for customer use. A paved walkway shall
be provided in the right-of-way of all public streets that the property abuts.
Installation of the sidewalk in the public right-of-way may be deferred
according to recommendations and conditions established in the Ogden City
Engineering Division.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4122.png]
 
   B.   Where it is necessary for the primary pedestrian access to cross drive
aisles or internal roadways, the material and layout of the walkway shall be
continuous as it crosses the driveway, with a break in continuity of the
driveway paving and not the pedestrian walkway. Crossings shall be well marked,
with priority placed on pedestrian circulation.
(Ord. 99-38, 10-19-1999)
15-12-11: VEHICULAR ACCESS LOCATION AND SIZE:
The City shall review and approve the size, number and location of vehicular
accesses to the properties. No changes to the approved accesses shall be
allowed without the required review and approval. The City shall permit
vehicular access to public streets if the access meets the following criteria:
   A.   Driveway Width:
      1.   Residential Zones:
         a.   Single-family and duplex lots:
            (1)   Shall have a minimum drive approach and driveway width of
nine feet (9') and a maximum width of thirty two feet (32') for each driveway
allowed, except that in no case may the combined width of all driveways cover
more than fifty percent (50%) of the lot width; and
            (2)   May not have more than fifty percent (50%) of the front yard
area covered by hard surface material.
         b.   Three (3) to four (4) units on a lot shall have a minimum access
and driveway width of sixteen feet (16') and a maximum of thirty two feet (32')
or fifty percent (50%) of the lot width, whichever is less.
         c.   More than four (4) units on a lot shall have a minimum access and
driveway width of twenty four feet (24') and a maximum of thirty five feet
(35').
      2.   Commercial And Manufacturing Zones: The minimum access and driveway
width shall be twenty four feet (24') wide with a maximum of thirty five feet
(35'). For entrances designed to be used solely for or in combination with
tractor trailers the minimum width shall be thirty five feet (35') and maximum
width fifty feet (50'). The driveway width on State administered highways may
be wider as required by the Utah State Department of Transportation.
   B.   Number Of Accessways:
      1.   Single-family or duplex lots shall be allowed one accessway onto the
public street for each lot.
         a.   One additional access may be permitted for single-family homes if
it is used to service a circular driveway or an accessory vehicle parking slab.
         b.   For corner lots with more than two hundred fifty feet (250') of
combined street frontage a third access for circular drives is allowed.
         c.   A circular driveway allowed under this section must meet the
following requirements:
            (1)   Circular driveways shall not be used to satisfy the required
parking;
            (2)   The arched portion of the driveway closest to the street
shall be set back at least twenty feet (20') from the front property line at
the mid-point of its arch;
            (3)   Each driveway connection to the street shall be no more than
fourteen feet (14') in width;
            (4)   The area between the driveway and the property line shall be
landscaped at a minimum with shrubs, trees, and approved ground covers; and
            (5)   The total pavement area between the front of the house and
the public right-of-way may not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the front yard.
      2.   All other uses shall have not more than one accessway to a public
street per one hundred feet (100') of street frontage (i.e., less than 100 feet
frontage - 1 approach, 100 feet - 199 feet frontage - 2 approaches, etc.).
      3.   No more than two (2) driveways will be permitted per parcel fronting
on any collector or arterial street as defined on the adopted street plan for
the City.
         a.   In parcels accommodating twenty (20) or more parking spaces,
driveways must be separated by at least two hundred fifty feet (250').
         b.   In parcels with less than twenty (20) parking spaces, driveways
must be separated by at least one hundred feet (100').
      4.   A minimum twenty foot (20') wide separation is required between
access drives for all developments except single-family homes. Driveways for
all uses except single-family homes shall not be closer than eight feet (8') to
an adjacent interior property line and shall be set back a minimum of eighty
feet (80') from the intersection of two (2) arterial streets and fifty feet
(50') from any other street classification intersection.
      5.   Lots are encouraged to have a shared access guaranteed by a recorded
reciprocal access easement. If shared access occurs, the driveway width maximum
may be increased by ten feet (10') in commercial and manufacturing zones, and
the ten foot (10') setback from the interior property line is waived on the
side the shared access exists in all zones.
(Ord. 2018-28, 10-16-2018)
15-12-12: OFF STREET TRUCK LOADING DESIGN:
   A.   Commercial or manufacturing loading and unloading facilities shall be
designed to be to the rear or side of the building and not visible from the
public street. In a manufacturing zone, if the lot dimensions together with the
building layout will not allow the necessary loading facility to be placed in
the rear or side and there are no other means of access to the rear portion of
the building, loading facilities may occur along the front or side facing a
street, provided that the building is set back a sufficient distance so that
all maneuvering of trucks can occur on the property and not the public right-
of-way. Buildings which were constructed prior to 1999 in the DDR Zone and are
located on 600 West, 700 West, 800 West, 930 West, 1000 West and 1070 West may
maintain the existing docks without modification; however, such docks may be
remodeled only if:
      1.   The resulting dock will not project closer to the street right-of-
way than the original construction; or
      2.   The docks are reconfigured to create an angled dock design and
sufficient distance will exist between the dock and street right- of-way so
that trailers parked at the dock will not project into the street right-of-way.
   B.   Loading areas shall be paved with concrete, asphalt or other approved
hardened surface.
   C.   Loading areas shall be sized to accept the largest delivery vehicle
that will serve the use, and include turnaround areas or be designed to allow
continued forward movement of the vehicle through the site.
(Ord. 99-38, 10-19-1999; amd. Ord. 2003-72, 12-16-2003)
15-12-13: RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Residential Weight Restrictions: Off street parking spaces for
residential uses shall be used only by vehicles up to, but not exceeding, one
ton manufacturer's capacity rating.
   B.   Storage Of Vehicles In Required Spaces: Required off street parking
spaces and access to the required spaces shall not be used for the parking or
storage of automobile trailers, boats, detached campers or any other object
that will render the parking space unusable according to the intent and purpose
of this chapter.
   C.   Sale Or Repair Uses: No off street parking space shall be used for the
commercial sale, repair, dismantling or servicing of any vehicle, equipment,
material, or supplies.
   D.   Residential Privately Owned Land: Privately owned land within any
residential zone shall not be used as access for commercial or manufacturing
zoned uses.
(Ord. 2018-28, 10-16-2018)
15-12-14: RECREATIONAL VEHICLE AND ACCESSORY PARKING:
The owner of a lot with a single family dwelling may install a parking area for
an accessory vehicle or a recreational vehicle, including a boat, trailer, or
detached camper, in compliance with this section.
   A.   Inapplicability To Non-Conforming Dwellings: This section does not
apply to the installation of additional parking in accordance with subsection
15-6-2B4 of this title for a single-family detached dwelling nonconforming as
to the number of properly located off street parking spaces.
   B.   General Requirements:
      1.   A recreational vehicle or accessory vehicle is permitted within the
accessory parking area if the dwelling unit has at least one parking space in a
private garage or in any area properly located for a future garage.
      2.   No parked recreational vehicle shall be used for storage of goods,
materials, or equipment other than those which are customarily associated with
the recreational vehicle.
      3.   Recreational vehicles may not be occupied as a dwelling while parked
on the property.
   C.   Location And Design: Recreational or accessory vehicle parking shall be
located in one side yard setback or rear yard subject to the following
conditions:
      1.   The parking area and driveway must be at least eight feet (8') wide
and of sufficient length, which may not be less than eighteen feet (18'), to
accommodate the accessory or recreational vehicle with no portion of the
vehicle extending forward of the front face of the dwelling;
      2.   The space above any parking area constructed within a side yard
setback must remain open and unobstructed to the sky;
      3.   All stormwater runoff from a hard surface must be directed to
prevent drainage onto adjacent properties or across the sidewalk;
      4.   No parking area is permitted within the twenty foot (20') required
side yard facing a street on a corner lot;
      5.   Access to the accessory parking area shall be provided by either;
         a.   Widening the approach from the street to match the width of the
new driveway provided the other provisions of this Code can be met; or
         b.   A driveway taper from the sidewalk at no less than a forty five
degree (45°) angle with the remnant area in the front yard setback landscaped
with a minimum of shrubs and an approved ground cover, provided that this
option is not allowed if the remnant landscaped area is less than forty five
(45) square feet or if curb, gutter and sidewalk are not present.
   OPTION A
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4124.png]
 
   OPTION B
   D.   Surface Materials: The portion of the driveway providing access to the
accessory parking area and the accessory parking area itself shall be
constructed with:
      1.   An approved hard surface material or drive strips as described in
subsection 15-12-8G4 of this title; or
      2.   A gravel or crushed concrete surface, provided:
         a.   The gravel or crushed concrete is at least four inches (4") deep,
compacted, and is sized between 1/2 inch to 11/2 inch;
         b.   A poured concrete or masonry border with a minimum four inch (4")
width and four inch (4") depth is constructed on all exterior sides of the
surface with masonry being limited to either brick, stone or precast concrete;
         c.   Road-base or other materials shall not be substituted for gravel
or crushed concrete; and
         d.   The surface material is properly maintained, kept free of weeds
or other vegetation and is kept fully contained within the allowed area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4126.png]
 
(Ord. 2018-28, 10-16-2018)
CHAPTER 13
REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL ZONES
SECTION:
15-13-1: Applicability
15-13-2: Additional Use Regulations
15-13-3: Additional Lot And Frontage Regulations; Exceptions
15-13-4: Additional Yard Regulations
15-13-5: Additional Height Regulations
15-13-6: Building Regulations
15-13-7: Fence Regulations
15-13-8: Lighting
15-13-9: Private Park, Playground Or Recreation Area
15-13-10: Public Utility Substation
15-13-11: Swimming Pool; Family
15-13-12: Daycare Center Regulations
15-13-13: Sexually Oriented Businesses
15-13-14: Zero Side Yard Provisions
15-13-15: Residential Facilities For Persons With A Disability
15-13-16: Landscaping Required
15-13-17: Concessions Or Amusement Businesses; Public Parks
15-13-18: Television Satellite Antennas (Or Dish Antennas)
15-13-19: Racing Pigeons; Standards And Operating Procedures
15-13-20: Limit On Aboveground Storage Tanks
15-13-21: Recycling Drop Off Stations, Reverse Vending Machines
15-13-22: Single Room Occupancy Development Criteria
15-13-23: Financial Guarantee Requirements
15-13-24: Mobile Homes, Recreational Coaches And Manufactured Homes Without
Permanent Foundation; Location Restrictions
15-13-25: Residential Facilities For Elderly Persons
15-13-26: Design And Separation Of Protective Housing, Rehabilitation/Treatment
Facilities, Transitional Housing, And Assisted Living Facilities
15-13-27: Design Standards For Two-Family Dwellings/Duplexes And Multiple-
Family Dwellings
15-13-28: Legal Conforming Two-Family Dwellings Or Duplexes
15-13-29: Special Permit For Temporary Facilities After A Disaster
15-13-30: Legal Conforming Bachelor Or Bachelorette Dwelling
15-13-31: Transition Provision For Application Of Definition Of Family
15-13-32: Length Of Stay In A Motel Or Hotel If No Permanent Residence
15-13-33: Standards For Accessory Buildings In Residential Zones
15-13-34: Short Term Loan Businesses
15-13-35: Regulations Governing Retail Tobacco Specialty Business
15-13-36: Regulations Governing Front Entry Porches In Residential Zones
15-13-37: Mobile Food Trucks And Mobile Food Trailers
15-13-38: Residential Vacation Rental
15-13-39: Standards For Accessory Dwelling Units
15-13-40: Reserved
15-13-41: Regulations For Keeping Of Residential Chickens
15-13-1: APPLICABILITY:
The regulations hereinafter set forth in this chapter qualify or supplement, as
the case may be, the zone regulations contained elsewhere in this title.
(Ord. 72-13, 7-6-1972; amd. Ord. 90-52, 10-25-1990)
15-13-2: ADDITIONAL USE REGULATIONS:
The requirement of this title as to minimum site development standards shall
not be construed to prevent the use for a single- family dwelling of any parcel
of land in the event such parcel was held in separate ownership prior to
February 8, 1951.
(Ord. 72-13, 7-6-1972; amd. Ord. 90-52, 10-25-1990; 1999 Code; Ord. 2001-35, 6-
5-2001)
15-13-3: ADDITIONAL LOT AND FRONTAGE REGULATIONS; EXCEPTIONS:
Every main building shall be located and maintained on a "lot", as defined in
section
15-2-13 of this title, and every lot shall have required "frontage" on a
"street", as such terms are defined in sections
15-2-7 and
15-2-20 of this title, except where a parcel of land was in separate ownership
prior to February 8, 1951, as described in section
15-13-2 of this chapter. For lots created after February 8, 1951, but before
June 30, 2001, the frontage shall not be less than sixteen feet (16'). For lots
created after June 30, 2001, the frontage shall not be less than thirty feet
(30').
(Ord. 72-13, 7-6-1972; amd. Ord. 90-52, 10-25-1990; Ord. 2001-35, 6-5-2001)
15-13-4: ADDITIONAL YARD REGULATIONS:
   A.   No required yard or other open space around an existing building, or
which is hereafter provided around any building for the purpose of complying
with the provisions of this title, shall be considered as providing a yard or
open space for any other building; nor shall any yard or other required open
space on an adjoining lot be considered as providing a yard or open space on a
lot whereon a building is to be erected or established.
   B.   On any lot under a separate ownership from adjacent lots and of record
at the time of the "initial enactment of the zoning ordinances", as defined in
section
15-2-10 of this title, and such lot having a smaller width than required for
the zone in which it is located, the following regulations shall apply:
      1.   For interior lots, each side yard may be equal to but not less than
the same percentage of the required side yard width as the lot is of the
required lot width; provided, that in no case shall the smaller of the two (2)
side yards be less than five feet (5') or the larger less than eight feet (8').
      2.   On corner lots, each side yard may be equal to but not less than the
same percentage of the required side yard width as the lot is of the required
lot width; provided, that in no case shall the side yard on the street side be
less than fifteen feet (15') in R-
1-10, R-
1-8, R-
1-6, R-2, and R-3 Zones or less than ten feet (10') in R-4 and R-5 Zones, and
the other side yard shall not be less than five feet (5') in all residential
zones.
   C.   On any lot under separate ownership from adjacent lots and of record at
the time of the "initial enactment of the zoning ordinances", as defined in
section
15-2-10 of this title, where a private attached garage containing a sufficient
number of parking spaces to meet the requirements of this title has a side yard
equal to the minimum side yard required for a dwelling in the same zone, the
width of the other side yard for the dwelling may be reduced to equal that of
the minimum side yard.
   D.   On any interior lot where a single-family dwelling has an attached
private garage containing a sufficient number of parking spaces to meet the
requirements of this title, and has a side yard equal to the minimum side yard
required for a single-family dwelling in the same zone, the width of the other
side yard for the dwelling may be reduced to equal that of the minimum required
side yard; and on any interior or corner lot where a single- family dwelling
has an attached garage with sufficient parking and has such side yard, the rear
yard of the dwelling may be reduced to fifteen feet (15'), provided the garage
also has a rear yard of at least fifteen feet (15').
   E.   Every part of the required yard shall be open to the sky, unobstructed
except for accessory buildings in a rear yard, and except for the ordinary
projections of skylights, sills, belt courses, cornices and other ornamental
features.
   F.   Open or lattice enclosed fire escapes, fireproof outside stairways, and
balconies opening upon fire towers may project into a yard not more than five
feet (5'), and the ordinary projections of chimneys and flues are permitted.
   G.   No accessory building nor group of accessory buildings in any
residential zone shall cover more than twenty five percent (25%) of the rear
yard.
   H.   No space needed to meet the width, yard, area, coverage, parking or
other requirements of this title for a lot or building may be conveyed away
from such lot or building, except as permitted by the Board of Zoning
Adjustment, and any attempted conveyance or lease in violation hereof shall be
void.
   I.   No parcel of land which has less than the minimum width and area
requirements for the zone in which it is located may be cut off from a larger
parcel of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of building or
development as a lot, except by permit of the Board of Zoning Adjustment.
   J.   Any corner lot in a residential zone subdivided or receiving approval
for subdivision before January 1987, and meeting the existing lot area and lot
frontage requirements for interior lots in their respective zones shall be
considered as in conformance with this title.
   K.   A single family or duplex lot may not have more than fifty percent
(50%) of the front yard area covered by hard surface material.
(Ord. 72-13, 7-6-1972; amd. Ord. 77-24, 5-19-1977; Ord. 81-23, 6-18-1981; Ord.
87-11, 3-12-1987; Ord. 90-52, 10-25-1990; Ord. 91-51, 12-19-1991; 1999 Code;
Ord. 2017-44, 10-17-2017)
15-13-5: ADDITIONAL HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
   A.   Penthouse or roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways,
tanks, ventilating fans or similar equipment required to operate and maintain a
building, and fire or parapet walls, skylights, towers, steeples, flagpoles,
chimneys, smokestacks, and water tanks, wireless or television masts, theater
lofts, silos or similar structures may be erected above the height limits
prescribed in the zone height regulations, but no space above the height limit
shall be allowed for the purpose of providing additional floor space, and no
heights are permitted above the maximum allowed under airport area height
provisions.
   B.   No dwelling shall be erected to a height less than ten feet (10').
   C.   In a residential zone, the ridge or highest point of the roof of an
accessory building may be erected to a height no greater than the lesser of:
      1.   Twenty five feet (25');
      2.   Eighty percent (80%) of the highest point of the roof of the main
residential building, except where the ridge or highest point of the roof of
the main residential building is sixteen feet (16') or less the ridge or
highest point of the roof of the accessory building may not exceed twelve and
one-half feet (12'6"); or
      3.   For a metal accessory building, twelve and one-half feet (12'6").
(Ord. 2011-40, 7-5-2011)
15-13-6: BUILDING REGULATIONS:
Domestic water supply and sewage disposal shall comply with the county health
department requirements in all applications for a building permit where either
an approved supply of piped water under pressure, or a sewer, is not available.
(Ord. 72-13, 7-6-1972; amd. Ord. 90-52, 10-25-1990)
15-13-7: FENCE REGULATIONS:
   A.   Fence Materials: The materials used in a constructed fence are limited
to materials made of wood, metal, concrete, masonry, stone or vinyl. The
materials used to construct the fence shall be of dimensions and design
commonly intended for typical fence construction and shall not be materials or
reused materials that have been designed for another function and are now being
used to create a fence.
   B.   Fence Material Restrictions: Limitations to the use of certain types of
fencing material shall be as follows:
      1.   In residential zones fences which have razor ribbon or barbed wire
are prohibited. A barbed wire fence would not be considered to be in violation
of this provision if such fence material is used to repair or replace existing
barbed wire fences where such fencing is for existing agricultural or pasture
fences.
      2.   In commercial zones fences which have razor ribbon are prohibited.
Security fences may have up to three (3) strands of barbed wire provided that
no strand of barbed wire shall be permitted less than six feet (6') high. The
barbed wire strands shall not slant more than sixty degrees (60°) from a
vertical line and shall not project over public property. Fences with barbed
wire shall not be allowed in the front yard setback.
      3.   In manufacturing zones fences with razor ribbon shall only be
allowed to the side or rear of a building on the same lot or if no building is
on the lot such fencing will not be allowed in the front yard setback.
   C.   Fence Height: The maximum height of fencing allowed shall be as
required below:
      1.   No fence or other similar structure shall be erected, installed,
planted or maintained in any required front yard of a dwelling to a height in
excess of four feet (4'); nor shall any fence or similar structure be erected
in any side or rear yard to a height in excess of seven feet (7') except fences
created solely of living plant material.
      2.   On corner lots in a residential zone, a fence may be erected,
installed, planted or maintained in any side yard facing a street on a corner
lot to a maximum height of four feet (4'), or to a maximum height of six feet
(6') if the following conditions are met:
         a.   The fence shall not extend into the side yard area between the
dwelling and street and shall be located exclusively in the side yard area
immediately adjacent to the rear yard.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4128.png]
 
         b.   A clear view zone be maintained free of fencing when a driveway
exists on the adjacent lot within ten feet (10') of the shared property line.
The "clear view zone" refers to that portion of the corner lot lying within a
triangular area formed by measuring back ten feet (10') from the point where
the interior property line shared with the adjacent lot meets the property line
along the public right of way.
      3.   Where a fence is erected upon a retaining wall or where, for other
reasons, there is a difference in the elevation of the surface of the land on
either side of the fence, height of the fence shall be measured from a point
halfway between the top of the retaining wall and the land on the lower side or
from the average elevation of the surface of the land on either side of the
fence, but nothing herein contained shall be construed to restrict to less than
four feet (4') in height measured from the surface of the land on the site
having the highest elevation.
      4.   Notwithstanding the above, no fence shall be erected to a height in
violation of title 7, chapter 3, "Obstructions At Intersections", of this code.
(Ord. 72-13, 7-6-1972; amd. Ord. 90-41, 7-26-1990; Ord. 90-52, 10-25-1990; Ord.
2000-16, 3-7-2000; Ord. 2005-19, 5-17-2005)
15-13-8: LIGHTING:
   A.   Exterior Lighting: No spotlight or floodlight shall be installed in any
way which will permit the direct rays of such light to penetrate into any
residential zone or onto any property used for residential purpose.
   B.   Lights Not To Constitute Traffic Hazard: No light, sign or other
advertising structure as regulated by this title shall be erected at the
intersection of any street in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear
vision; or at any location where, by reason of the position, shape or color, it
may interfere with, obstruct the view or be confused with any authorized
traffic sign, signal or device which makes use of the words "STOP", "LOOK",
"DRIVE-IN", "DANGER" or any other word, phrase, symbol or character in such a
manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic.
(Ord. 72-13, 7-6-1972; amd. Ord. 90-52, 10-25-1990)
15-13-9: PRIVATE PARK, PLAYGROUND OR RECREATION AREA:
In all residential zones a private park, playground or recreation area with or
without a swimming pool shall meet the following requirements:
   A.   Ownership: The lands and facilities used for such purpose shall be
owned or leased and operated by a nonprofit corporation for the exclusive
benefit of the members, their immediate families and nonpaying guests.
   B.   Facilities: Adequate restrooms and sanitary facilities shall be
provided and kept available for use by members, their families and guests, and
shall be maintained in proper working order and in a clean and sanitary
condition and in full compliance with the reasonable standards, rules and
regulations established by the county health department.
   C.   Parking: Twenty five (25) off street parking spaces, or one off street
parking space for each four (4) memberships in the operating corporation,
whichever is greater, shall be provided on the lot devoted to the principal
use.
   D.   Time Limitations: Operation or use of the recreational or other
facilities provided is forbidden between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00)
P.M. to six o'clock (6:00) A.M. next following.
   E.   Setback Requirements: All facilities, equipment and buildings shall be
set back not less than twenty feet (20') from any property line and shall be
located not less than fifty feet (50') from any main building on an adjoining
lot and from any area upon which any such main building may be constructed upon
said adjoining lot if no such main building is in existence.
   F.   Minimum Lot Size: The minimum size of the lot or suite used for such
recreational or other purposes shall be one acre.
   G.   Lighting: Any lights used to illuminate the premises shall be installed
in such a manner that the source of light shall be suitably screened to avoid
annoying illumination of lands outside said premises.
(Ord. 72-13, 7-6-1972; amd. Ord. 90-52, 10-25-1990)
15-13-10: PUBLIC UTILITY SUBSTATION:
In all residential zones, public utility substations shall meet the following
requirements:
   A.   Lot Area: Each public utility substation in a residential zone shall be
located on a lot not less than two thousand (2,000) square feet in area.
   B.   Yards: Each public utility substation in a residential zone shall be
provided with a yard on each of the four (4) sides of the building not less
than five feet (5') in width, except that for such stations located on lots
fronting on a street abutted by one or more residential lots, the front yard,
side yards and rear yard shall equal those required for a single-family
residence in the same zone.
   C.   Street Access: Each public utility substation in a residential zone
shall be located on a lot which has adequate access from a street, alley or
easement.
   D.   Location To Be Approved: The location of public utility substation in a
residential zone shall be subject to approval by the planning commission.
(Ord. 72-13, 7-6-1972; amd. Ord. 90-52, 10-25-1990)
15-13-11: SWIMMING POOL; FAMILY:
A family swimming pool shall be permitted in the side and rear yard of a
dwelling as an accessory use, provided the following requirements are met:
   A.   Location: The location of such family swimming pool or accessory
machinery shall not be less than ten feet (10') from any interior property
line. On corner lots, the distance from said pool to the property line facing
on a street shall not be less than the required side yard for an accessory
building in that zone.
   B.   Fence: An outside family swimming pool shall be completely enclosed by
a substantial fence of not less than six feet (6') in height and any lights
used to illuminate said pool or its accessories shall be so arranged as to
reflect the light away from adjoining premises. A "substantial fence" shall
mean any fence that would not allow passage by any person.
(Ord. 72-13, 7-6-1972; amd. Ord. 88-37, 9-8-1988; Ord. 90-52, 10-25-1990)
15-13-12: DAYCARE CENTER REGULATIONS:
   A.   Licensing: The regulations and licensing of daycare centers shall be in
accordance with Utah Code Annotated title 62A, chapter 2, as amended, or as
hereafter amended.
   B.   Fence: All outdoor play areas shall be within fenced area and shall be
limited to use between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to eight o'clock
(8:00) P.M. Fence height shall be in accordance with section
15-13-7 of this chapter.
   C.   Off Street Parking: Sufficient off street parking shall be provided to
satisfy the requirement of section
15-12-3 of this title.
(Ord. 73-22, 7-12-1973; amd. Ord. 90-52, 10-25-1990)
15-13-13: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES:
   A.   Purpose: It is the purpose and object of this section that the city
establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the concentration of
sexually oriented businesses or their location in areas deleterious to the
community of Ogden, to protect adjoining uses, to provide visibility of parking
areas in order to promote management supervision and oversight by law
enforcement agencies, and to regulate the signage of such businesses and to
control the adverse effects of such signage and prevent inappropriate exposure
to the community. This section is to be construed as a regulation of time,
place and manner of the operation of these businesses, consistent with the
limitations provided by provisions of the United States and Utah constitutions.
Except where the context or specific provisions require, this section does not
supersede or nullify any other related zoning ordinances. This section,
together with the other provisions of this title referencing or duplicating the
regulations imposed herein, shall be known and referred to as the SEXUALLY
ORIENTED BUSINESS ZONING ORDINANCES.
   B.   Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall
have meanings defined in this subsection:
   EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION: A public elementary or secondary school, seminary,
parochial school or private education institution having a curriculum similar
to that ordinarily given in grades one through twelve (12) in a public school
system. The term educational institution for the purpose of this section does
not include post-high school educational facilities.
   HISTORIC BUILDING: A structure which is listed on the Ogden City register of
historic resources or the National Register of Historic Places.
   HISTORIC DISTRICT: An area containing a significant number of historic
buildings which has been designated and listed as a historic district on the
Ogden City register of historic resources or the National Register of Historic
Places.
   PUBLIC PARK: A park, playground, swimming pool, nature reserve, fairground,
golf course or athletic field within the city which is owned, operated or
maintained by the city or the county.
   RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION: A building which is used primarily for religious
worship and related religious activities.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES: An inclusive term used to describe
collectively those businesses for which a sexually oriented business license is
required, pursuant to the sexually oriented business license chapter, set out
in title 5, chapter 15 of this code, which types of businesses include for
purposes of this section: outcall services, adult entertainment dancing
agencies, adult businesses (an inclusive term including adult motion picture
theaters, adult bookstores and adult video stores), and adult live
entertainment businesses. This collective term does not describe a specific
land use and shall not be considered a single use category for purposes of this
title.
   C.   Businesses Permitted Where; Separation Requirements:
      1.   Outcall services and adult entertainment dancing agencies as such
terms are defined in title 5, chapter 15 of this code, shall be permitted uses
in areas zoned C-2, C-3 and CBD.
      2.   Unless otherwise specifically allowed in the use regulations
applicable to a specific zoning category, adult businesses and adult live
entertainment businesses as such terms are defined in title 5, chapter 15 of
this code, shall only be permitted in areas zoned C-3 under chapter 38 of this
title, M-1 and M-2 under chapter 21 of this title, subject to the following
additional restrictions:
         a.   No adult business or adult live entertainment business shall be
located:
            (1)   Within a six hundred sixty foot (660') radius of any
religious institution, educational institution, public park, public library,
the Ogden entertainment subdivision, the Newgate Mall, the Ogden River Parkway
trail or the Weber River Parkway trail;
            (2)   Within a one thousand foot (1,000') radius of any residential
zoning district;
            (3)   Within six hundred sixty feet (660') of any historic building
or district;
            (4)   Within a one thousand foot (1,000') radius of any other adult
business or adult live entertainment business.
      3.   Distance requirements between structures and uses specified in this
subsection shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures or zoning districts, from the closest property boundary of the
educational institution, park, religious institution, library, mall,
subdivision, river parkway trail, zoning district, historic building, historic
district, or other sexually oriented business.
      4.   An adult business or adult live entertainment business lawfully
operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the
location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of a sexually oriented business
license, within six hundred sixty feet (660') of the adult business or adult
live entertainment business, of a religious institution, educational
institution, public park or public library, a religious institution,
educational institution, public park or public library, a designated historic
building or historic district, or the creation of a residential zoning district
within one thousand feet (1,000'). This provision applies only to the renewal
of a valid license and it does not apply when an application for license is
submitted after a license has expired or has been revoked.
   D.   Additional Site Development Standards: Notwithstanding anything
contrary contained in this title regarding minimum site development standards
under chapter 4 of this title or minimum parking standards under chapter 12 of
this title, the more restrictive site development or parking standard shall
apply. The following additional site development or parking standards shall
apply:
      1.   All parking spaces or parking lots for adult businesses or adult
live entertainment businesses shall be:
         a.   Located on the same lot with the main building; and
         b.   At a location on the site visible from a public street.
      2.   Building entrances for customers or patrons shall face or be visible
from a public street.
   E.   Restrictions On Signage Or Attention Drawing Devices: Notwithstanding
anything contrary contained in title 18 of this code, the more restrictive
standards for signs imposed herein shall prevail. Signs for sexually oriented
businesses and other devices designed to draw attention to the business shall
be limited as follows:
      1.   No more than one sign shall be allowed on any sexually oriented
business premises.
      2.   No sign on the sexually oriented business premises shall be allowed
to exceed eighteen (18) square feet.
      3.   No animation shall be permitted on or around any sexually oriented
business sign, or on the exterior walls or roof of the premises.
      4.   No descriptive art or designs depicting any activity related to, or
inferring, the nature of the business shall be allowed on any sexually oriented
business sign, which shall contain alphanumeric copy only.
      5.   Only flat wall signs shall be permitted for any sexually oriented
business.
      6.   No painted signs or painted wall advertising shall be allowed,
including any signage or advertising painted on the inside of any window or
other translucent material which is visible from the outside of the building.
      7.   The building and the premises of the sexually oriented business
shall be kept free of any temporary signs or banners, as such terms are defined
in title 18 of this code.
      8.   The premises of the sexually oriented business shall be kept free of
vehicles or trailers displaying signage that identifies the name of the
business, displays descriptive art or designs depicting any activity related
to, or inferring, the nature of the sexually oriented business, or otherwise
draws attention to the business or the business location; provided that signage
on the driver door or front passenger door of a business vehicle shall not be
prohibited.
      9.   No searchlights or other outdoor activities or promotional events
that draw attention to the business or the business location shall be allowed
on the premises.
      10.   Outdoor lighting shall be designed to direct all light toward the
ground and all light poles shall be restricted to a height of twenty feet
(20'). This provision is not intended to restrict the seasonal use of
nonflashing, miniature lighting on trees or shrubs.
      11.   No outdoor music or use of a "sound amplification device", as
defined in title 12, chapter 14 of this code, shall be used to draw attention
to the business or business location.
   F.   Drinking Establishment: If a proposed drinking establishment is already
licensed as an adult live entertainment business, or if approvals are being
sought for both uses concurrently, it shall be presumed that any location in a
zone allowing a drinking establishment and meeting the distance requirements
for an adult live entertainment business, is an appropriate location for a
drinking establishment and shall be considered a permitted use, notwithstanding
any other provisions of this title classifying such use as a conditional use.
Any drinking establishment so allowed as a permitted use shall also be subject
to the following:
      1.   No more than two (2) drinking establishments per linear block.
      2.   The location is in a zone allowing a drinking establishment as a
conditional use.
      3.   The parking location meets the requirements of parking for a
sexually oriented business.
(Ord. 2009-61, 10-27-2009; amd. Ord. 2020-24, 6-23-2020)
15-13-14: ZERO SIDE YARD PROVISIONS:
At the time of subdivision approval by the planning commission and mayor, one
zero side yard may be permitted per lot in the subdivision under the following
conditions:
   A.   When the remaining one side yard is equal to the combined total of the
required two (2) side yards of the zone in which is located; and
   B.   No window or other similar opening shall be installed in the building
or any accessory building along the side having a zero side yard; and
   C.   No zero side yard will be permitted on the lot side bordering on a
nonresidential zone, or on the lot side bordering on a residential lot not
utilizing zero side yard provisions; and
   D.   The use of the zero side yard provisions is contingent upon development
of or commitment to development of a zero side yard on adjacent lots; and
   E.   The approved location of each dwelling and accessory buildings
utilizing the zero side yard concept must be designated on each lot on the
approved final subdivision linen; and
   F.   All building permits will be issued in strict accordance with the
building site restrictions as shown on the approved subdivision linen. Any
changes in the location of buildings from the locations shown on the approved
linen must be approved by the planning commission and mayor and an amended
final linen recorded with the county recorder showing the approved changes; and
   G.   In the case of existing subdivisions, the zero side yard concept may be
utilized upon compliance with the above provisions and upon issuance of a
conditional use permit approved by the planning commission.
(Ord. 78-56, 12-7-1978; amd. Ord. 90-52, 10-25-1990; Ord. 91-51, 12-19-1991)
15-13-15: RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES FOR PERSONS WITH A DISABILITY:
   A.   Applicability: If any facility, residence, or other circumstance meets
the definition of a "residential facility for persons with a disability" as set
forth in chapter 2 of this title, the requirements of this section shall govern
the same notwithstanding any other provision of this title.
   B.   Purpose: The purposes of this section are:
      1.   To comply with section 10-9-605 of the Utah code; and
      2.   To avoid discrimination in housing against persons with disabilities
as provided in the Utah fair housing act and the fair housing amendments act as
interpreted by courts having jurisdiction in Utah.
   C.   Permitted Use; Requirements: A residential facility for persons with a
disability shall be a permitted use in any zoning district where a dwelling is
allowed. Each such facility shall conform to the following requirements:
      1.   The facility shall comply with all building, safety, and health
regulations applicable to similar structures. As part of this requirement the
following site development standards and parking standards shall be applicable:
         a.   Each facility shall be subject to minimum site development
standards applicable to a single-family dwelling or other similar dwelling in
the zone in which the facility is located; and
         b.   The minimum number of parking spaces required for a residential
facility for persons with a disability shall be the same as those for a single-
family dwelling located in the same zoning district in which the facility is
located.
      2.   No facility shall be made available to an individual whose tenancy
would:
         a.   Constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other
individuals, or
         b.   Result in substantial physical damage to the property of others.
(It is not the intention of this subsection to establish any legal basis for
tort liability on the part of the facility operator.)
      3.   Prior to the occupancy of any facility, the person or entity
licensed or certified by the department of human services or the department of
health to establish and operate the facility shall:
         a.   Provide a copy of such license or certification to the city, and
         b.   Certify in a sworn affidavit to the city that no person will
reside or remain in the facility whose tenancy would likely:
            (1)   Constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other
individuals, or
            (2)   Result in substantial physical damage to the property of
others.
      4.   The use permitted by this section is nontransferable and shall
terminate if:
         a.   The facility is devoted to a use other than a residential
facility for persons with a disability, or
         b.   The license or certification issued by the department of human
services or the department of health terminates or is revoked, or
         c.   The facility fails to comply with the conditions enumerated in
this section.
      5.   No residential facility for persons with a disability, licensed for
the housing of more than five (5) disabled persons, shall be established or
maintained within six hundred sixty feet (660') measured in a straight line
between the closest property lines of the lots or parcels, of the following
similar facilities:
         a.   Another residential facility for persons with a disability
licensed for the housing of more than five (5) disabled persons;
         b.   A residential facility for the elderly with more than five (5)
elderly persons in residence; or
         c.   Any of the following facilities: protective housing facility;
transitional housing facility; assisted living facility or rehabilitation/
treatment facility.
   D.   Reasonable Accommodation: None of the foregoing conditions shall be
interpreted to limit any reasonable accommodation necessary to allow the
establishment or occupancy of a residential facility for persons with a
disability.
      1.   Any person or entity who wishes to request a reasonable
accommodation shall make application therefor to the director and shall
articulate in writing the basis for the requested accommodation.
      2.   Each application for a reasonable accommodation shall be decided
within not more than thirty (30) days.
      3.   If a request for a reasonable accommodation is denied, such decision
may be appealed to the board of zoning adjustment in the manner provided for
appeals of administrative decisions applying this title.
(Ord. 81-46, 11-12-1981; amd. Ord. 82-16, 4-8-1982; Ord. 85-40, 10-17-1985;
Ord. 87-44, 8-27-1987; Ord. 98-62, 10-27-1998; Ord.
2000-2, 1-4-2000; Ord. 2001-32, 6-5-2001)
15-13-16: LANDSCAPING REQUIRED:
When an area is required to be landscaped under the terms of this title, the
requirements shall be met by the installation and maintenance of improvements
as set forth below:
   A.   General Requirements:
      1.   All plantings shall be maintained in a healthy and attractive
condition.
      2.   Landscaping materials shall be contained so as not to spill into the
public right of way.
      3.   All yard and setback areas not occupied by buildings or parking
shall be landscaped; the area within the public right of way between the curb
and gutter and the sidewalk, otherwise known as the park strip, shall be
landscaped, unless the area falls along a gateway or entry corridor as
designated in the general plan. Park strip landscaping outside of gateway or
entry corridors shall not exceed a maximum height of two feet (2') for shrubs
or grasses, and trees in the park strip shall have a minimum height of seven
feet (7') for the lowest branches of a tree when they extend above the curb or
sidewalk. Notwithstanding the branch height, no evergreen tree is allowed in
the park strip. Public rights of way defined by a curb or gutter shall be
landscaped utilizing one of three (3) methods:
         a.   Grass with trees spaced at a maximum of forty feet (40') on
center;
         b.   Ground covers, trees and shrubs. When shrubs or ground covers
other than grass are used for landscaping, the spacing, type and size of plants
used shall be such that seventy five percent (75%) of all landscaped areas
shall be covered with living material within three (3) years of planting; or
         c.   Rock ground cover with trees spaced at a maximum of forty feet
(40') on center. When such rock ground cover is used, there shall not be a
concrete surface underneath the ground cover. The rocks used in the ground
cover must be between 1.5 inches and four inches (4") in size or,
alternatively, if a size smaller than 1.5 inches is used, then:
            (1)   Areas of living plant material are required that extend the
full width of the park strip in a distinguishable patterned design for the
length of the park strip, or
            (2)   A varying rock size or color pattern must be used.
      4.   For all uses except single-family dwellings, all landscaping shall
be serviced by an acceptable underground sprinkling or irrigation system.
      5.   If artificial turf is used as a ground cover:
         a.   It shall consist of green lifelike individual blades of grass
that:
            (1)   Emulate natural turf in look and color;
            (2)   Have a minimum pile height of 1.5 inches, except in rear
yards where shorter pile height may be installed for planned recreational
surfaces; and
            (3)   Have a minimum tufted weight of fifty six (56) ounces per
square yard;
         b.   In no case shall it be installed within:
            (1)   Permanent drainage features (e.g., ponds, swales, and
retention and detention basins); or
            (2)   Any public right of way;
         c.   It shall have a minimum eight (8) year manufacturer's warranty
protecting against color fading and decrease in pile height;
         d.   The use of indoor or outdoor plastic or nylon carpeting as a
substitute or replacement for artificial turf or natural turf is prohibited;
         e.   It shall be properly anchored to ensure that the turf will
withstand the effects of wind;
         f.   All seams shall be nailed and glued, not sewn, and edges shall be
trimmed to fit against all regular and irregular edges to resemble a natural
look;
         g.   Proper grading, compaction and drainage shall be provided for all
artificial turf installations to prevent excess runoff or pooling of water and
artificial turf installations shall have a minimum permeability of thirty
inches (30") per hour per square yard;
         h.   It shall be visually level, with the grain pointing in a single
direction;
         i.   An appropriate solid barrier device (e.g., concrete mow strip,
bender board) is required to separate the artificial turf from planters and
live vegetation;
         j.   A minimum four foot (4') separation between artificial turf and
tree trunks and two foot (2') separation between artificial turf and shrubs
shall be maintained to ensure roots are not damaged with the installation of
artificial turf and that the overall health of the living plant material is not
compromised;
         k.   It shall be cleaned regularly and maintained in an appropriate
and neat manner;
         l.   It shall be replaced if it is worn, uneven, discolored, or
damaged; and
         m.   It shall comply with subsection C of this section if it is
proposed to be used, either solely or in combination with other nonliving
ground cover, for more than ten percent (10%) of the ground area required to be
landscaped.
   B.   Gateway And Entry Corridor Rights Of Way:
      1.   For areas at an entry point or along an entry corridor, the area
within the public right of way between the curb and gutter and sidewalk may be
fully landscaped, or may invoke a combination of landscaping, pavers and other
design elements to create the desired visual impact. The use of landscaping and
pavers at entry points and along entry corridors should substantively satisfy
the following objectives:
         a.   Landscaping, combined with pavers and other design elements such
as lighting, seating, etc., as deemed appropriate, should enhance the visual
environment by creating a visually obvious and definite entry point or entry
corridor through use of a texture, color, size and shape, etc., enhancing
perspective by framing views, complementing architecture, screening, and
creating points of interest and activity;
         b.   Landscaping combined with other design elements should ensure
public safety by:
            (1)   Guiding the circulation of cars and people,
            (2)   Controlling access to parking lots, and
            (3)   Making traffic diverters prominent; and
         c.   Landscaping combined with other design elements should minimize
maintenance to ensure these points of first impression are maintained at an
optimum level.
      2.   Care should be taken to integrate the design of the entry point or
entry corridor to the surrounding areas in a way that maximizes the assets of
the area while still maintaining the desired continuity and visual impact.
      3.   Visual continuity and overall design shall control the balance of
landscaping and other design elements. However, whenever possible, landscaping
shall be used.
   C.   More Than Ten Percent Nonliving Ground Cover: When considering if more
than ten percent (10%) of nonliving ground cover shall be allowed, the
following principles shall be in place in the landscaping or landscaping
design:
      1.   The overall landscaping on the property enhances the visual
environment by:
         a.   Adding visual interest through texture, color, size and shape,
etc., and
         b.   Enhancing perspective by framing views complementing
architecture, screening and creating points of interest and activity;
      2.   The design includes elements which work with existing topography and
is designed in such a way as to make softened transitions from the landscaping
of adjoining properties to the property in question;
      3.   Plant species that are a public nuisance or that cause excess litter
should be avoided;
      4.   The other aspects of waterwise design are included on the property
which are:
         a.   An overall landscape design for the entire property,
         b.   Mulches are used in planting bed areas,
         c.   Turf areas are used in high use areas of the lot,
         d.   Plants are selected and installed which are appropriate for the
physical condition of site specific locations, and
         e.   The landscaping is kept free of weeds and junk materials.
      5.   Artificial turf is limited to not more than fifty percent (50%) of
the total landscaping area, unless it is installed and used in the construction
of public or private athletic fields, or on playgrounds associated with a:
         a.   Public or private community center;
         b.   Park;
         c.   School; or
         d.   University.
   D.   General Maintenance: All landscaped areas, whether required or
otherwise, shall be kept and maintained in accordance with all of the following
standards:
      1.   Landscaped areas shall be kept free of litter and debris.
      2.   Landscaped areas shall be weeded on a regular basis.
      3.   Trees and shrubs shall be pruned so as to avoid damage to other
improvements, structures or utility lines.
      4.   Dead branches or dead trees, shrubs or other plant materials are
removed from the property.
      5.   Lawns are mowed on a regular basis according to the growth habit of
the type of turf grass used.
      6.   All plant materials shall be adequately watered to maintain a
healthy condition as by the typical color of the plant under normal growing
conditions; provided that when water use restrictions are imposed by the city
or applicable secondary water provider during times of drought, no violation
shall occur as long as the owner or occupant is watering within such
restrictions.
      7.   Required trees, shrubs or other plant materials that have died and
been removed shall be replaced.
   E.   Application To Existing Residential Uses: For existing residential uses
which have either not installed landscaping or residential uses where the
landscaping no longer exists, landscaping according to these regulations shall
be installed within eighteen (18) months from the enactment of this provision.
   F.   Two-Family And Multiple-Family:
      1.   As a minimum, all new two-family dwellings and multiple-family
dwellings which are permitted uses in residential zones shall be:
         a.   Landscaped with grass or ornamental living ground covers;
         b.   Have one 2-inch caliper tree per unit, in addition to the street
trees required in the parkway with street trees spaced forty feet (40') on
center for large trees, thirty feet (30') on center for medium trees, and
twenty feet (20') on center for small trees; and
         c.   Have five (5) 5-gallon shrubs per unit planted on the lot.
      2.   Landscaping shall be installed in all areas not occupied by
buildings, parking or accessways and according to the approved plot plan.
Landscaping shall be installed prior to occupancy of any unit in the structure.
In the case of inclement weather that prevents the installation of the required
improvements, the time completion of the improvements may be extended, in
writing, upon the approval of the applicable reviewing official or body, or
designee. However, in no case shall the time for completion be extended beyond
June 1 immediately following the completion date. A financial guarantee
according to section
15-13-23 of this chapter shall be required prior to issuing building permits.
   G.   New Single-Family Dwellings: New single-family homes, at the time of
completion of construction and prior to occupancy of the dwelling shall have
street trees installed in the dedicated street parking strip. Large street
trees shall be spaced at forty feet (40') on center, medium trees shall be
spaced at thirty feet (30') on center, and small trees shall be spaced at
twenty feet (20') on center. Trees in the park strip shall have a minimum
height of seven feet (7') for the lowest branches of a tree when they extend
above the curb or sidewalk. Notwithstanding the branch height, no evergreen
tree is allowed in the park strip.
(Ord. 2016-12, 3-1-2016)
15-13-17: CONCESSIONS OR AMUSEMENT BUSINESSES; PUBLIC PARKS:
In all zones, a privately operated concession or amusement business in a public
park shall meet the following conditions of approval:
   A.   Hours: Operation or use of the amusement or other facilities provided
is forbidden between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. to six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. next following, or as approved by the planning commission.
   B.   Setback: All facilities, equipment and buildings shall be set back not
less than twenty feet (20') from any property line and shall be located not
less than fifty feet (50') from any main building on an adjoining lot and from
any area upon which any said building may be constructed upon said adjoining
lot if no main building is in existence, or as approved by the planning
commission.
   C.   Minimum Size: The minimum size of the park for such amusement or other
purposes shall be five (5) acres.
   D.   Lighting: Any lights used to illuminate the premises shall be installed
in such a manner that the source of light shall be suitably screened to avoid
annoying illumination of lands outside said premises.
   E.   Noise: Noise from such amusement or other purpose shall not
significantly increase noise levels already existing in the park from other
activities as determined by the planning commission.
   F.   Identification Signs: Only identification signs shall be permitted and
shall meet the requirements for such signs as specified in Title 18 of this
Code, Outdoor Signs.
   G.   Buildings; Facilities: All buildings, facilities, etc., shall be in
aesthetic harmony with the park and its purposes as well as the immediate
surrounding area.
   H.   Landscaping: Landscaping shall be sufficient to enhance the aesthetic
appearance of such development.
   I.   Private Property Intrusion: The proposal shall not create or invite
intrusion into private property.
(Ord. 82-22, 5-20-1982; amd. Ord. 90-52, 10-25-1990)
15-13-18: TELEVISION SATELLITE ANTENNAS (OR DISH ANTENNAS):
Building permits are required for television satellite antennas (or dish
antennas) and shall comply with the following regulations:
   A.   Location:
      1.   All television satellite antennas shall have setbacks of at least
five feet (5'), if freestanding. The setback shall be measured from the
property lines to the nearest point of the antenna. The distance for rotating
dish antennas shall be measured from the nearest point of the antenna in its
closest rotational configuration.
      2.   In any commercial or manufacturing zone, such antenna may be located
on the roof or in the rear of side yards; but shall only be permitted in the
front yard or on a side yard facing the street on a corner lot, by approval of
the Board of Zoning Adjustment when a useable satellite signal cannot be
obtained in an otherwise approved location.
      3.   Television satellite antennas shall only be located in the rear yard
of any lot in any residential zone. If a useable satellite signal cannot be
obtained from such rear yard, the antenna may be located on the roof or side
yard (except side yards facing the street on a corner lot) by approval of the
Board of Zoning Adjustment.
   B.   Antenna Size: No television satellite antenna shall exceed twelve feet
(12') in diameter in a residential zone. Upon the approval and issuance of a
conditional use permit by the Planning Commission, business and professional
offices located in a PI Zone may install a television satellite antenna which
exceeds the twelve foot (12') diameter limitation where there is a finding made
of no adverse impact to adjoining properties.
   C.   Antenna Height: No antenna shall exceed the height limitation in its
respective zone.
   D.   Construction Standards:
      1.   All antennas shall be erected in a secure and wind-resistant manner.
      2.   Every antenna must be adequately grounded for protection against a
direct strike of lightning.
      3.   All antennas in a residential zone shall be located and designed to
reduce the visual impact from surrounding properties at street level and from
public streets.
   E.   Temporary Television Satellite Antennas: Temporary television satellite
antennas (or dish antennas) may be located on property for a total of thirty
(30) days subject to the provisions of subsections A2 and A3 of this Section.
(Ord. 84-23, 8-30-1984; amd. Ord. 86-8, 12-13-1986; Ord. 90-52, 10-25-1990;
Ord. 91-51, 12-19-1991; 1999 Code)
15-13-19: RACING PIGEONS; STANDARDS AND OPERATING PROCEDURES:
   A.   Construction: The physical construction of the lofts shall be in
compliance with applicable City building ordinances and codes;
   B.   Location: Lofts shall be located a minimum of fifty feet (50') from any
neighboring residence plus twenty five feet (25') from any property line, and
six feet (6') from the owner's dwelling;
   C.   Easily Cleanable: Lofts shall be constructed in a workmanlike manner
and shall be easily cleanable;
   D.   Living Space: Lofts shall be constructed so as to allow each adult
pigeon ten (10) cubic feet of living space;
   E.   Number Limited: No owner will be permitted to maintain more than one
hundred (100) pigeons per permit;
   F.   Feed Storage: Feed shall be stored in a manner which prevents rodent
infestation or harborage;
   G.   Maintenance; Repair: Lofts shall at all times be in compliance with
these regulations and shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary, and orderly
condition and kept in good repair;
   H.   Confinement: Pigeons shall be confined to the loft, unless being
conditioned, exercised or trained; owners shall exercise necessary measures to
prevent their pigeons from perching or lingering on buildings or property of
others;
   I.   Diseases; Isolation: Pigeons shall be maintained in a healthy, disease
free condition; those with communicable diseases shall be properly isolated;
   J.   Nuisances: Loft scrapings, dead pigeons, manure and other putrescible
wastes shall be stored in watertight containers with tightfitting lids, final
disposal shall be accomplished in a manner which creates neither a health
hazard or nuisance and shall be approved by the county health department;
   K.   Odors And Noise: Necessary measures shall be exercised to prevent the
generation of obnoxious or offensive odors and noise, or otherwise create a
nuisance affecting the buildings or property of others;
   L.   Property Destruction: Pigeons shall not be allowed to destroy or deface
the property of others;
   M.   Breeding: Lofts may not be utilized for the business of breeding,
raising or harboring fowl for commercial or marketing purposes.
(Ord. 86-15, 3-27-1986)
15-13-20: LIMIT ON ABOVEGROUND STORAGE TANKS:
   A.   The storage of flammable, combustible liquids in aboveground tanks
outside of buildings is permitted:
      1.   In areas zoned as manufacturing M-1 or M-2, provided that tanks not
enclosed in a designed monolithic poured concrete case may not be closer than
two hundred feet (200') to any residential structure; and
      2.   In areas zoned as open space O-1, commercial C-2, commercial C-3,
and central business district CBD if all tanks are enclosed in a designed
monolithic poured concrete case.
   B.   The bulk storage of liquified petroleum gas in aboveground tanks shall
comply with the current fire code as adopted by title 16, chapter 2 of this
code, or its successor provision, and is permitted outside of buildings:
      1.   In areas zoned as manufacturing M-1 or M-2; and
      2.   As an accessory use in areas zoned commercial C-2 or commercial C-3.
(Ord. 2013-19, 5-7-2013)
15-13-21: RECYCLING DROPOFF STATIONS, REVERSE VENDING MACHINES:
Recycling dropoff stations and reverse vending machines shall be allowed as an
accessory to a main use in any zone, provided the following requirements are
met:
   A.   Residential: In residential zones:
      1.   No money is received by the donor for the material. No reverse
vending machines are allowed in residential zones.
      2.   The container is located only on property with nonresidential uses
such as a school, church, or public building.
      3.   The containers shall not be placed in any required yard setback
area.
      4.   The location of the containers shall not occupy required parking
spaces or traffic circulation areas.
      5.   The area around the containers and the container shall be maintained
in a clean and safe condition and free from litter.
      6.   No more than two (2) recycling containers, each with a maximum size
of six feet (6') tall, ten feet (10') long and eight feet (8') wide shall be
placed on a property.
   B.   Business, Commercial Or Manufacturing: In any business, commercial or
manufacturing zone:
      1.   The containers shall not be located any closer than thirty feet
(30') from any property line adjacent to a public street or placed in any other
required yard setback area.
      2.   The location of the containers shall not occupy required parking
spaces or traffic circulation areas.
      3.   The area around the containers and the container shall be maintained
in a clean and safe condition and free from litter.
      4.   No more than four (4) recycling containers, each with a maximum size
of six feet (6') tall, ten feet (10') long and eight feet (8') wide shall be
placed on a property.
   C.   Compliance With Standards: Any use meeting the definition of recycling
dropoff stations existing and legal on the effective date hereof is hereby
required to comply with the above requirements within six (6) months of the
effective date hereof.
(Ord. 95-74, 11-14-1995)
15-13-22: SINGLE ROOM OCCUPANCY DEVELOPMENT CRITERIA:
No single room occupancy (SRO) will be allowed unless the following criteria
are met:
   A.   Square Footage: Excluding the closet, storage space and bathroom space,
a living unit must be at least seventy (70) square feet in floor area for a one
person living unit and one hundred twenty five (125) square feet in floor area
for a two (2) person living unit.
   B.   Bath Facilities: If individual bath facilities are not provided, common
bathroom facilities must be provided for every eight (8) units and must be
located in a central and convenient location for the units being served.
   C.   Separate Outside Entry: Individual living units shall not have separate
outside entries.
   D.   Storage Space: A closet or designated storage space is required in
every living unit.
   E.   Storeroom: A cleaning supply storeroom and/or utility closet with at
least one laundry tub with hot and cold running water must be available for use
of the living units on each floor of the SRO.
   F.   Common Area: Each SRO shall provide a minimum of two hundred (200)
square feet of interior common area.
   G.   Distance Between SRO: No SRO shall be established within a six hundred
sixty foot (660') radius of another SRO measured from front door to front door.
   H.   CBD District: No SRO in the CBD intensive district shall have living
units located at the ground level of the building, fronting on a public street.
   I.   Parking: One parking space is required for each ten (10) units in an
SRO development.
(Ord. 96-51, 10-22-1996)
15-13-23: FINANCIAL GUARANTEE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Required: No site work shall be commenced, no development improvements
shall be made, or no building permits shall be issued until the owner or
developer provides a sufficient financial guarantee to ensure completion of the
following "required improvements":
      1.   Any landscaping improvements, whether upon public or private
property, required under the provisions of this title, or under any condition
imposed under authority of the provisions of this title; or
      2.   Any improvement to adjacent road surfaces, curbs, gutters or
sidewalks required under the provisions of this title; or
      3.   Any improvement for storm drainage, sewer, or water infrastructure
required under the provisions of this title, or under any condition imposed
under authority of the provisions of this title; or
      4.   Common open space improvements, private streets or private utilities
for which a financial guarantee is required under the subdivision title of this
code.
   B.   Escrow Account, Agreement: A sufficient financial guarantee shall be
provided by the establishment of a city escrow account, an escrow agreement, or
an irrevocable letter of credit for one hundred percent (100%) of the estimated
cost of the above required improvements, based on the actual cost estimate
provided by the owner or developer. The financial guarantee shall provide that
the required improvements be installed upon the completion of the development
or the account funds may be called by the city to complete the improvements.
Acceptable escrow agents shall include the city treasurer or a federally
insured bank or savings institution, or other escrow agent approved by the city
attorney. The issuer and agreement shall be subject to the approval of the city
attorney.
   C.   Warranty:
      1.   All required improvements shall be warranted by the property owner
for one year from the date of final inspection approval for all such
improvements.
      2.   The city may, as a warranty, either retain ten percent (10%) of the
guarantee amount or require an escrow equal to ten percent (10%) of the
required improvement costs. The ten percent (10%) warranty cost may be based on
the original estimate determined under subsection B of this section or the
actual cost of the required improvements if the owner or developer provides the
city with receipts or other evidence of actual cost deemed satisfactory by the
city engineer.
   D.   Effect Of Noncompliance On Subsequent Applications: No building permits
shall be issued nor development approvals given for any expansion, amendment or
subsequent phase of a development, if the required improvements have not been
installed in accordance with prior permits or approvals for the site. This
prohibition may be waived, if the reviewing official or body determines the
following:
      1.   The approval of the expansion, amendment, or subsequent phase would
result in the removal of the previously required improvements; and
      2.   Any previously required improvements which are not affected by the
proposed expansion, amendment or subsequent phase have been installed; and
      3.   Adequate security is provided for the previously uninstalled
required improvements, as well as for any new required improvements imposed in
regards to the expansion, amendment or subsequent phase.
   E.   Installation Of Improvements; Completion: Required improvements shall
be installed and completed before occupancy or use of any building, structure
or improvement approved in regards to the site plan, permit or other
development. In the case of inclement weather that prevents the installation of
the required improvements, the time of the improvements may be extended, in
writing, upon approval of the applicable reviewing official or body, or
designee. However, in no case shall the time for completion be extended beyond
June 1 immediately following the completion date, and no additional phases of
any development shall be permitted during such period of extension.
   F.   Release: The funds provided under the financial guarantee shall not be
released until an authorized representative of the city has certified in
writing that the required performance is completed and that the city releases
its right to draw funds either in full or in part. Upon expiration of the
warranty period, the city shall release the established security in whole or in
part by providing the issuer a certificate, signed by an authorized
representative of the city, that the city releases its right to draw funds or
to the extent applicable. As portions of the required improvements are
completed for large developments, the owner or developer may petition the city
to reduce the amount of the original financial guarantee provided that a
request occur not more frequently than every thirty (30) days. If the city
determines that the portions of the required improvements that have been
completed are in compliance with city ordinances, the approved site plan, and
any conditions of approval, and that the amount to be released is sufficient to
justify the administrative expense, the city may cause the amount to be
partially released; provided, that a minimum of twenty percent (20%) is
retained as follows:
      1.   Ten percent (10%) is retained until expiration of the warranty
period; and
      2.   At least ten percent (10%) is retained to ensure completion of any
remaining required improvements.
   G.   Failure To Complete Required Improvements: In those cases where the
financial guarantee has been provided and the required improvements have not
been installed as required, the city may, in its discretion:
      1.   Pursue any available criminal or civil remedies to require the
responsible party to complete the required improvements;
      2.   Declare the development in default and obtain funds under the escrow
agreement and complete, at the city's discretion, all or a portion of the
required improvements either itself or through a third party;
      3.   Assign its right to receive funds under the security to any third
party, including a subsequent owner of the development, in whole or in part, in
exchange for the third party's or subsequent owner's promise to complete the
improvements for the development; or
      4.   Exercise any other rights available under the law.
   H.   Administrative Procedures: The mayor may establish procedures
consistent with this section relating to the administration of the financial
guarantee, including, but not limited to, fund management, release, default and
collection.
(Ord. 2013-35, 6-25-2013)
15-13-24: MOBILE HOMES, RECREATIONAL COACHES AND MANUFACTURED HOMES WITHOUT
PERMANENT FOUNDATION; LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   No occupied manufactured home, not on permanent foundation, shall be
located anywhere within the city except in a licensed manufactured home park.
Emergency or temporary parking of any unoccupied manufactured home outside a
licensed manufactured home park will be permitted for a period not exceeding
twenty four (24) hours. This subsection does not apply to manufactured home
sales areas.
   B.   Recreational coaches which do not include the facilities necessary to
be a "manufactured home" as defined in chapter 2 of this title shall not be
used at any place in the city, at any time, for living quarters except in
designated recreational coach parks.
   C.   No occupied mobile home shall be located anywhere within the city
unless such mobile home was legally located in a manufactured home park prior
to May 27, 1997. In the event a mobile home, legally located in a manufactured
home park prior to May 27, 1997, is moved, only a manufactured home may be
placed thereafter on such space. Emergency or temporary parking of any
unoccupied mobile home will be permitted for a period not exceeding twenty four
(24) hours.
(Ord. 97-36, 5-27-1997)
15-13-25: RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES FOR ELDERLY PERSONS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to comply with section 10-9-605
of the Utah code.
   B.   Requirements: A "residential facility for elderly persons" shall comply
with the following requirements:
      1.   The facility shall meet all applicable building, safety, zoning, and
health ordinances applicable to similar dwellings.
      2.   Minimum site development standards shall be the same as those for a
single-family dwelling or dwelling unit in the zone in which the facility is
located.
      3.   The facility shall be capable of use as such facility without
structural or landscaping alterations that would change the structure's
residential character.
      4.   The use granted and permitted by this subsection is nontransferable
and terminates if the structure is devoted to a use other than as a residential
facility for the elderly, or if the structure fails to comply with the
applicable health, safety, and building codes.
      5.   No residential facility for elderly persons, which facility has more
than five (5) elderly persons in residence, shall be established or maintained
within six hundred sixty feet (660') measured in a straight line between the
closest property lines of the lots or parcels, of the following similar
facilities:
         a.   Another residential facility for the elderly with more than five
(5) elderly persons in residence;
         b.   A residential facility for persons with a disability licensed for
more than five (5) disabled persons;
         c.   Any of the following facilities: protective housing facility;
transitional housing facility; assisted living facility or rehabilitation/
treatment facility.
(Ord. 2000-2, 1-4-2000)
15-13-26: DESIGN AND SEPARATION OF PROTECTIVE HOUSING, REHABILITATION/TREATMENT
FACILITIES, TRANSITIONAL HOUSING, AND ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES:
   A.   Any newly constructed facility in a residential zone shall comply with
the following design standards:
      1.   All setbacks shall be according to the other main building category
of the respective residential zone.
      2.   All required or accessory parking areas for the use shall be located
either in the rear yard area of the lot, behind the main building or in a
garage.
      3.   Notwithstanding the maximum height restriction of the individual
residential zone, a new building or addition shall not exceed one hundred ten
percent (110%) of the average height of the closest dwellings on both sides of
the proposed structure.
      4.   In order for new construction to reflect the design and character of
the existing neighborhood:
         a.   The roof design of the proposed structure or remodeled roof shall
be a pitched roof of the same slope as the most common roof slope of the homes
on the same side of the block on which the building is proposed.
         b.   The exterior materials of the walls shall have the same
proportion of usage on all four (4) sides of the building (e.g., if brick is
used on the front of the building it is also used on the other 3 sides).
         c.   The type of exterior materials shall be of traditional home
finish materials of brick, siding or stucco. The use of these materials shall
be applied in such a manner as to blend in with the neighborhood where the
building is located and not draw undue attention to the building because of the
materials, their color and combination being uncharacteristic of the other
buildings in the neighborhood.
         d.   The structure shall be designed with a front porch and at least
one of the following design features in the architecture of the building:
            (1)   Bay windows;
            (2)   Cantilevered floor;
            (3)   Dormers;
            (4)   Full length covered front veranda.
   B.   Any existing residential dwelling which has exterior modifications
proposed and is not normal maintenance of the building shall comply with the
above standards as much as physically possible based on the scope of work
proposed.
   C.   In all zones where allowed no protective housing facility, transitional
housing facility, rehabilitation/treatment facility or assisted living facility
shall be established or maintained within one thousand feet (1,000'), measured
in a straight line between the closest property lines of the lots or parcels of
any of the following similar facilities:
      1.   A protective housing facility;
      2.   A transitional housing facility or a rehabilitation/treatment
facility;
      3.   A residential facility for persons with a disability licensed for
the housing of more than five (5) disabled persons;
      4.   A residential facility for the elderly with more than five (5)
elderly persons in residence;
      5.   An assisted living facility; or
      6.   Boarding or lodging house.
   D.   In all residential zones where allowed the number of people lodged in a
transitional housing facility or a rehabilitation/treatment facility shall be
limited to a maximum of fifteen (15) individuals excluding support staff.
   E.   In all residential zones where allowed the number of people lodged in a
protective housing facility shall be limited to a maximum of fifteen (15)
individuals, excluding support staff, as a permitted use and from sixteen (16)
up to a maximum of thirty (30) individuals, excluding support staff, as a
conditional use.
(Ord. 2000-2, 1-4-2000; amd. Ord. 2002-58, 10-15-2002; Ord. 2005-47, 7-26-2005)
15-13-27: DESIGN STANDARDS FOR TWO-FAMILY DWELLINGS/DUPLEXES AND MULTIPLE-
FAMILY DWELLINGS:
   A.   Conversion Of Residential Buildings To Other Than Original Designed
Residential Use:
      1.   An existing residential building shall not be converted to add any
more dwelling units than it was originally built with when it was constructed.
      2.   Any increase in the number of dwelling units requires the removal of
the existing structure, except that homes listed on the local historic register
or eligible buildings in the Central Bench national historic district shall not
be removed in order to accommodate additional dwelling units but may only be
converted to multiple units on approval of the planning commission following
the procedures of subsection 15-6-3I of this title.
      3.   Replacement of a structure by new construction for use as a duplex
or multi-dwelling unit is allowed only if the additional units are permitted
according to the regulations of this title.
      4.   This section does not limit the construction of an accessory
dwelling unit if authorized, approved and constructed pursuant to chapter 32 of
this title.
   B.   Building Design: Dwelling structures shall be designed so that they
present a front appearance to the street. In order to accomplish this the
dwelling structure shall have:
      1.   A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the primary entry doors to the
individual units face the public street.
      2.   A minimum of ten percent (10%) of the wall surface area facing the
street on the main level in glazing.
      3.   A maximum of forty percent (40%) of the ground level width of the
building facing the street being occupied by garage doors. This does not
preclude attached garages with entrance from the side, detached garages behind
the dwellings or garages which are entered from the rear of the building by
means of alleys or private drives.
      4.   Surface parking and carports located only to the rear or side of the
structure. The area between the front of the building and the front property
line shall be in open green space except for sidewalks leading to front doors
and driveways leading to legal parking.
      5.   If seventy five percent (75%) of the linear block is developed with
dwelling structures, the building shall not be taller than the tallest dwelling
structure on that linear block regardless of the zoning height allowances.
(Ord. 2000-71, 1-16-2001, eff. 1-18-2001; amd. Ord. 2008-57, 10-28-2008)
15-13-28: LEGAL CONFORMING TWO-FAMILY DWELLINGS OR DUPLEXES:
Any two-family dwelling or duplex that was in legal existence prior to January
16, 2001, shall be considered legal conforming. Legal conforming status shall
authorize alterations, extensions, additions, or replacement of the two-family
dwelling or duplex, without having to comply with the requirements of chapter 6
of this title. When replacing a legal conforming two-family dwelling or duplex
with a new two-family dwelling or duplex:
   A.   There shall not be a square footage limitation on the replacement
dwelling;
   B.   The replacement structure shall not project into a required yard area
beyond any encroachment established by the structure being replaced; and
   C.   The number of new parking stalls provided shall be equal to or more
than the number of parking stalls being replaced, provided that all parking
stalls, and accesses to such stalls, shall be paved with an asphalt or concrete
surface.
(Ord. 2000-73, 1-16-2001, eff. 1-18-2001)
15-13-29: SPECIAL PERMIT FOR TEMPORARY FACILITIES AFTER A DISASTER:
   A.   Definitions: The following terms when used in this section shall have
the following meanings:
   DAMAGED BUILDING: A building that has been damaged and destroyed by fire,
flood, wind, earthquake, or other "disaster" as defined in title 12, chapter 15
of this code.
   SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARD: Any regulation under this title that imposes:
      1.   Yard, setback, height or other dimensional requirements, regarding
the placement of buildings, structures or other site improvements;
      2.   Building design or architectural requirements; or
      3.   Parking regulations or requirements.
   B.   Permit Granted: A temporary special permit may be granted allowing the
temporary waiver of a site development standard, or the installation of a
temporary building or structure not otherwise allowed as a permitted or
conditional use, only as follows:
      1.   The person requesting the permit:
         a.   Was the occupant of a damaged building and its reconstruction or
rehabilitation is being diligently pursued by the owner;
         b.   Plans to return to the damaged building after its reconstruction
or rehabilitation; and
         c.   Is in need of temporary facilities until such reconstruction or
rehabilitation is completed.
      2.   A temporary special permit shall only be granted if the applicant
demonstrates, and it is determined by the approving authority, that:
         a.   Either:
            (1)   The duration of the temporary relocation does not justify the
outlay of expenses necessary to bring the property into compliance with the
applicable site development standard or use restriction, or
            (2)   The improvement required by the site development standard or
use restriction is inconsistent with the subsequent use of the property;
         b.   If the temporary special permit does not relate to the site of
the damaged building, the person requesting the permit has made a reasonable
attempt to find temporary facilities, which comply with the requirements of
this title;
         c.   The duration of the temporary special permit is no longer than
reasonably necessary for the diligent reconstruction or rehabilitation of the
damaged building; and
         d.   The temporary waiver will not negatively impact surrounding
properties, cause public inconvenience, threaten the safety of the public,
cause damage to adjacent public infrastructure or property, or substantially
affect the implementation of the general plan.
      3.   An exception involving a design standard may be approved by the
director, or the director's designee; provided, however, that any person denied
such waiver may appeal to the Ogden City planning commission for a final
administrative determination. The approving authority may impose conditions
determined to be necessary to bring the requested waiver into compliance with
the intent of this section.
      4.   The time period for the temporary special permit shall not exceed
the period of time necessary for the diligent rehabilitation or reconstruction
of the damaged building; provided, that in no event may the temporary special
permit, nor any extension thereof, be approved for a period in excess of three
(3) years.
      5.   It shall be the obligation of the person requesting the permit to
provide all information determined by the approving authority to be necessary
for the determinations required above.
      6.   Within sixty (60) days after the expiration date of the permit, the
permittee or its successors or assigns shall either return the temporary site
back to its original condition, or otherwise bring the site into compliance
with the provisions of this title.
      7.   An agreement shall be entered into between the permittee and the
city at the time of issuance of the permit, which defines the site restoration
requirements, including restoration of landscaping, whether upon public or
private property, and removal of any temporary structures, and provides notice
to successors and assigns.
   C.   Intention: It is not the intention of this section to restrict the
power of the mayor to grant temporary exceptions for emergency situations under
section
15-1-13 of this title.
(Ord. 2001-64, 12-18-2001)
15-13-30: LEGAL CONFORMING BACHELOR OR BACHELORETTE DWELLING:
Any bachelor or bachelorette dwelling that was in legal existence prior to
October 1, 1998, shall be considered a legal conforming use for certain
purposes. Legal conforming use status shall authorize alterations, extensions,
additions, or replacement of the dwelling, without having to comply with the
requirements of chapter 6 of this title, except to the extent that the building
or site does not comply with existing minimum yard setbacks, height
restrictions, parking requirements, or landscaping requirements. If located in
a multiple-family zone, the site development standards shall be the same as the
requirements imposed on a multiple-family dwelling in the same zone. If located
in single-family or two-family zone, the site development standards shall be
those applicable to multiple-family dwellings in the R-3 zone.
(Ord. 2004-50, 7-27-2004)
15-13-31: TRANSITION PROVISION FOR APPLICATION OF DEFINITION OF FAMILY 1 :
   A.   Any dwelling unit having more than three (3) but no more than five (5)
unrelated individuals residing on the premises as of July 27, 2004, shall not
be required to comply with the definition of "family" as it applies to the
allowed number of unrelated individuals until January 27, 2006, unless granted
an extension under subsection B of this section. Notwithstanding the above,
individuals residing in a dwelling unit as four (4) or five (5) unrelated
individuals on July 27, 2004, shall be allowed to continue residency so long as
no other individual is residing in the dwelling unit who was not residing
therein on such date.
   B.   Extension:
      1.   Conditions: The director shall grant an owner of property affected
by subsection A of this section an extension of the time for complying with the
requirements of such subsection if:
         a.   The owner:
            (1)   By September 20, 2006, files a notice of intent to apply for
a time extension as provided in this subsection B, and
            (2)   By June 20, 2007, files a complete application for an
extension of time as provided in this subsection B; and
         b.   The owner's application for an extension of time demonstrates by
a preponderance of evidence that:
            (1)   The nonconforming use which is the subject of the application
was legally established as of July 27, 2004, and
            (2)   The owner is unable to recover prior to January 27, 2006, the
amount of the owner's investment in the property, using the formula provided in
subsection B2 of this section.
      2.   Formula:
         a.   The time period during which an owner may recover the amount of
the owner's investment in property affected by subsection A of this section
shall be determined by dividing the residual value of the property by the
average monthly net rental income from the property. The resulting figure is
the number of months which the owner shall have to recover his investment in
the property. For the purposes of this subsection, the following definitions
shall apply:
   ADJUSTED PRESENT VALUE: A property's original purchase price plus any
capital improvements and less depreciation and net income from the property,
all as adjusted for inflation to July 27, 2004.
   AMOUNT OF THE OWNER'S INVESTMENT: The adjusted present value of a property
as of July 27, 2004.
   COMPLIANCE VALUE: The appraised value of the property on July 27, 2004,
based on compliance with the requirements of this section.
   RESIDUAL VALUE: The difference between a property's adjusted present value
and its compliance value as of July 27, 2004.
         b.   The time period determined under subsection B2a of this section
shall apply to the property for which the owner made an application for
extension and to the owner's successors, if any, until such time period has
run.
      3.   Regulations: The director may adopt reasonable regulations to carry
out the purpose of this subsection B.
      4.   Stay Of Enforcement Action: Timely filing of a notice of intent as
provided herein shall stay any enforcement action pending the filing of a
complete application as provided herein. Timely filing of the complete
application for extension of time shall stay any enforcement action pending the
director's final decision on the application.
   C.   The burden of establishing a right to maintain more than three (3) but
no more than five (5) unrelated individuals under this section shall be on the
owner, occupant or other possessor of the dwelling unit.
(Ord. 2004-50, 7-27-2004; Ord. 2006-26, 6-20-2006)
 
Notes
1 1. See definition of "family" in section 15-2-7 of this title.
15-13-32: LENGTH OF STAY IN A MOTEL OR HOTEL IF NO PERMANENT RESIDENCE:
No owner or operator of a hotel or motel shall allow any individual or family
without a primary residence at another location to stay a maximum of ninety
(90) days in any twelve (12) month period.
(Ord. 2005-48, 7-26-2005)
15-13-33: STANDARDS FOR ACCESSORY BUILDINGS IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES:
In all Residential Zones, unless a more restrictive standard has been adopted
within this title, accessory buildings shall meet the following requirements:
   A.   Quantity Allowed: Each residential lot may have up to a total of three
(3) accessory buildings with a combined floor area not to exceed the maximum
lot coverage allowed in the zone. The following buildings, although included in
the lot coverage calculation, are not counted in the number of allowed
accessory buildings:
      1.   One attached or detached garage or carport; and
      2.   Buildings that are open on a minimum of three (3) sides, limited to
patio covers, trellises, cabanas, gazebos, or arbors.
   B.   Design: The original design of the building must have been to function
as a typical accessory residential structure, such as a storage shed or
carport, and not for some other use. Reuse of a metal structure originally
designed or used for other purposes, such as shipping or cargo containers, is
not allowed unless fully contained within an accessory building located,
designed and built in compliance with this section.
   C.   Exterior Materials And Finish: The exterior surface of the accessory
building shall be constructed of materials intended for exterior finished walls
and roofs.
      1.   Exterior wall finish materials for a building over four hundred
(400) square feet are limited to:
         a.   Brick, stone, or synthetic stone;
         b.   Wood lap, tongue and groove siding, hardiplank, or other similar
siding;
         c.   Vinyl siding, glass, stucco or stucco appearing material;
         d.   Architectural metal when reviewed and approved by the Planning
Commission on a case by case basis; or
         e.   Other metal finish materials when reviewed and approved by the
Planning Commission on a case by case basis when the building meets all of the
following criteria:
            (1)   The building is an accessory building to the primary use of
either a single family home or agricultural use;
            (2)   The building is a detached structure on a lot larger than
one-half (1/2) acre, and there are no other detached accessory structures
larger than four hundred (400) square feet;
            (3)   Other considerations such as topography do not increase
potential negative effects on the single family or agricultural use or that of
adjacent parcels zoned as Residential;
            (4)   The metal exterior finish is either baked-on colored enamel
or vinyl coating. No galvanized or bare metal permitted;
            (5)   Roof types are either gabled, shed or gambrel with a minimum
pitch of 4:12 and a minimum six inch (6") eave overhang;
            (6)   A relief feature is included on at least one side of the
building that breaks up the longer side, front, or roof elevation of the
building (i.e., awning, building projection, etc.) and the roof of the relief
feature is of the same materials as the roof materials of the building;
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4130.png]
 
            (7)   Corrugated metal is not allowed unless it has a squared rib,
not wavy rib appearance; and
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4132.png]
 
- Squared rib corrugated metal ALLOWED
 
            (8)   Windows are located on at least two (2) of the four (4) sides
of the building.
      2.   Exterior wall finish materials for a building under four hundred
(400) square feet, in addition to the materials described in subsection C1 of
this section, may also be:
         a.   Metal siding that has a baked enamel paint or vinyl coating;
         b.   Architectural metal; or
         c.   Rigid vinyl walls.
      3.   Open structures on corner lots that are otherwise allowed within the
side yard setback facing a street shall be constructed of:
         a.   New dimensional lumber which is properly treated or of a species
suitable for outdoor use; or
         b.   Dimensional HDPE (high density polyethylene), vinyl, or composite
lumber designed for such use (e.g., Trex).
      4.   Roofing shall be made of materials designed for such application,
including: composition asphalt/fiberglass shingles, wood shakes, slate, tile,
or similar appearing materials, standing seam metal roof systems and metal
shingles. Galvanized metal surfaces, reflective surfaces, or reuse of materials
that are not originally designed as an exterior wall or roof finish material
are not permitted.
      5.   The Director may allow the use of materials other than those listed
above only if they are compatible with the exterior materials and finishes of
the main residential building. If agreement cannot be reached on compatibility,
the proposed materials/finishes shall be subject to Planning Commission review
and approval.
      6.   The provisions of this subsection C do not supersede or nullify
building design or material requirements applicable to the specific zone in
which the building is located.
   D.   Location And Size:
      1.   No detached accessory building, other than trellises, shall be
allowed between the front of the main residential building and the street.
      2.   A garage or carport attached to the main residential building is
allowed between the front of the main residential building and the street if
the front yard setback requirement for the zone is maintained and the garage or
carport is integrated into the design of the residential building, with the
same exterior wall treatment, roof slope, and roofing material as the building
to which it is attached.
      3.   Metal accessory buildings must be located in the rear yard and shall
not exceed the lesser of four hundred (400) square feet or the maximum lot
coverage allowed in the zone.
      4.   Nonmetal accessory buildings and accessory buildings finished with
architectural metal may be located in an interior side yard or rear yard
provided they meet the required setbacks of the zone.
      5.   On a corner lot, an attached or detached accessory building (with or
without a roof) that is open on at least three (3) sides may extend into the
side yard setback facing a street up to the minimum side yard setback for an
interior lot in its respective zone. Such structures are limited to covered or
uncovered decks, patios, gazebos, pergolas, and trellises. The finished floor
elevation of these structures may not be higher than eighteen inches (18")
above finish grade.
      6.   Parking/storage of boats, trailers, campers, equipment, materials,
etc., is prohibited within the side yard setback facing a street.
      7.   The footprint of an accessory building on a one-half (1/2) acre or
smaller residential lot may not exceed the lesser of eighty percent (80%) of
the footprint of the main residential building or the maximum lot coverage
allowed in the zone.
      8.   The footprint of an accessory building on a larger than one- half
(1/2) acre residential lot may not exceed the footprint of the main residential
building unless authorized by a conditional use permit. In addition:
         a.   The accessory building may not exceed the maximum lot coverage
allowed in the zone; and
         b.   An accessory building with a footprint greater than eighty
percent (80%) of the footprint of the main residential building shall be set
back from the rear and side lot lines a distance equal to the minimum required
setback for main buildings in the zone.
   E.   Roof: An accessory building over two hundred (200) square feet shall
have a pitched roof with a minimum of six inch (6") overhanging eaves or match
the existing form, slope, and materials of the roof of the main residential
building. The eave requirement may be modified by the Planning Commission upon
finding that an exception to the eave standard is compatible with the main
building and does not adversely impact the surrounding neighborhood.
   F.   Doors: If the building is equipped with a door or doors, the door or
doors may not take up more than eighty percent (80%) of the structure's front
face.
   G.   Height: The building shall not exceed the maximum height allowed by
section
15-13-5 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2011-47, 10-18-2011; amd. Ord. 2019-12, 3-26-2019)
15-13-34: SHORT TERM LOAN BUSINESSES:
   A.   Location: No short term loan business shall be located within one
thousand feet (1,000') of another short term loan business or within six
hundred sixty feet (660') of a pawnbroker or sexually oriented business.
   B.   Measurements: Distances shall be measured in a straight line, without
regard to intervening structures or zoning districts, from the property line of
each business to the closest property boundary of the short term loan business,
pawnbroker or sexually oriented business.
   C.   Number Allowed: The total number of short term loan businesses allowed
in the City shall be limited to no more than fifteen (15).
   D.   Zoning: Short term loan businesses shall only be allowed in areas zoned
for their use pursuant to the zoning ordinance. When allowed within a zoning
district, a short term loan business may only be located on the following
streets: Harrison Boulevard, Washington Boulevard, Wall Avenue, 12th Street,
and Riverdale Road.
   E.   Disclosure Signs: Each short term loan business shall post a sign with
solid black lettering on a white background, in 50-point, nonitalicized, bold
arial typeface designed to achieve a letter height of at least one-half inch
(1/2"), in the English and Spanish languages, at every public entrance to the
business bearing the following disclosure:
   DISCLOSURE REQUIRED BY OGDEN CITY
THIS BUSINESS SPECIALIZES IN MAKING LOANS FOR SHORT-TERM NEEDS.
THESE LOANS SHOULD NOT BE USED AS A LONG-TERM FINANCIAL SOLUTION.
       DIVULGACIÓN REQUERIDA POR LA CIUDAD DE OGDEN
ESTE NEGOCIO SE ESPECIALIZA EN LA TOMA DE PRÉSTAMOS PARA LAS NECESIDADES A
CORTO PLAZO.
STOS PRÉSTAMOS NO DEBEN UTILIZARSE COMO UNA SOLUCIÓN FINANCIERA A LARGO PLAZO.
The disclosure signs required by this section may be provided by the city,
shall face the entrance to the business, and shall be placed either on the
interior surface of the door so that the top edge of the sign is between forty
eight inches (48") and seventy two inches (72") from the entrance threshold
(measured vertically) or shall be located directly behind the entry door
without any intervening obstruction, between forty eight inches (48") and
seventy two inches (72") from the floor (measured vertically), as near to the
entry door as is allowed by the current building code adopted by Ogden City.
Existing short term loan businesses shall post the disclosure signs no later
than July 1, 2010.
   F.   Additional Disclosures: If not otherwise required by state or federal
law, a short term loan business shall:
      1.   Post in a conspicuous location on its premises that can be viewed by
a person seeking a short term loan a complete schedule of any interest or fees
charged using dollar amounts;
      2.   Enter into a written contract for the short term loan;
      3.   Provide the person seeking the short term loan a copy of the written
contract described in subsection F2 of this section; and
      4.   Orally review with the person seeking the short term loan the terms
of the short term loan including:
         a.   The amount of any interest rate or fee;
         b.   The date on which the full amount of a short term loan is due;
      5.   Comply with the following as in effect on the date the short term
loan is extended:
         a.   Truth in lending act, 15 USC section 1601 et seq., and its
implementing federal regulations;
         b.   Equal credit opportunity act, 15 USC section 1691, and its
implementing federal regulations;
         c.   Bank secrecy act, 12 USC sections 1829b, 1951 through 1959, and
31 USC sections 5311 through 5332, and its implementing regulations; and
         d.   Title 70C, Utah consumer credit code.
(Ord. 2013-6, 1-22-2013)
15-13-35: REGULATIONS GOVERNING RETAIL TOBACCO SPECIALTY BUSINESS:
   A.   A retail tobacco specialty business beginning operation after May 8,
2012, is required to have a minimum separation from each of the following uses:
      1.   One thousand feet (1,000') from:
         a.   A public or private kindergarten, elementary, middle, junior high
or high school;
         b.   A licensed childcare facility or preschool;
         c.   A trade or technical school;
         d.   A church;
         e.   A public library;
         f.   A public playground;
         g.   A public park;
         h.   A youth center or other space used primarily for youth oriented
activities;
         i.   A public recreation facility;
         j.   A public arcade; and
      2.   Six hundred feet (600') from:
         a.   Another retail tobacco specialty business;
         b.   An agriculture zone or use;
         c.   A residential zone or use.
   B.   The distance separation shall be measured in a straight line from the
nearest entrance of the retail tobacco specialty business to the nearest
property line of the other uses without regard to intervening structures or
zoning districts.
   C.   Retail tobacco businesses established prior to May 9, 2012, that do not
meet the minimum separation requirements are nonconforming uses and are subject
to the nonconforming use provisions with the exception of abandonment of use. A
nonconforming retail tobacco specialty business use is deemed abandoned if it
is suspended or discontinued for more than sixty (60) consecutive days or the
business license expires without renewal or is permanently revoked.
(Ord. 2013-50, 12-3-2013)
15-13-36: REGULATIONS GOVERNING FRONT ENTRY PORCHES IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES:
Single-family dwellings in a residential zone may have a front porch that
extends into the front yard setback, if:
   A.   The porch has an entrance facing the street;
   B.   The porch and porch roof are designed to follow the architectural lines
and building materials of the home;
   C.   The deck, roof and columns or posts do not extend into the required
front yard setback more than eight feet (8') and the eave overhang does not
extend into the required front yard setback more than ten feet (10');
   D.   The porch has a minimum roof projection over the front door of four
feet (4');
   E.   The porch extends at least five feet (5') in width along the front face
of the dwelling and may extend the full length of the front of the dwelling;
   F.   The porch remains open on three (3) sides (except for see through
insect screens) and does not have glass or walls taller than forty inches (40")
around the sides that are open;
   G.   The portion of the porch within the setback does not include space for
any other use, such as living or storage space; and
   H.   The distance from the front property line to the porch structure is not
less than twelve feet (12').
(Ord. 2014-17, 4-22-2014)
15-13-37: MOBILE FOOD TRUCKS AND MOBILE FOOD TRAILERS:
   A.   Location:
      1.   When allowed in the use regulations applicable to a specific zoning
category, mobile food trucks may be:
         a.   Located in a private parking lot with property owner approval for
that location; or
         b.   Parked parallel to the curb in a public right-of-way.
      2.   Mobile food trailers are not allowed:
         a.   In residential zones except when part of a special event; or
         b.   Within the public right-of-way.
   B.   Parked In Private Parking Lot: When parked in a private parking lot, a
mobile food truck or a mobile food trailer shall:
      1.   Have access to a permanent bathroom facility;
      2.   Be located on an improved portion of the lot; and
      3.   Be located on a lot where an occupied business is operating.
   C.   Parked In Public Right-Of-Way: When parked in the public right-of-way,
a mobile food truck:
      1.   May only be parked for the applicable period of time allowed on the
street where the food truck is located;
      2.   Is limited to operating on any one linear block once per day;
      3.   Is limited to one mobile food truck per linear block;
      4.   May have a maximum two foot (2') canopy extension projecting toward
the public sidewalk;
      5.   May only occupy legal parallel parking where the serving window
faces the public sidewalk;
      6.   May not supply street furnishings other than a garbage can located
next to the truck;
      7.   May not, except with the permission of the restaurant, operate in
the right-of-way in front of that portion of a building housing a restaurant on
the main floor; and
      8.   May not, except with the permission of the property owner, operate
immediately adjacent to a lot or parcel whose primary use is for a church,
synagogue or similar permanent building used for regular religious worship.
   D.   Conditions That Apply: Regardless of where a mobile food truck or
mobile food trailer is operated or parked, the following conditions apply:
      1.   A truck or trailer shall not operate within one hundred feet (100')
of a sidewalk vending cart.
      2.   All signs are limited to those that are permanent and physically
attached to the truck or trailer.
      3.   The operator shall provide trash and recycling containers which
shall be removed from site when the truck or trailer leaves site.
      4.   Trucks and trailers are to be maintained in a neat and professional
manner.
      5.   Hours of operation are between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M. with no overnight parking except at commissary location.
      6.   Trucks are not allowed to idle.
      7.   Music is allowed provided it does not exceed the noise ordinance.
(Ord. 2017-38, 8-22-2017)
15-13-38: RESIDENTIAL VACATION RENTAL:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of residential vacation rentals in Ogden City is
to provide a short term rental option in residential zones for individuals who
have a primary residence at another location.
      1.   Special regulation of residential vacation rentals is necessary to
ensure that they will be compatible with surrounding residential uses and will
not be detrimental to, or alter, the neighborhoods in which they are located.
      2.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a person may
not be fined, charged, prosecuted, denied a business license or otherwise
punished solely for the act of listing or offering a residential vacation
rental.
   B.   Definitions: As used in this section, the following words shall have
the meanings as defined in this subsection:
   AGENT: A person or entity who contracts with an owner to manage or otherwise
assist in the leasing or occupancy of real property as a residential vacation
rental, except that it does not include a person or entity who solely provides
software or internet services to list or market the owner's property to
potential renters.
   NET LIVING SPACE: Space within a residential vacation rental utilized for
living, sleeping or eating, but not including space used for hallways, stairs,
cooking, bathing, washing or sanitation purposes.
   OWNER: A person or entity who claims an ownership interest in real property,
including any part owner, joint owner or tenant in common of the whole or of a
part of such land.
   OWNER-OCCUPIED: A dwelling that is a person's primary residence; in which
the person lives for at least eight (8) months each year; and for which title
is in the person's name or in the name of a living trust of which the person is
both the trustor and the beneficiary.
   C.   Proof Of Residency: A person desiring to be recognized as an owner-
occupant shall establish that the property is the person's primary residence by
showing that the property is taxed as their primary personal residence and
providing two (2) of the following forms of evidence that match the address of
the residence:
      1.   Either the address shown on the person's driver's license, vehicle
registration, or State issued identification card;
      2.   The address shown on the person's voter registration; or
      3.   Either the address shown on the person's State or Federal tax
return.
   D.   Permit Required: It is unlawful for an owner or the owner's agent to
rent a dwelling as a residential vacation rental unless the owner or agent has
a valid current Ogden City residential vacation rental permit and a rooming
house business license under title 5 of this Code.
   E.   Issuance Of Permit: The issuance of a residential vacation rental
permit is conditioned on the owner or owner's agent also obtaining and
completing other permits that may be necessary to bring the dwelling into
compliance with the standards of this section. The applicant shall pay any
required fee and submit as part of the initial application for a residential
vacation rental permit:
      1.   Detailed floor plans drawn to scale with labels on rooms indicating
uses or proposed uses;
      2.   A drawing or other description as to how required legal off- street
parking will be provided and the number of legal off- street parking spaces
available;
      3.   A copy of a State issued sales tax license;
      4.   A statement affirming whether or not the vacation rental will be
owner-occupied; and
      5.   The name and contact information of the person described in
subsection I10 of this section.
   F.   Renewals: In order to renew a residential vacation permit, a person
shall pay any required fee and provide:
      1.   A copy of the person's Utah Transient Room Tax Return for the prior
year.
      2.   A list from the prior year of the nights the residential vacation
rental was occupied, the number of people in each rental to whom it was rented
and the length of occupancy of each person or group of people.
   G.   Compliance With Building Codes: A residential vacation rental shall be
inspected upon initial application, upon any housing complaint filed with the
City, and every two (2) years for non- owner occupied dwellings, to verify that
the structure:
      1.   Complies with the information contained in the application and with
the requirements of this section;
      2.   Complies with all applicable local and State Building, Health, Fire,
Safety and Maintenance Codes;
      3.   Has windows in sleeping rooms that:
         a.   Comply with the current Building Code for egress window size and
location in all basement sleeping rooms regardless of when the structure was
built;
         b.   For buildings constructed prior to January 1, 1972, have a
minimum operable width of twenty inches (20"), a minimum height of twenty four
inches (24"), and a minimum glazing area of five (5) square feet, which can
include meeting rails or muntins, in above grade sleeping rooms; and
         c.   For buildings constructed after January 1, 1972, comply with the
Building Code in effect at the time the building was constructed in above grade
sleeping rooms;
      4.   Has a functioning interconnected fire alarm system; and
      5.   Has a fire extinguisher with a current tag or new within a year with
proof of purchase and a minimum rating of 2-A:10BC that is hung in a visible
and accessible location with the top of the extinguisher no more than sixty
inches (60") above the floor.
   H.   Spacing Of Non-Owner Occupied Residential Vacation Rentals: A non-
owner-occupied residential vacation rental may not be located on the same
linear block as another non-owner-occupied residential vacation rental,
residential facility for persons with a disability or residential facility for
elderly persons. A non-owner-occupied residential vacation rental permit may be
renewed if a residential facility for persons with a disability or residential
facility for elderly persons is established on the same linear block after the
original residential vacation permit was issued.
   I.   Standards: All residential vacation rentals must conform to the
following standards:
      1.   Occupancy Limits: A residential vacation rental may be occupied by
no more than two (2) people per sleeping room, as established by the inspection
described in subsection G of this section, plus two (2) additional people. The
number of allowed occupants may be increased if:
         a.   The minimum number of required off-street parking spaces are
provided based on the number of sleeping rooms in the structure;
         b.   The total number of permitted occupants does not exceed one (1)
person for every two hundred (200) square feet of net living space, with the
number of occupants rounded down to the nearest whole number; and
         c.   Any basement sleeping room designated or arranged for occupancy
by more than two (2) people has a Code compliant door that exits directly to
the exterior of the residential vacation rental.
      2.   Occupancy Limits For Owner-Occupied Rentals Where The Owner Is
Absent: In addition to the numerical occupancy limits described in subsection
I1 of this section, occupancy of an owner-occupied residential vacation rental
that is not being lived in by the owner-occupant or a person related to the
owner at the time of the vacation rental is limited to a single family as
defined by section
15-2-7 of this title.
      3.   Occupancy Limits For Owner-Occupied Rentals Where The Owner Is
Present: If the dwelling is being lived in by the owner-occupant or a person
related to the owner-occupant at the time of the vacation rental:
         a.   Guest occupancy is limited to no more than two (2) adults, with
or without minor children of the two (2) adults; and
         b.   The calculation of the number of guests allowed under subsection
I1 of this section shall be based on the number of bedrooms or net living space
occupied exclusively by the guests.
      4.   Single Contract: The residential vacation rental may not be the
subject of multiple rental contracts for the same night or nights.
      5.   Off-Street Parking: A residential vacation rental shall provide no
less than the two (2) off street parking spaces that meet the legal location
and requirements for off street parking for a single-family dwelling or have
been established as legal non-conforming parking.
         a.   No additional off street parking in the front or side yard of the
residential vacation rental is allowed, such as a side yard parking slab or
widened driveway, but tandem parking (1 vehicle behind another) in the driveway
is allowed, provided the tandem parking does not extend over the property line
or interfere with any public sidewalk.
         b.   A residential vacation rental with more than four (4) sleeping
rooms that is not owner occupied or that is owner-occupied but not being lived
in by the owner-occupant or a person related to the owner-occupant at the time
of the vacation rental shall, in addition to the required two (2) off street
parking spaces, provide off street parking at the rate of one-half (1/2)
parking space for each additional sleeping room recognized in the permit,
rounded up to the nearest whole number.
         c.   An owner-occupied vacation rental that is being lived in by the
owner-occupant or a person related to the owner-occupant at the time of the
vacation rental shall, in addition to the required two (2) off street parking
spaces, provide off street parking at the rate of one-half (1/2) parking space
for each sleeping room recognized in the permit, rounded up to the nearest
whole number.
         d.   A residential vacation rental may not utilize a driveway shared
with another parcel to provide access to parking unless the driveway was
approved to serve a common development, such as in a planned unit development.
      6.   On-Street Parking: On street parking may not be used to satisfy the
parking requirements for a residential vacation rental.
      7.   Garbage: Where a residential vacation rental receives garbage
service from Ogden City, the owner shall provide the minimum one (1) Ogden City
garbage cart and one (1) recycling cart.
         a.   Carts shall be placed at the side or rear of the dwelling and
shall not be in public view except on collection days.
         b.   Information about allowed recycling materials and garbage
collection dates shall be provided to the occupants of the residential vacation
rental.
         c.   The owner is responsible to ensure that garbage or other material
does not overflow the carts or accumulate outside of the carts.
      8.   Animals: If allowed by the owner, the number of household pets is
limited to the number allowed for a single family home. Pets must be boarded
inside the residence and may not be allowed outside unless accompanied by an
adult.
      9.   Signage: Signage is limited to the same standards applicable to a
home occupation, as contained in section
18-5-1, "Appendix A; Signs", of this Code.
      10.   Management: A responsible person shall be available at all times
who is capable of personally responding to the residential vacation rental
location within thirty (30) minutes.
         a.   The contact person name and phone number shall be posted in a
prominent place inside of the dwelling together with a copy of the residential
vacation rental permit; and
         b.   The contact information shall also be mailed by the responsible
person annually to surrounding property owners within three hundred feet (300')
of the property line of the residential vacation rental, except that mailing is
not required for an owner occupied residential vacation rental where the owner
does not make the dwelling available for rental during the owner's absence.
   J.   Permit Requirement: A residential vacation rental permit may not be
issued for a dwelling in a single family residential zone unless the dwelling
is owner-occupied.
   K.   Advertisements: An owner of property or the owner's agent who
advertises or rents a residential vacation rental shall include the following
information in every advertisement and in each rental contract:
      1.   The person's Ogden City residential vacation rental permit number;
      2.   The number of sleeping rooms available for rental as allowed in the
permit;
      3.   The ceiling height of any basement sleeping room if the ceiling is
between six feet eight inches (6'8") and seven feet (7');
      4.   The maximum number of people allowed to occupy the residential
vacation rental as contained in the permit;
      5.   Whether pets are allowed and the conditions associated with pets;
and
      6.   The number of legal off-street parking spaces recognized by the
permit as allowed for use by the residential vacation rental.
   L.   Unlawful Advertising: It is unlawful for an owner of property or the
owner's agent to advertise, represent orally or in writing, or sign a rental
contract for a residential vacation rental that:
      1.   Authorizes more people to occupy the residential vacation rental
than is allowed in the permit;
      2.   Allows the use of any portion of property outside of the residential
vacation rental for sleeping purposes by pitching tents or otherwise;
      3.   Authorizes or provides for more parking spaces, including on- street
parking, than are authorized in the permit.
   M.   Noncompliance With Standards: Noncompliance with the standards of this
section; allowing the property associated with the residential vacation rental
permit to become a nuisance, such as through violations of the City noise
ordinance or property maintenance standards; failure to maintain the original
conditions that allowed the residential vacation rental permit to be issued;
and entering into sham transactions shall each constitute just cause for the
denial of an application or renewal, or revocation of a residential vacation
rental permit.
      1.   Revocation shall be based upon the findings of fact at an
administrative hearing before a Hearing Officer, pursuant to title 5, chapter
1, article C of this Code, as such provisions may be applicable.
      2.   If the permit is revoked, the rental of the dwelling as a
residential vacation rental shall terminate within thirty (30) days of the
final determination.
      3.   A dwelling whose residential vacation rental permit has been revoked
is not eligible for use as a residential vacation rental for a period of three
(3) years from the date of revocation.
      4.   For purposes of this section, a sham transaction means any
transaction which is meant to, or could result in, a violation or avoidance of
other applicable zoning ordinances, including transactions:
         a.   Where a residential vacation rental is occupied by a person or
group of people for more than thirty (30) consecutive nights, regardless of the
term of any rental contract or contracts; or
         b.   Where a residential vacation rental is occupied by a person or
group of people, regardless of the number of nights of occupancy, who do not
have a primary residence at another location.
   N.   Denial Or Approval Of Application: After review by the Building
Services and Fire Divisions, the Planning Division shall approve or deny an
application for a residential vacation rental based on compliance with these
regulations and payment of the fee established in section
4-6-1 of this Code.
   O.   Time Period; Renewal: A residential vacation rental permit is valid for
one (1) year from the date of the approval and must be renewed annually. Change
of property ownership does not void the residential vacation rental permit if
the new owner obtains an updated permit within the earlier of ninety (90) days
after acquiring title to the property or upon expiration of the existing
permit.
   P.   Filing Period: There is an initial filing period, ending at five
o'clock (5:00) P.M. on January 20, 2017, for individuals who desire to obtain a
non-owner-occupied residential vacation rental permit to submit a permit
application. If more than one (1) application is submitted for a particular
linear block on or before the deadline, the Planning Division shall hold a
drawing between the applicants for the available permit. An individual who is
successful in a drawing shall complete any requirements to obtain a permit
within three (3) months. If all requirements are not met, the next person in
the drawing will be recognized as eligible for the permit subject to the same
terms as the first successful applicant.
(Ord. 2017-24, 5-23-2017)
15-13-39: STANDARDS FOR ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS:
In all residential zones, unless a more restrictive standard has been adopted
within this title, accessory dwelling units shall meet the following
requirements:
   A.   Purpose: It is the purpose of this section to establish regulations
controlling the use and construction of accessory dwelling units; to encourage
individuals to become and remain homeowners by allowing limited opportunities
for rental income; to allow the provision of security or services to owner
occupants of the dwelling; to provide options for structures designed as
single-family dwellings to meet the needs of owner occupants at a variety of
stages in their life cycle; and to protect the stability of neighborhoods.
   B.   Number Of Accessory Units Per Parcel: An accessory dwelling unit (ADU)
shall be allowed only on parcels containing a single- family dwelling. No more
than one (1) accessory dwelling unit shall be allowed for a lot or parcel which
also contains the single-family dwelling. ADUs shall not be allowed on lots or
units which are part of a PRUD, apartment building, group dwelling or a
condominium project.
   C.   Occupancy: The property owner, which includes titleholders, must occupy
either the primary or accessory dwelling as their permanent and principal
residence in order to qualify for an ADU.
      1.   As long as the owner occupies the main dwelling or the ADU then the
other unit is allowed to be rented under this ADU provision.
      2.   The owner is permitted to have a separate seasonal residence but
during the time away from the permanent residence they are not allowed to rent
out their vacant permanent residence unit. For the purposes of this subsection
"seasonal residence" shall mean living in another location up to four (4)
months in one (1) calendar year.
      3.   The property owner shall conform to the definition of "family" as
described in chapter 2 of this title.
      4.   The nonowner occupied unit is limited to no more than two (2)
related or unrelated adults, with or without minor children of the two (2)
adults.
      5.   Neither the single-family dwelling nor the ADU may be used or
licensed as a residential vacation rental.
   D.   Size: The ADU shall not occupy more than forty percent (40%) of the
building's total habitable square footage or for detached units shall not be
less than three hundred (300) square feet or more than eight hundred (800)
square feet. Detached units shall not occupy more than twenty five percent
(25%) of the rear yard area of the lot.
   E.   Appearance: The appearance of the dwelling shall remain that of a
single-family residence and not be altered with the exception of required
egress windows from bedrooms or entry doors. Any new detached building to
accommodate an accessory dwelling unit shall be designed to follow the
architectural design, style, and character of the main building. The exterior
surfaces shall have the same visual appearance of the exterior material and
color of the main building. The height of the building shall not exceed one (1)
story if the main building is one (1) story nor be taller than twenty five feet
(25') to the peak of the roof if the main building is taller than one (1)
story.
   F.   Outside Entrances: The entrances to the ADU and main dwelling shall use
existing entrances to the dwelling if possible. If a separate entrance is
required to be installed to one of the units, it shall be by means of a door
located in the side or rear of the building.
   G.   Parking: A single-family dwelling with an accessory dwelling unit shall
have in existence the required two (2) off street parking spaces that meet the
legal location and requirements for off street parking for a single-family
dwelling. No additional off street parking in the front or side yard for the
ADU is to be provided such as a side yard parking slab or widened driveway.
Tandem parking (1 vehicle behind another) in the driveway that leads to legal
parking for the main unit shall be the means of providing parking provided the
tandem parking does not extend over the property line and the public sidewalk.
   H.   Compliance With Building Codes: The ADU shall comply with all
applicable Building, Health and Fire Codes with special attention for existing
buildings given to providing the required emergency access from bedrooms.
   I.   Application Procedure:
      1.   Any homeowner who resides in a single-family dwelling and whose
property is in a residential zone and desires an accessory dwelling unit shall
obtain an accessory dwelling permit. The accessory dwelling permit shall be in
addition to any building permits that may be necessary to create the accessory
dwelling unit. The applicant shall submit as part of the application for an
accessory dwelling permit:
         a.   A site plan drawn accurately to scale that shows property lines
and dimensions, the location of existing buildings and building entrances, any
proposed building and its dimensions from buildings and property lines, and the
location of parking stalls.
         b.   Detailed floor plans drawn to scale with labels on rooms
indicating uses or proposed uses.
         c.   Written verification that the applicant is the owner of the
property and has permanent residency in the existing single- family dwelling
where the request is being made. The verification also requires the applicant
to acknowledge that they are the owner-occupant and will remain an owner-
occupant in order for an accessory dwelling unit to be permitted.
      2.   After review by the Building Services and Fire Divisions, the
Planning Division shall approve or deny the application based on compliance
with these regulations and payment of the same business license fee, including
any disproportionate fee, as an owner occupied duplex under title 5, chapter 1,
article B of this Code. The required fee may be reduced by any discounts
available to an owner occupied duplex.
      3.   Noncompliance with the standards of this section shall be just cause
for the denial of an application or revocation of an accessory dwelling permit
if the original conditions are not maintained that allowed the accessory
dwelling unit. Revocation shall be decided based upon the findings of fact at
an administrative hearing before a Hearing Officer, pursuant to title 5,
chapter 1, article C of this Code, as such provisions may be applicable. If the
permit is revoked the accessory dwelling unit shall be removed within thirty
(30) days of the final determination.
      4.   The approval of a permit for an accessory dwelling unit is valid for
one year from the date of the approval and must be renewed annually. Change of
property ownership voids the accessory dwelling permit. A new permit must be
applied for according to these requirements if the new owner desires an ADU.
(Ord. 2016-2, 1-12-2016)
15-13-40: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2017-32, 6-13-2017)
15-13-41: REGULATIONS FOR KEEPING OF RESIDENTIAL CHICKENS:
The purpose of this section is to provide minimum regulations for the ability
to keep residential chickens on a lot or parcel of property in all zones of
Ogden City.
   A.   Residential chickens are only permitted as an accessory use to a single
family owner occupied residential dwelling. Roosters are not allowed.
   B.   Residential chickens are permitted to be kept only in the rear yard of
a lot or parcel that is used as an owner occupied single family dwelling where
the rear yard has a minimum of two thousand (2,000) square feet of non-paved
open area that is free of structures, excluding a coop and run.
   C.   Where there is sufficient yard space to allow residential chickens, the
maximum number of chickens allowed is six (6).
   D.   The keeping of residential chickens is solely for egg production for
the use of the occupants of the owner occupied dwelling.
      1.   Residential chickens shall not be slaughtered on site or used for
meat.
      2.   An annual license is required for the keeping of each residential
chicken.
      3.   Eggs or fertilizer that are produced by residential chickens are not
permitted to be sold.
   E.   Residential chickens shall be maintained and contained in a chicken
coop and enclosed chicken run.
      1.   A coop shall be a completely enclosed structure for housing,
containing and protection of the residential chickens.
      2.   A run shall be enclosed on all sides, including the top, in which
residential chickens are able to move around outside the chicken coop.
      3.   Residential chickens are not permitted to roam freely outside of the
coop or run.
   F.   The chicken coop and run shall not exceed a footprint of one hundred
twenty (120) square feet nor be taller than seven feet (7') in height.
      1.   Neither the coop or run shall be constructed of scrap or dilapidated
materials nor use tarps or other non-rigid materials for shading or roofing.
      2.   Exterior finish materials for the coop shall be typical residential
exterior materials except openings may be covered in wire mesh or netting
rather than glass.
   G.   No portion of a coop or run shall be located closer than five feet (5')
to any property line in the rear yard or to a dwelling on the lot associated
with the coop and run.
      1.   In the case of a corner lot, a setback of five feet (5') to the rear
yard setback line facing a street shall be kept clear of any coop or run.
      2.   The five foot (5') setback area adjacent to the coop or run shall be
kept clear of any vegetation except sod grass to reduce the harboring of
rodents or other wildlife.
      3.   A coop or run shall not be located closer than twenty five feet
(25') to any dwelling structure on adjacent property.
   H.   Chicken feed shall be kept secure from rodents and other wildlife.
Spillage and leftover feed must be removed daily.
   I.   Chicken manure must be either placed in containers used for composting
on the property or air tight containers for the manure to be disposed of
offsite. No open air storage of manure is permitted on the property.
   J.   An initial animal license application shall also require a land use
permit that shows location of coop and run, area of open rear yard, and
distance to adjacent dwellings. An inspection confirming compliance to the
requirements of the land use permit is required prior to the animal license
being issued.
(Ord. 2017-50, 12-19-2017)
CHAPTER 14
OPEN SPACE ZONE O-1
SECTION:
15-14-1: Purpose And Intent
15-14-2: Permitted Uses
15-14-3: Conditional Uses
15-14-4: Site Development Standards
15-14-5: Regulation Of Outdoor Gun Ranges
15-14-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The open space zone is specifically intended to include two (2) types of land
use. The first is to encourage the preservation of a natural environment in an
otherwise urban setting; to hold for future generations open space in which
plants and animals can be protected and studied; to inhibit erection of
unnecessary buildings on a floodplain, on areas of severe slope and areas of
fault line and rockslides; to provide suitable areas for recreation and
relaxation, and to alleviate stream pollution. The second is to designate and
preserve as a land use public land that is predominately free of structures and
has been landscaped, developed and set aside for the use and benefit of the
public.
(Ord. 2011-59, 12-13-2011)
15-14-2: PERMITTED USES:
Agriculture.
Botanical or zoological garden.
Cemetery.
Conservation areas, botanical or zoological.
Fishing ponds, private or public.
Golf course.
Horse raising, provided conducted in a pasture of at least one acre size and
with a maximum density of two (2) horses per acre; and provided further, that
all barns and corrals associated with this use shall be maintained not closer
than fifty feet (50') to a property line.
Private park, playground or recreation area.
Public park, public recreation grounds and associated buildings.
Wildlife sanctuaries.
(Ord. 72-13, 7-6-1972; amd. Ord. 82-22, 5-20-1982; Ord. 86-14, 3-20-1986)
15-14-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following uses shall be permitted only when authorized by a conditional use
permit as provided in chapter 7 of this title:
Accessory building and use customarily incidental to any permitted use.
Outdoor gun range.
Private accessway for a non-O-1 use, which provides access over the O-1 zone
for such use. The accessway is from property within an adjacent zone where such
use is an allowed use, provided all the following conditions are met:
   A.   Only limited removal of riparian vegetation in the O-1 is needed to
accomplish access.
   B.   Physical evidence of access is on property in the O-1 zone.
   C.   The accessway crosses the O-1 zone in the shortest distance possible.
   D.   The accessway does not create a perceived zone boundary line by its
physical appearance.
   E.   Area around the accessway is revegetated if past usage or new
construction improvements have removed natural habitat.
   F.   Use of accessways is designed to prevent any environmental damage to
the O-1 zone habitat.
   G.   When the accessway crosses public property:
      1.   It does not create physical restrictions of recreational usage of
the O-1 zone; and
      2.   The applicant has established a legal right to cross such public
property.
   H.   Any proposed grading shall improve the O-1 area by directing runoff
away from the O-1 zone, not increase flooding potential, and improves or
enhances the natural habitat.
Privately operated concession or amusement business in a public park.
Public buildings.
Public utility substation or water storage reservoir developed by a public
agency.
(Ord. 2014-40, 10-28-2014)
15-14-4: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Minimum Lot Area: Minimum lot area, one acre; except for public parks
where there is no minimum.
   B.   Minimum Lot Width: Minimum lot width, one hundred fifty feet (150');
except for public parks where the minimum is sixty feet (60').
   C.   Minimum Yard Setbacks For Structures:
      1.   Front: Thirty feet (30').
      2.   Side: Twenty feet (20') each side.
      3.   Rear: Thirty feet (30').
   D.   Building Height:
      1.   Minimum: One story.
      2.   Maximum: Two and one-half (21/2) stories or thirty five feet (35').
(Ord. 2011-59, 12-13-2011)
15-14-5: REGULATION OF OUTDOOR GUN RANGES:
   A.   Conditions Met: An outdoor gun range shall meet the conditions of this
section in addition to any other conditions that may be required by a
conditional use permit.
   B.   Operational Standards:
      1.   A certified range master shall be present for each firing line at
all times when an outdoor gun range is in use;
      2.   Only firearms shall be discharged at gun ranges. No cannons,
artillery or rockets, or other devices may be discharged;
      3.   No retail sales or repair of firearms shall be permitted as an
accessory use to an outdoor gun range, except as part of a special event;
      4.   Outdoor gun ranges shall meet noise ordinance standards;
      5.   Reclamation and recycling of bullets and shot shall be done on a
regular basis as needed (following the EPA's "Best Management Practices For
Lead And Outdoor Shooting Ranges" manual) for all gun ranges, but not less
frequently than in five (5) year intervals; and
      6.   If not otherwise required by the county health department or by the
current building code, as adopted by title 16, chapter 2 of this code or its
successor provision, an outdoor gun range shall have permanent restroom
facilities, with at least one toilet available for each sex, at all times the
range is in operation.
   C.   Design Standards: Outdoor gun ranges shall:
      1.   Be completely enclosed by a seven foot (7') high security fence and
have controlled access;
      2.   Be equipped with all weather warning signs posted around the entire
perimeter of the shooting range. The signs shall be posted on the average of
one sign each one hundred (100) linear feet along the perimeter. Each sign
shall be a minimum of two (2) square feet and shall contain wording which warns
of shooting on the premises;
      3.   Be designed so that no lead shot can be discharged or deposited into
any wetland;
      4.   Not have any shooting lane located within five hundred feet (500')
of any residential structure, airstrip, or runway;
      5.   Be located on a parcel of five (5) acres or more in area;
      6.   Have complete containment by being confined by features and
structures that effectively prevent bullets and shot from escaping the range;
      7.   Be designed to provide protection from accidental or stray
ammunition discharge for surrounding properties and uses;
      8.   Be designed to minimize noise and meet noise ordinance regulations;
      9.   Have appropriate bullet and shot containment traps to allow for
effective reclamation and recycling;
      10.   Have appropriate engineered runoff controls to prevent
contamination of areas outside of the gun range;
      11.   Meet all applicable standards established in the "NRA Range Source
Book". Documentation indicating compliance with the aforementioned standards
shall be submitted with the site plan designed by an engineer or architect
licensed by the state;
      12.   Meet all applicable state and federal regulations including, but
not limited to: the Utah department of natural resources, environmental
protection agency and occupational safety and health administration.
Documentation indicating compliance with the aforementioned regulations shall
be submitted with the site plan designed by an engineer or architect licensed
by the state.
(Ord. 2014-40, 10-28-2014)
CHAPTER 15
SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONES R-
1-5, R-
1-6, R-
1-8, R-
1-10
SECTION:
15-15-1: Purpose And Intent
15-15-2: Permitted Uses
15-15-3: Conditional Uses
15-15-4: Site Development Standards
15-15-5: Building Design Standards For R-
1-5 Zone In East Central Community Area
15-15-6: Front Yard And Side Yard Facing A Street On A Corner Lot Fencing
Material In East Central Community Area
15-15-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of the R-
1-10, R-
1-8, R-
1-6, and R-
1-5 Zone classifications is to provide regulated areas for single-family
residential uses at four (4) different low density levels. The R-
1-5 Zone located in the East Central Community, defined for the purposes of
this chapter as the area between Harrison Boulevard and Washington Boulevard
and between 30th Street and 1850 South, includes additional site standards and
design guidelines to ensure context design with the historic character of that
specific area of R-
1-5 Zone.
(Ord. 2011-4, 1-18-2011)
15-15-2: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any permitted use.
Accessory dwelling unit (see section
15-13-39 of this title for ADU requirements), except within:
   A.   The Mount Ogden planning community where accessory dwelling units are
not allowed between Harrison Boulevard and Polk Avenue from 26th Street to the
north side of 35th Street and between Polk Avenue and the eastern City limits
from 26th Street to the north boundary line of lots on 36th Street; and
   B.   The East Central planning community where accessory dwelling units are
not allowed between Harrison Boulevard and Monroe Boulevard from 23rd Street to
18th Street and from 30th Street to 27th Street; between Harrison Boulevard and
Quincy Avenue from 27th Street to 26th Street; and between Harrison Boulevard
and Jackson Avenue from 26th Street to 25th Street.
Agriculture.
Church, synagogue or similar permanent building used for regular religious
worship.
Cluster subdivision, in accordance with chapter 9 of this title.
Daycare centers, provided the facility is located on the same site as an
educational institution.
Educational institution.
Golf course, except miniature golf course.
Greenhouse, noncommercial only.
Home occupation.
Household pets.
Pigeon loft for the housing of racing pigeons (only allowed on single-family
residential lots), in accordance with the standards contained in section
15-13-19 of this title.
Public building, public park, recreation grounds and associated buildings.
Residential facilities for persons with a disability (see section
15-13-15 of this title for facility requirements).
Residential garage sales or yard sales.
Residential vacation rental (see section
15-13-38 of this title for requirements).
Single-family dwelling.
Temporary building for use incidental to construction work. Such building shall
be removed upon the completion or abandonment of the construction work.
(Ord. 2018-4, 2-6-2018)
15-15-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following uses shall be permitted only when authorized by a conditional use
permit as provided in chapter 7 of this title:
Planned residential unit development (PRUD), in accordance with chapter 8 of
this title.
Private park, playground, or recreation area, but not including privately owned
commercial amusement business.
Privately operated concession or amusement business in a public park.
Public school bus terminal, subject to the following standards:
   A.   School buses are owned and operated by the School District;
   B.   Facility is located in conjunction with school administrative offices;
and
   C.   Accessory maintenance and fuel operations must be specifically applied
for and approved.
Public utility substation or water storage reservoir developed by a public
agency.
Residential infill development in the R-
1-5 and R-
1-6 Zones, in accordance with chapter 11 of this title.
(Ord. 2015-52, 11-24-2015)
15-15-4: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Minimum Lot Area:
      1.   R-
1-10 Zone: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet; corner lot, eleven thousand
(11,000) square feet.
      2.   R-
1-8 Zone: Eight thousand (8,000) square feet; corner lot, nine thousand (9,000)
square feet.
      3.   R-
1-6 Zone: Six thousand (6,000) square feet for dwelling and seven thousand five
hundred (7,500) square feet for other main building; corner lot, seven thousand
(7,000) square feet.
      4.   R-
1-5 Zone: Five thousand (5,000) square feet for dwelling and seven thousand
five hundred (7,500) square feet for other main building; corner lot, six
thousand (6,000) square feet.
   B.   Lot Width:
      1.   R-
1-10 Zone, minimum lot width: Eighty feet (80'); corner lot, ninety feet (90').
      2.   R-
1-8 Zone, minimum lot width: Sixty five feet (65'); corner lot, seventy five
feet (75').
      3.   R-
1-6 Zone, minimum lot width: Sixty feet (60'); corner lot, seventy feet (70').
      4.   R-
1-5 Zone:
         a.   Minimum lot width: Fifty feet (50'); corner lot, sixty feet
(60').
         b.   East Central Community, minimum lot width: Forty feet (40');
corner lot sixty feet (60'); all lots with a maximum width of seventy five feet
(75'), except that the depth of a corner lot may exceed seventy five feet
(75').
   C.   Yard Setbacks:
      1.   Front:
         a.   R-
1-10 and R-
1-8 Zones, minimum setback: Thirty feet (30'), except average where fifty
percent (50%) frontage is developed but not less than twenty feet (20').
         b.   R-
1-6 and R-
1-5 Zones except East Central Community, minimum setback: Twenty five feet
(25'), except average where fifty percent (50%) frontage is developed, but not
less than twenty feet (20').
         c.   East Central Community, minimum setback: Twenty feet (20') with a
maximum of thirty five feet (35').
      2.   Side:
         a.   Dwelling:
            (1)   R-
1-10 zone, minimum setback: Ten feet (10') with total width of two (2) side
yards not less than twenty four feet (24').
            (2)   R-
1-8 and R-
1-6 zones, minimum setback: Eight feet (8') with total width of two (2) side
yards not less than eighteen feet (18').
            (3)   R-
1-5 zone, minimum setback: Five feet (5') with total width of two (2) side
yards not less than fifteen feet (15').
            (4)   East Central Community, maximum setback: Ten feet (10') on
one side and twenty four feet (24') on the other side.
         b.   Main Building: Other main building, twenty feet (20') each side.
         c.   Accessory building:
            (1)   R-
1-10 zone: Ten feet (10'), except one foot (1') if located at least six feet
(6') from rear of main building, and sixty feet (60') back from front lot line,
but not closer than ten feet (10') to dwelling on adjacent lot.
            (2)   R-
1-8 and R-
1-6 zones: Eight feet (8'), except one foot (1') if located at least six feet
(6') from rear of main building and sixty feet (60') back from front lot line,
but no closer than eight feet (8') to dwelling on adjacent lot.
            (3)   R-
1-5 zone: Five feet (5'), except one foot (1') if located at least six feet
(6') from rear of main building, but no closer than six feet (6') to dwelling
on adjacent lot.
      3.   Corner Lot: Side facing street on corner lot, twenty feet (20'),
except average where fifty percent (50%) frontage is developed, but not less
than fifteen feet (15').
      4.   Rear:
         a.   Main Building: Main building, thirty feet (30').
         b.   Accessory Building:
            (1)   R-
1-10 zone: One foot (1'), except ten feet (10') where accessory building rears
on side yard of adjacent corner lot.
            (2)   R-
1-8 and R-
1-6 zones: One foot (1'), except eight feet (8') where accessory building rears
on side yard of adjacent corner lot.
            (3)   R-
1-5 zone: One foot (1'), except six feet (6') where accessory building rears on
side yard of adjacent corner lot.
   D.   Building Height:
      1.   Minimum: One story.
      2.   Maximum: Two and one-half (21/2) stories or thirty five feet (35').
   E.   Lot Coverage: No accessory building or group of accessory buildings
shall cover more than twenty five percent (25%) of the rear yard area; except
if the only accessory building is a garage, it may exceed the twenty five
percent (25%) coverage provided it is no larger than five hundred twenty eight
(528) square feet.
   F.   Landscaping: All yard areas except those areas where accessory
buildings, permitted parking and accessways are specifically allowed are
required to be landscaped and maintained. For new construction the landscaping
shall be installed within eighteen (18) months of the time of the first
occupancy of the dwelling.
(Ord. 2011-4, 1-18-2011)
15-15-5: BUILDING DESIGN STANDARDS FOR R-1-5 ZONE IN EAST CENTRAL COMMUNITY
AREA:
Development in the East Central Community is subject to the following
requirements:
   A.   Dwelling Sizes For Units Constructed After July 31, 2010:
      1.   Minimum Size: For a single-family dwelling the minimum square
footage (excluding any basement) is one thousand one hundred (1,100) square
feet for a single-story building or, for a two- story building, eight hundred
(800) square feet on the main level with a total minimum of one thousand three
hundred (1,300) square feet for the two (2) stories.
      2.   Maximum Size: For a single-family dwelling the maximum square
footage (excluding any basement) is two thousand four hundred (2,400) square
feet for a single-story building or, for a two- story building, one thousand
four hundred (1,400) square feet on the main level and two thousand eight
hundred (2,800) square feet for the total of two (2) stories. If more than
fifty percent (50%) of the same side of the block has dwellings larger than
these maximums for either single-story or two-story dwellings respectively,
then the new construction can exceed these maximums but cannot be larger than
the largest home on that block in square footage.
   B.   Exterior Building Materials And Design: In order to protect the
historic integrity established by the existing buildings in this zone, the
building design and exterior finishes of all new dwellings constructed in the
East Central Community, including new additions or exterior remodeling of
existing buildings or accessory structures after July 31, 2010, shall comply
with the following design requirements and materials. Covering of existing
exterior brick with any other type of material or paint is prohibited.
Properties which are on the local historic register are subject to the
requirements of the local landmarks commission and are exempt from these
standards if a certificate of historic appropriateness grants approval contrary
to these standards.
      1.   Exterior Solid Wall Surface Materials:
         a.   Face brick (maximum brick size 25/8 inches by 95/8 inches);
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4134.png]
 
         b.   Wood lap or tongue and groove wood siding that creates horizontal
lines;
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4136.png]
 
         c.   Hardiplank or similar nonvinyl or nonmetal siding material that
creates a horizontal wood lap appearance; or
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4138.png]
 
         d.   Stucco or stucco appearing material so long as there are breaks
in the wall plane with brick or stone relief areas.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4140.png]
 
         e.   A combination of brick as the base ground level material around
all four (4) sides of the building and stucco appearing material, wood or
hardiplank type materials above the brick; provided that on single-story
buildings the brick extends at a minimum to the bottom of the windowsills and
for two-story structures the brick extends at a minimum to the beginning of the
second story, and the transition between the two (2) types of exterior
materials is defined by a projection of the upper floor beyond the main wall or
a break in the wall surface due to a porch roofline.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4142.png]
 
      2.   Exterior Solid Wall Accent Surface Materials: There are portions of
a wall surface that can be designed as either areas of decoration to a building
or provide a continuity of design depending on the design concept of the
building. Materials used on gable ends of a building, dormers, bay projections,
chimneys, quoins, pillars, and other ornamental features have a wider variety
of design patterns and materials and are not limited to materials with
horizontal lines. Materials that are allowable for these features are:
         a.   The same brick, wood, stucco, or hardiplank or similar nonvinyl
or nonmetal siding material that creates a horizontal wood lap appearance used
on the main walls of the building.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4146.png]
 
         b.   Stucco, wood, or synthetic materials that have a wood or stucco
appearance and create a variation of patterns that accent the architectural
feature.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4148.png]
 
         c.   Brick, stone or synthetic stone in patterns different from the
major wall material.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4150.png]
 
      3.   Windows On Wall Surfaces Facing A Public Street: The minimum amount
of glass for the ground floor level of a dwelling facing the street is fifteen
percent (15%) of the wall surface and, for dwellings on a corner lot, ten
percent (10%) of the wall surface facing the side street. For two-story
dwellings, the minimum amount of glass for the second story is ten percent
(10%) of the wall surface facing the street and, for the second story of a
dwelling on a corner lot, seven and one-half percent (7.5%) of the second story
wall facing the side street.
      4.   Roof Design And Materials: Only roof designs that either are gabled,
gambrel, or hip design are permitted. The minimum roof slope is three to twelve
(3:12) (3 rise to 12 length). The roof exterior surface is limited to asphalt
shingles, wood shake or wood shingle, tile or tile appearing material or
composite materials that have the same visual appearance as the permitted
materials.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4144.png]
 
      5.   Entry Porches: New dwellings are required to have a main entrance
facing the street with a porch and associated roof over that porch. The roof
covering over the porch shall be an extension of the house in design and
building materials and shall have a minimum projection over the front door of
four feet (4') and a maximum of eight feet (8'). The porch shall be a minimum
of five feet (5') wide along the front face of the building and may extend the
full length of the front of the dwelling. It must remain open on two (2) sides
(except for insect see through screens) and cannot have glass or walls taller
than forty inches (40") around the sides that are open. Existing porches as of
July 31, 2010, that are open on three (3) sides shall not be enclosed on one
side but shall remain open on three (3) sides. New porches which are open on
three (3) sides and designed to follow the architectural lines and the material
of the existing home as provided in these standards can extend the deck, roof,
and columns or posts into the required front yard setback a maximum of eight
feet (8') and the eave overhang a maximum of ten feet (10').
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4154.png]
 
      6.   Garage Requirement, Design, Exterior Material, Locations And Other
Parking Regulations:
         a.   Any dwelling constructed after July 31, 2010, is required to
include, at a minimum, a one car garage as part of the construction.
         b.   New attached garages shall have the same exterior wall treatment
as the dwelling to which the garage is attached.
         c.   Detached new or remodeled garages located behind the home on an
interior lot may have either the same exterior wall treatment as the dwelling
or may use one of the solid wall surface materials listed under subsection B1
of this section.
         d.   A garage constructed after July 31, 2010, shall have the same
roof slope as the dwelling, shall use the same material used in the gable ends
of the roof of the dwelling if such roof treatment exists on the dwelling, and
the eave line of the garage roof facing the street shall have the same detail/
ornamentation that is present on the exterior of the dwelling facing the
street. If no ornamentation exists on the dwelling, none is required on the
garage. Roofing material for the garage shall be the same roofing material as
the home.
         e.   A new garage constructed on an interior lot may be freestanding
and set back behind the back line of the home or attached to the rear of the
home with either a side or rear garage door for vehicle entry into the garage.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4156.png]
 
         f.   A garage constructed on a corner lot may be:
            (1)   Freestanding in the rear yard if located a minimum of twenty
feet (20') behind the side line of the home on the side facing a street on a
corner lot and if it can meet the other required yard setbacks. If the garage
cannot meet the required minimum setbacks it may be less than twenty feet (20')
from the side line of the home, but in no case shall it be less than five feet
(5') behind the side line of the home on the side facing a street on a corner
lot (see figure i of this section);
            (2)   Behind the home on the opposite side of the lot from the
street corner and not facing the street (see figure ii of this section); or
            (3)   Attached to the home with an entrance into the garage on the
side of the house facing the street (see figure iii of this section).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4158.png]
 
         g.   Notwithstanding other general regulations, no recreational
vehicle or accessory vehicle parking slab is permitted in the side yard setback
or at the side of a dwelling in this zone and no front yard parking slab is
permitted, even if no parking is available on the site in this zone.
         h.   Driveways leading to legal parking shall be a maximum of twelve
feet (12') in width along the side of the home and shall flare to a width
necessary to provide access to the garage and the maneuvering space needed to
access the garage, except access from a side street to a garage on a corner lot
may have a maximum width of twenty four feet (24').
   C.   Exceptions:
      1.   Additions, repairs or maintenance of an existing dwelling may vary
from either the exterior wall materials or the roof design and materials
required by subsection B of this section if the building exterior material or
the roof design and materials, as of July 31, 2010, do not meet the material
types or roof shape specified in this section and the addition or repair will
match the existing building in exterior materials and roof shape.
      2.   If the exterior material of an existing dwelling is impossible to
match because the material is no longer available, the exterior wall material
may be any of the allowed exterior materials permitted in this section.
      3.   If an addition is to the rear of a dwelling on an interior lot and
does not face a street, the exterior wall material may be any of the allowed
exterior materials permitted in this section.
(Ord. 2011-67, 12-13-2011)
15-15-6: FRONT YARD AND SIDE YARD FACING A STREET ON A CORNER LOT FENCING
MATERIAL IN EAST CENTRAL COMMUNITY AREA:
Fences in the front yard setback or the side yard facing a street on a corner
lot of the East Central Community are limited to wood, decorative metal, vinyl
and plant material that may form a hedge. Brick or stone may be used as columns
in the fence design. Chainlink fencing is not permitted in the front yard
setback or in a side yard facing a street on a corner lot. All fencing designs
other than hedges shall be open in their design with a minimum spacing between
the solid members of the fence being equal to or greater than the width of the
solid members of the fence. Owners of property with existing chainlink, as of
July 31, 2010, shall not expand the use of chainlink fencing. If a chainlink
fence is replaced it may only be replaced with a fence made with material
permitted by this section.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4152.png]
 
(Ord. 2011-67, 12-13-2011)
CHAPTER 16
TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE R-2
SECTION:
15-16-1: Purpose And Intent
15-16-2: Permitted Uses
15-16-3: Conditional Uses
15-16-4: Site Development Standards
15-16-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of the R-2 zone classification is to accommodate a need for
moderate density residential districts, incorporating both single-family and
two-family units.
(Ord. 72-13, 7-6-1972)
15-16-2: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any permitted use.
Accessory dwelling unit (see section
15-13-39 of this title for ADU requirements).
Agriculture.
Church, synagogue or similar permanent building used for regular religious
worship.
Cluster subdivision, in accordance with chapter 9 of this title.
Daycare centers, provided the facility is located on the same site as an
educational institution.
Educational institution.
Golf course, except miniature golf course.
Greenhouse, noncommercial only.
Home occupation.
Household pets.
Pigeon loft for the housing of racing pigeons (only allowed on single-family
residential lots), in accordance with the standards as contained in section
15-13-19 of this title.
Public building, public park, recreation grounds and associated buildings.
Residential facilities for elderly persons (see section
15-13-25 of this title for facility requirements).
Residential facility for persons with a disability (see section
15-13-15 of this title for facility requirements).
Residential garage sales or yard sales.
Residential vacation rental (see section
15-13-38 of this title for requirements).
Single-family dwelling.
Temporary building for use incidental to construction work. Such building shall
be removed upon the completion or abandonment of the construction work.
Two-family dwelling, in accordance with the requirements of section
15-13-27 of this title.
(Ord. 2016-63, 12-20-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)
15-16-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following uses shall be permitted only when authorized by a conditional use
permit as provided in chapter 7 of this title:
Cemetery with customary incidental uses, including, but not limited to:
   A.   Mortuary services;
   B.   Crematory services;
   C.   Staff housing;
   D.   Service shops;
   E.   Chapel; and
   F.   Engraving, etching and final carving of unfinished grave markers and
monuments and the sale and distribution of such finished or unfinished markers
and monuments.
Group dwellings in accordance with chapter 10 of this title.
Planned residential unit development (PRUD), in accordance with chapter 8 of
this title.
Private park, playground, or recreation area, but not including privately owned
commercial amusement business.
Privately operated concession or amusement business in a public park.
Public school bus terminal, subject to the following standards:
   A.   School buses are owned and operated by the school district;
   B.   Facility is located in conjunction with school administrative offices;
and
   C.   Accessory maintenance and fuel operations must be specifically applied
for and approved.
Public utility substation or water storage reservoir developed by a public
agency.
(Ord. 2009-33, 5-19-2009)
15-16-4: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Minimum Lot Area:
      1.   Single-family dwelling, six thousand (6,000) square feet.
      2.   Two-family dwelling or other main building, twelve thousand (12,000)
square feet. For lots subdivided prior to January 18, 2001, seven thousand five
hundred (7,500) square feet provided that seventy five percent (75%) of the
linear block is developed as duplexes.
      3.   Corner lot, seven thousand (7,000) square feet.
   B.   Minimum Lot Width: Minimum lot width, sixty feet (60'); corner lot,
seventy feet (70').
   C.   Minimum Yard Setbacks:
      1.   Front: Front, twenty five feet (25'), except average where fifty
percent (50%) frontage is developed, but not less than twenty feet (20').
      2.   Side:
         a.   Main building, eight feet (8'), with a total width of two (2)
side yards of not less than eighteen feet (18') for single-family dwelling or
two-family dwelling, and twenty feet (20') each side for other main building.
         b.   Accessory building, eight feet (8'), except one foot (1') if
located at least six feet (6') in rear of main building, but not closer than
eight feet (8') to dwelling on adjacent lot.
      3.   Corner Lot: Side facing street on corner lot, twenty feet (20'),
except average where fifty percent (50%) frontage is developed, but not less
than fifteen feet (15').
      4.   Rear:
         a.   Main building, thirty feet (30').
         b.   Accessory building, one foot (1'), except eight feet (8') where
accessory building rears on side yard of adjacent corner lot.
   D.   Building Height:
      1.   Minimum, one story.
      2.   Maximum, two and one-half (21/2) stories or thirty five feet (35').
   E.   Lot Coverage: No accessory building or group of accessory buildings
shall cover more than twenty five percent (25%) of the rear yard area.
   F.   Landscaping: For single-family dwellings, all yard areas except those
areas where accessory buildings, permitted parking and accessways are
specifically allowed are required to be landscaped and maintained. For new
single-family construction the landscaping shall be installed within eighteen
(18) months of the time of the first occupancy of the dwelling. For duplex
requirements see subsection 15-13-16F of this title.
(Ord. 72-13, 7-6-1972; amd. Ord. 78-42, 12-21-1978; Ord. 79-44, 11-1-1979; Ord.
87-11, 3-12-1987; Ord. 97-35, 5-27-1997; Ord. 2001-5, 2-13-2001; Ord. 2003-24,
5-27-2003)
CHAPTER 17
MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE R-3
SECTION:
15-17-1: Purpose And Intent
15-17-2: Permitted Uses
15-17-3: Conditional Uses
15-17-4: Site Development Standards
15-17-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of this zone is to provide residential areas that will accommodate
the development of dwelling type from single- family through multiple-family
units with their associated necessary public services and activities, and to
encourage government subsidized housing for the elderly at higher densities and
in a wider range of residential areas. It is also to provide an orderly
transition from less intensive, lower density uses to more intensive, higher
density uses.
(Ord. 72-13, 7-6-1972; amd. Ord. 81-7, 2-19-1981)
15-17-2: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any permitted use.
Accessory dwelling unit (see section
15-13-39 of this title for ADU requirements).
Agriculture.
Church, synagogue or similar permanent building used for regular religious
worship.
Educational institution.
Golf course, except miniature golf course.
Greenhouse, noncommercial only.
Group dwelling with eight (8) or less dwelling units in accordance with chapter
10 of this title.
Home occupation.
Household pets.
Library or museum, public or nonprofit.
Multiple-family dwelling with eight (8) or less dwelling units, in accordance
with the requirements of section
15-13-27 of this title.
Pigeon loft for the housing of racing pigeons (only allowed on single-family
residential lots), in accordance with the standards contained in section
15-13-19 of this title.
Public building, public park, recreation grounds and associated buildings.
Residential facilities for elderly persons (see section
15-13-25 of this title for facility requirements).
Residential facility for persons with a disability (see section
15-13-15 of this title for facility requirements).
Residential garage sales or yard sales.
Residential vacation rental (see section
15-13-38 of this title for requirements).
Single-family dwelling.
Temporary building for use incidental to construction work. Such building shall
be removed upon the completion or abandonment of the construction work.
Transitional housing facility (see section
15-13-26 of this title for facility requirements).
Two-family dwelling, in accordance with the requirements of section
15-13-27 of this title.
(Ord. 2016-63, 12-20-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)
15-17-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following uses shall be permitted only when authorized by a conditional use
permit as provided in chapter 7 of this title:
Assisted living facility (see section
15-13-26 of this title for facility requirements).
Bed and breakfast inn, subject to the following standards:
   A.   Two (2) parking spaces shall be provided for the host family plus one
space for each guestroom;
   B.   Proprietor or owner must occupy the property;
   C.   Meals may only be served to overnight guests;
   D.   Signs are limited to nameplate signs not exceeding two (2) square feet
in residential zones. In addition, a freestanding identification sign not to
exceed four (4) square feet is permitted. If illuminated, only indirect
spotlighting is allowed, thus prohibiting backlighted signs.
Cemetery with customary incidental uses, including, but not limited to,
mortuary, mausoleum, crematory, staff housing, service shops or chapel.
Daycare center.
Group dwellings with nine (9) or more dwelling units in accordance with chapter
10 of this title.
Multiple-family dwelling with nine (9) or more dwelling units, in accordance
with the requirements of section
15-13-27 of this title.
Nursing home.
Planned residential unit development (PRUD), in accordance with chapter 8 of
this title.
Private park, playground or recreation area.
Privately operated concession or amusement business in a public park.
Public school bus terminal, subject to the following standards:
   A.   School buses are owned and operated by the school district;
   B.   Facility is located in conjunction with school administrative offices;
and
   C.   Accessory maintenance and fuel operations must be specifically applied
for and approved.
Public utility substation or water storage reservoir developed by a public
agency.
Retirement home.
(Ord. 72-13, 7-6-1972; amd. Ord. 73-22, 7-12-1973; Ord. 70-9, 2-8-1979; Ord.
82-22, 5-20-1982; Ord. 86-30, 6-12-1986; Ord. 86-44, 11-13-1986; Ord. 90-51,
10-25-1990; Ord. 93-32, 8-17-1993; Ord. 98-62, 10-17-1998; 1999 Code; Ord.
2000-2, 1-4-2000; Ord. 2002-42, 8-20-2002; Ord. 2008-57, 10-28-2008)
15-17-4: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Minimum Lot Area:
      1.   One building dwelling, six thousand (6,000) square feet for single-
family, seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet for two-family. For
multiple-family, seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet, plus two
thousand (2,000) square feet for each dwelling unit in excess of two (2) in
each building.
      2.   Other main building, seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square
feet. For nursing home or retirement home an additional seven hundred fifty
(750) square feet for each guest or patient accommodation in excess of four
(4). For transitional housing or assisted living facilities an additional one
thousand (1,000) square feet for each resident in excess of four (4).
      3.   Government subsidized elderly housing with a minimum forty (40) year
contract, seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet for each building
plus one thousand (1,000) square feet for each dwelling unit in excess of two
(2) in each building.
      4.   Corner lot, seven thousand (7,000) square feet.
   B.   Minimum Lot Width: Minimum lot width, sixty feet (60'); corner lot,
seventy feet (70').
   C.   Minimum Yard Setbacks:
      1.   Front: Front, twenty five feet (25'), except average where fifty
percent (50%) frontage is developed, but not less than twenty feet (20').
      2.   Side:
         a.   Main Building:
            (1)   One building dwelling and group dwelling, eight feet (8')
with total width of two (2) required side yards of not less than eighteen feet
(18') plus one foot (1') each side for each one foot (1') main building is over
thirty five feet (35') high.
            (2)   Other main building, twenty feet (20') each side plus one
foot (1') each side for each one foot (1') main building is over thirty five
feet (35') high.
         b.   Accessory Building: Accessory building, eight feet (8'), except
one foot (1') if located at least six feet (6') from rear of main building, but
not closer than eight feet (8') to dwelling on adjacent lot.
      3.   Corner Lot: Side facing street on corner lot, twenty feet (20'),
except average where fifty percent (50%) frontage is developed, but not less
than fifteen feet (15').
      4.   Rear:
         a.   Main building, thirty feet (30').
         b.   Accessory building, one foot (1'), except eight feet (8') where
accessory building rears on side yard of adjacent corner lot.
   D.   Building Height:
      1.   Minimum, one story.
      2.   Maximum, nursing home, two and one-half (21/2) stories or thirty
five feet (35'), none for other buildings.
   E.   Lot Coverage: No building or group of buildings with their accessory
building shall cover more than forty percent (40%) of the lot area.
   F.   Open Space: At least forty percent (40%) of the lot area shall be left
in open space.
   G.   Special Regulations: In no case shall the ratio of total floor area in
the building to the total lot area exceed one to one (1:1).
   H.   Landscaping: For single-family dwellings, all yard areas except those
areas where accessory buildings, permitted parking and accessways are
specifically allowed are required to be landscaped and maintained. For new
single-family construction the landscaping shall be installed within eighteen
(18) months of the time of the first occupancy of the dwelling. For duplex and
multiple-family requirements see subsection 15-13-16F of this title.
(Ord. 72-13, 7-6-1972; amd. Ord. 81-7, 2-19-1981; Ord. 87-11, 3-12-1987; Ord.
97-35, 5-27-1997; Ord.
2000-2, 1-4-2000; Ord. 2003-24, 5-27-2003)
CHAPTER 18
MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE R-4
SECTION:
15-18-1: Purpose And Intent
15-18-2: Permitted Uses
15-18-3: Conditional Uses
15-18-4: Site Development Standards
15-18-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of the R-4 zone is to provide higher density residential areas with
their associated necessary public services and activities. It is also to
provide an orderly transition from less intensive, lower density uses to more
intensive, higher density uses.
(Ord. 72-13, 7-6-1972; amd. Ord. 92-18, 2-25-1992)
15-18-2: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any permitted use.
Accessory dwelling unit (see section
15-13-39 of this title for ADU requirements).
Adult daycare.
Agriculture.
Bed and breakfast inn, subject to the following standards:
   A.   Two (2) parking spaces shall be provided for the host family, plus one
space for each guestroom;
   B.   Proprietor or owner must occupy the property;
   C.   Meals may only be served to overnight guests; and
   D.   Signs are limited to nameplate signs not exceeding two (2) square feet
in residential zones. In addition, a freestanding identification sign not to
exceed four (4) square feet is permitted. If illuminated, only indirect
spotlighting is allowed, thus prohibiting backlighted signs.
Boarding and lodging house; provided that no boarding or lodging house shall be
located within one thousand feet (1,000'), measured in a straight line between
the closest property lines of the lots or parcels of any of the following
similar facilities:
   A.   Any other boarding or lodging house,
   B.   A protective housing facility,
   C.   A transitional housing or rehabilitation/treatment facility,
   D.   A residential facility for persons with disability or residential
facility for the elderly of more than five (5) people, or
   E.   An assisted living facility.
Church, synagogue or similar permanent building used for regular religious
worship.
Daycare center.
Educational institution.
Golf course, except miniature golf course.
Greenhouse, noncommercial only.
Group dwelling with eight (8) or less dwelling units in accordance with chapter
10 of this title.
Home occupation.
Household pets.
Library or museum, public or nonprofit.
Multiple-family dwelling with eight (8) or less dwelling units, in accordance
with the requirements of section
15-13-27 of this title.
Pigeon loft for the housing of racing pigeons (only allowed on single-family
residential lots), in accordance with the standards contained in section
15-13-19 of this title.
Protective housing facility lodging up to fifteen (15) individuals, excluding
support staff.
Public building, public park, recreation grounds and associated buildings.
Rehabilitation/treatment facility (see section
15-13-26 of this title for facility requirements).
Residential facilities for elderly persons (see section
15-13-25 of this title for facility requirements).
Residential facility for persons with a disability (see section
15-13-15 of this title for facility requirements).
Residential garage sales or yard sales.
Residential vacation rental (see section
15-13-38 of this title for requirements).
Single-family dwelling.
Temporary building for use incidental to construction work. Such building shall
be removed upon the completion or abandonment of the construction work.
Transitional housing facility (see section
15-13-26 of this title for facility requirements).
Two-family dwelling, in accordance with the requirements of section
15-13-27 of this title.
(Ord. 2016-63, 12-20-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)
15-18-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following uses shall be permitted only when authorized by a conditional use
permit as provided in chapter 7 of this title:
Assisted living facility (see section
15-13-26 of this title for facility requirements).
Cemetery with customary incidental uses, including, but not limited to,
mortuary, mausoleum, crematory, staff housing, service shops and chapel.
Educational institution with housing.
Group dwelling with nine (9) or more dwelling units in accordance with chapter
10 of this title.
Multiple-family dwelling with nine (9) or more dwelling units, in accordance
with the requirements of section
15-13-27 of this title.
Nursing home.
Planned residential unit development (PRUD), in accordance with chapter 8 of
this title.
Private park, playground or recreation area, but not including privately owned
commercial amusement business.
Privately operated concession or amusement business in a public park.
Protective housing facility lodging from sixteen (16) to a maximum of thirty
(30) individuals, excluding support staff.
Public utility substation.
Retirement home.
(Ord. 2015-58, 12-1-2015)
15-18-4: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Minimum Lot Area:
      1.   One building dwelling, six thousand (6,000) square feet for single-
family, plus one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet for each additional
dwelling unit.
      2.   Other main building, seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square
feet. For nursing home or retirement home an additional five hundred (500)
square feet for each guest or patient accommodation in excess of four (4). For
transitional housing, rehabilitation/treatment facility, or assisted living
facilities an additional seven hundred fifty (750) square feet for each
resident in excess of four (4).
      3.   Corner lot, seven thousand (7,000) square feet.
   B.   Minimum Lot Width: Minimum lot width, sixty feet (60'); corner lot,
seventy feet (70'). Area between 27th Street and 31st Street and Wall Avenue to
Grant Avenue minimum lot width, forty feet (40'); corner lot, sixty feet (60').
   C.   Minimum Yard Setbacks:
      1.   Front: Front, twenty feet (20'), except average where fifty percent
(50%) frontage is developed, but not less than fifteen feet (15').
      2.   Side:
         a.   For any dwelling, nursery school, office, clinic, boarding house
or lodging house, six feet (6') with total of two (2) side yards not less than
sixteen feet (16'), plus one foot (1') each side for each one foot (1') any
main building is over thirty five feet (35') high. For any single-family
dwelling in the area between 27th Street and 31st Street and Wall Avenue to
Grant Avenue, five feet (5') on one side and nine feet (9') on the other side
with total of two (2) side yards not less than fourteen feet (14').
         b.   Other main building, twenty feet (20') each side, plus one foot
(1') each side for each one foot (1') main building is over thirty five feet
(35') high.
         c.   Accessory building, eight feet (8'), except one foot (1') if
located at least six feet (6') from rear of main building, but not closer than
eight feet (8') to dwelling on adjacent lot.
      3.   Corner Lot: Side facing street on corner lot, fifteen feet (15'),
except average where fifty percent (50%) frontage is developed, but not less
than ten feet (10').
      4.   Rear:
         a.   Main building, thirty feet (30').
         b.   Accessory building, one foot (1'), except six feet (6') where
accessory building rears on side yard of adjacent corner lot.
   D.   Building Height:
      1.   Minimum, one story.
      2.   Maximum, none.
   E.   Lot Coverage: No building or group of buildings with their accessory
building shall cover more than fifty percent (50%) of the lot area.
   F.   Open Space: At least thirty percent (30%) of the lot area shall be left
in open space.
   G.   Special Regulations: In no case shall the ratio of total floor area in
the building to the total lot area exceed two to one (2:1).
   H.   Landscaping: For single-family dwellings, all yard areas except those
areas where accessory buildings, permitted parking and accessways are
specifically allowed are required to be landscaped and maintained. For new
single-family construction the landscaping shall be installed within eighteen
(18) months of the time of the first occupancy of the dwelling. For duplex and
multiple-family requirements see subsection 15-13-16F of this title.
(Ord. 2015-58, 12-1-2015)
CHAPTER 19
MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE R-5
SECTION:
15-19-1: Purpose And Intent
15-19-2: Permitted Uses
15-19-3: Conditional Uses
15-19-4: Site Development Standards
15-19-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of the R-5 Zone is to provide higher density residential areas with
their associated necessary public services and activities. It is also to
provide an orderly transition from less intensive, lower density uses to more
intensive, higher density uses.
(Ord. 72-13, 7-6-1972; amd. Ord. 92-18, 2-25-1992)
15-19-2: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any permitted use.
Accessory dwelling unit (see section
15-13-39 of this title for ADU requirements).
Adult daycare.
Agriculture.
Bed and breakfast inn, subject to the following standards:
   A.   Two (2) parking spaces shall be provided for the host family, plus one
space for each guestroom;
   B.   Proprietor or owner must occupy the property;
   C.   Meals may only be served to overnight guests;
   D.   Signs are limited to nameplate signs not exceeding two (2) square feet
in residential zones. In addition, a freestanding identification sign not to
exceed four (4) square feet is permitted. If illuminated, only indirect
spotlighting is allowed, thus prohibiting backlighted signs.
Boarding and lodging house; provided that no boarding or lodging house shall be
located within one thousand feet (1,000'), measured in a straight line between
the closest property lines of the lots or parcels of any of the following
similar facilities:
   A.   Any other boarding or lodging house,
   B.   A protective housing facility,
   C.   A transitional housing or rehabilitation/treatment facility,
   D.   A residential facility for persons with disability or residential
facility for the elderly of more than five (5) people, or
   E.   An assisted living facility.
Church, synagogue or similar permanent building used for regular religious
worship.
Daycare center.
Educational institution.
Golf course, except miniature golf course.
Greenhouse, noncommercial only.
Group dwelling with forty nine (49) or less dwelling units in accordance with
chapter 10 of this title.
Home occupation.
Household pets.
Library or museum, public or nonprofit.
Multiple-family dwelling with forty nine (49) or less dwelling units, in
accordance with the requirements of section
15-13-27 of this title.
Pigeon loft for the housing of racing pigeons (only allowed on single-family
residential lots), in accordance with the standards contained in section
15-13-19 of this title.
Private park, playground, recreation area, but not including privately owned
commercial amusement businesses.
Protective housing facility lodging up to fifteen (15) individuals, excluding
support staff.
Public building, public park, recreation grounds and associated buildings.
Rehabilitation/treatment facility (see section
15-13-26 of this title for facility requirements).
Residential facilities for elderly persons (see section
15-13-25 of this title for facility requirements).
Residential facility for persons with a disability (see section
15-13-15 of this title for facility requirements).
Residential garage sales or yard sales.
Residential vacation rental (see section
15-13-38 of this title for requirements).
Retirement home.
Single-family dwelling.
Student housing, limited to property at 3801 Harrison Boulevard and subject to
the following standards:
   A.   The building or group dwelling shall have a minimum of ten (10) student
housing dwelling units per building.
   B.   A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of all new building exterior surface
shall be covered in brick.
   C.   Required parking shall be a minimum of 0.7 stalls per bedroom with a
maximum of one stall per bedroom.
   D.   A bedroom shared by two (2) persons shall not be smaller than one
hundred thirty (130) square feet.
Temporary building for use incidental to construction work. Such building shall
be removed upon the completion or abandonment of the construction work.
Transitional housing facility (see section
15-13-26 of this title for facility requirements).
Two-family dwelling, in accordance with the requirements of section
15-13-27 of this title.
(Ord. 2017-32, 6-13-2017)
15-19-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following uses shall be permitted only when authorized by a conditional use
permit as provided in chapter 7 of this title:
Assisted living facility (see section
15-13-26 of this title for facility requirements).
Cemetery with customary incidental uses, including, but not limited to,
mortuary, mausoleum, crematory, staff housing, service shops and chapel.
Educational institution with housing.
Group dwellings with fifty (50) or more dwelling units in accordance with
chapter 10 of this title.
Multiple-family dwelling with fifty (50) or more dwelling units, in accordance
with the requirements of section
15-13-27 of this title.
Nursing home.
Privately operated concession or amusement business in a public park.
Protective housing facility lodging from sixteen (16) up to a maximum of thirty
(30) individuals, excluding support staff.
Public utility substation.
(Ord. 2015-58, 12-1-2015)
15-19-4: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Minimum Lot Area:
      1.   One building dwelling, five thousand (5,000) square feet for single-
family, plus seven hundred fifty (750) square feet for each additional dwelling
unit.
      2.   Other main building, seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square
feet. For nursing home or retirement home, seven thousand five hundred (7,500)
square feet plus five hundred (500) square feet for each guest or patient
accommodation in excess of four (4). For transitional housing, rehabilitation/
treatment facility, or assisted living facilities an additional seven hundred
fifty (750) square feet for each resident in excess of four (4).
      3.   Corner lot, seven thousand (7,000) square feet.
   B.   Minimum Lot Width: Minimum lot width, fifty feet (50'); corner lot,
sixty feet (60').
   C.   Minimum Yard Setbacks:
      1.   Front: Front, twenty feet (20'), except average where fifty percent
(50%) frontage is developed, but not less than fifteen feet (15').
      2.   Side:
         a.   For any dwelling, daycare center, boarding house or lodging
house, six feet (6') with total of two (2) side yards not less than sixteen
feet (16'), plus one foot (1') each side for each two feet (2') any main
building is over thirty five feet (35').
         b.   Other main building, twenty feet (20') each side, plus one foot
(1') each side for each two feet (2') main building is over thirty five feet
(35') high.
         c.   Accessory building, eight feet (8'), except one foot (1') if
located at least six feet (6') from rear of main building, but not closer than
eight feet (8') to dwelling on adjacent lot.
      3.   Corner Lot: Side facing street on corner lot, fifteen feet (15'),
except average where fifty percent (50%) frontage is developed, but not less
than ten feet (10').
      4.   Rear:
         a.   Main building, thirty feet (30').
         b.   Accessory building, one foot (1'), except six feet (6') where
accessory building rears on side yard of adjacent corner lot.
   D.   Building Height:
      1.   Minimum, one story.
      2.   Maximum, none.
   E.   Lot Coverage: No building or group of buildings with their accessory
building shall cover more than sixty percent (60%) of the lot area.
   F.   Open Space: At least twenty percent (20%) of the lot area shall be left
in open space.
   G.   Special Regulations: In no case shall the ratio of total floor area in
the building to the total lot area exceed three to one (3:1).
   H.   Landscaping: For single-family dwellings, all yard areas except those
areas where accessory buildings, permitted parking and accessways are
specifically allowed are required to be landscaped and maintained. For new
single-family construction the landscaping shall be installed within eighteen
(18) months of the time of the first occupancy of the dwelling. For duplex and
multiple-family requirements see subsection 15-13-16F of this title.
(Ord. 2015-58, 12-1-2015)
1CHAPTER 20
RESIDENTIAL MANUFACTURED HOME PARK ZONE Rmh-1
SECTION:
15-20-1: Purpose And Intent
15-20-2: Permitted Uses
15-20-3: Reserved
15-20-4: Standards For Single-Family Dwellings, Subdivisions And PRUDs
15-20-5: Manufactured Home Parks; Site Plan Review
15-20-6: Manufactured Home Parks; Site Development Standards
15-20-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of the Rmh-1 zone is to provide appropriate areas for suitable
development of manufactured home parks, together with other compatible single-
family development. It is also to ensure that manufactured home parks receive
adequate services and facilities and blend harmoniously with surrounding
residential neighborhoods.
(Ord. 81-11, 4-2-1981; amd. Ord. 97-36, 5-27-1997)
15-20-2: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory building and uses customarily incidental to any permitted use.
Home occupation.
Household pets.
Manufactured home park.
Pigeon loft for the housing of racing pigeons (only allowed on single-family
residential lots), in accordance with standards contained in section
15-13-19 of this title.
Residential facilities for elderly persons (see section
15-13-25 of this title for facility requirements).
Residential facilities for persons with a disability (see section
15-13-15 of this title for facility requirements).
Residential garage sales or yard sales.
Single-family dwelling.
Temporary building for use incidental to construction work. Such building shall
be removed upon completion or abandonment of construction work.
(Ord. 81-11, 4-2-1981; amd. Ord. 86-15, 3-27-1986; Ord. 93-32, 8-17-1993; Ord.
97-36, 5-27-1997; 1999 Code; Ord.
2000-2, 1-4-2000)
15-20-3: RESERVED:
(Ord. 81-11, 4-2-1981; amd. Ord. 97-36, 5-27-1997; Ord. 2006-3, 1-17-2006)
15-20-4: STANDARDS FOR SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS, SUBDIVISIONS AND PRUDs:
   A.   Site Development Standards; R-
1-6 Zone: All site development standards applicable to single-family dwellings
in the R-
1-6 zone shall apply to single-family dwellings in the Rmh-1 zone.
   B.   Wheels, Tongue Removed: When used as a single-family dwelling, a
manufactured home must have wheels and tow tongue removed and must be placed on
and anchored to a permanent concrete foundation which is designed to meet city
standards.
   C.   PRUDs: Property developed as a PRUD shall be evaluated in accordance
with the development standards for the R-
1-6 zone. The planning commission may approve a manufactured home park as part
of a PRUD.
(Ord. 81-11, 4-2-1981; amd. Ord. 97-36, 5-27-1997)
15-20-5: MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS; SITE PLAN REVIEW:
   A.   Intent: In order to achieve the general objectives, intent and purpose
of this Chapter, preliminary site plan review of mobile home parks proposed for
construction, alteration, or extension by the Planning Commission is required.
In reviewing the site plan for a proposed park, the Planning Commission shall
ascertain whether the proposed site plan is consistent with all regulations of
this and all other City ordinances and any applicable State regulations.
Further, in consideration of each site plan, the Planning Commission shall
endeavor to assure that the movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic within
the site and in relation to access streets shall be safe and convenient, that
adequate provision is made for the continuation of the existing and planned
system of public streets, and that provisions are made so that the proposed
manufactured home park will not be harmful to the existing and future uses in
the immediate area and the vicinity.
   B.   Application; Contents: In order to obtain site plan review by the
Planning Commission, the application shall contain the following information:
      1.   Name, address and phone number of recorded applicant or his
representative or qualified person preparing the plans;
      2.   Interest of the applicant in the manufactured home park or
recreational coach park;
      3.   Location and legal description of the park; and
      4.   Eight (8) copies of the proposed preliminary plan and specifications
of the proposed park showing:
         a.   The area and dimensions drawn to scale of the tract of land and
approximate acreage;
         b.   The number, location and size of manufactured home spaces,
recreational coach spaces and open space;
         c.   The location and width of roadways, walkways and parking areas,
and access to public thoroughfare;
         d.   The location of service buildings and any other proposed
structures;
         e.   The location and size of natural features, including topography,
wetlands, streams, lakes, drains and wooded areas, and any anticipated change
in these features;
         f.   The size, location and design of recreational facilities;
         g.   Property ownership if other than applicant; and
         h.   A conceptual landscaping plan indicating location of trees and
open areas.
   C.   Final Plan; Contents: Following review and approval of the preliminary
plan, the applicant shall submit to the Planning Commission a final detailed
site plan for the proposed manufactured home park or the recreational coach
park in accordance with the following requirements:
      1.   Drawings to be of a scale not larger than one inch to fifty feet (1"
= 50') nor less than one inch to one hundred feet (1" = 100');
      2.   Scale, north point and all boundary dimensions;
      3.   Depiction of spaces, including accurate dimensions, angles and sizes
correlated with the legal description of said property;
      4.   Existing site characteristics:
         a.   Natural features, such as wooded areas, topography (2 foot
contour intervals). Streams, lakes, drains, wetlands, and similar features;
         b.   Existing manmade features, such as buildings, structures, high-
tension towers, pipelines, existing utilities, excavations, bridges, culverts,
drains, and easements;
      5.   Any changes in existing natural or manmade features included;
      6.   Proposed streets, driveways, sidewalks, exterior lights, and other
vehicular and pedestrian circulations featured within and adjacent to the site;
location and type of use of all recreational areas; location, area, number and
dimensions of parking spaces in the off-street parking areas and identification
of service lanes and service parking areas; details of roads and drives, curbs
and gutters, including cross sections;
      7.   Location, use and size of all utility service facilities, including
any common fuel storage tank facilities, water and sewer service systems, storm
drainage facilities, and fire hydrants;
      8.   Location and details of any and all signs to be constructed and
placed in the park;
      9.   A detailed landscaping plan which shall include the location and
type of all plant materials either to remain or to be planted. Such plant
materials shall be hardy when planted and maintained thereafter in a neat,
orderly manner; withered and/or dead plant materials shall be replaced within a
reasonable period of time, no longer than one growing season;
      10.   Plans should be designed and prepared by a qualified person in
order that all requirements may be met without undue delay; and
      11.   Any other information deemed necessary by the planning commission.
   D.   Planning Commission And Mayoral Review: The planning commission shall
review the application and plans of the proposed manufactured home park or
recreational coach park. It shall consider the report of the other departments
and agencies, together with the provisions of this chapter and any other
ordinance and shall recommend to the mayor approval, conditional approval or
disapproval. Upon receipt of such recommendations, the mayor may grant
approval, conditional approval or disapproval. The planning commission and
mayor may require the applicant to submit for recording covenants, conditions,
and restrictions determined to be necessary to provide adequate guarantees for
compliance with the conditions of approval.
   E.   Time Limitations:
      1.   A final plan shall be submitted for approval within twelve (12)
months of preliminary plan approval. Failure to submit a final plan within the
specified time period shall result in the preliminary plan approval becoming
null and void.
      2.   A building permit shall be secured and construction begun in
accordance with the approved final plan within twelve (12) months from the date
of the mayor's approval of the final plan. Application may be made for not more
than six (6) months' extension of the time limit for commencement of
construction. Plan approval will expire if no building permits are issued
within the time limits specified above.
   F.   Financial Guarantee: To the extent not otherwise required by city
ordinance, the developer shall be required to provide a financial guarantee in
an amount determined by the director guaranteeing the completion of any
required public improvements or the development of the recreational areas, open
space, landscaping plans or a phase thereof. The financial guarantee shall meet
the requirements of section
15-13-23 of this title.
(Ord. 81-11, 4-2-1981; amd. Ord. 97-36, 5-27-1997; Ord. 2001-32, 6-5-2001, eff.
6-30-2001)
15-20-6: MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS; SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Size And Density: Minimum site size for a manufactured home park shall
be ten (10) acres. Average park density shall not exceed seven and two-tenths
(7.2) manufactured home units per gross acre. Accessory areas designated for
recreational coach use may have an average density of twenty five (25) units
per gross acre. "Gross acre" shall not include any areas dedicated as public
rights of way.
   B.   Manufactured Home Space Coverage: Maximum manufactured home space
coverage shall not exceed seventy percent (70%) of each individual space.
Coverage shall mean any manmade apparatus, such as a parking space, trailer
pad, storage areas, patio and sidewalks, etc.
   C.   Park Perimeter Setbacks: All manufactured homes, recreational coaches
and accessory buildings shall be set back not less than twenty feet (20') from
the perimeter property lines of the park. Except as necessary for driveways,
access ways or walkways, the perimeter setback area shall be landscaped in
accordance with the approved landscaping plan.
   D.   Private Roads And Driveways: All private interior roads and driveways
shall be hard surfaced and designed to handle all anticipated peak loads and
shall be lighted for safety and ease of movement of vehicles. Minimum pavement
width shall be twenty two feet (22') for two-way roads, with no on-street
parking allowed. Driveways shall be a minimum width of ten feet (10'). Except
as necessary to provide for the extensions of the city's street system, the
manufactured home park road system should be so designed as to prevent the use
of such roads for through traffic. The entire width of the vehicle travel lanes
shall be hard surfaced with concrete or asphalt, with concrete curb and gutters
placed along both sides of all roads. Types of curbs and gutters shall reflect
topographic conditions and road design. Four foot (4') walkways shall be
required on both sides. Approval of the design for road system, curb and
gutters and walkways will be subject to the City Engineer's approval.
   E.   Public Streets:
      1.   Street Improvements: Where the park borders an existing street which
does not meet City standards, the Mayor may require additional dedication and
improvements on streets and highways abutting the proposed manufactured home
park.
      2.   Continuation Of City Streets: The Planning Commission and Mayor
shall review whether the continuation of public streets in the surrounding
areas is necessary for convenient movement of traffic, effective fire
protection, efficient provision of services, and as may be required in
accordance with the approved transportation plan. If continuation of the
streets is determined to be necessary, the Mayor may require dedication and
improvement of such street.
      3.   Dedication And Improvement Standards: Standards for dedication and
improvements shall be the same as required for a new subdivision under Title 14
of this Code.
   F.   Off-Street Parking: Adequate hard surface paving shall be provided for
off-street parking, vehicle storage and access in accord with the following
schedule:
      1.   Each manufactured home space shall be provided with off-street
parking space for two (2) vehicles. This may be provided totally on the space
or in parking compounds conveniently located and readily accessible to the
space which they are intended to serve, or as a combination of the above.
      2.   For all other uses, sufficient parking shall be provided to fit the
scale of the contemplated use and activity to be developed.
      3.   Each parking space shall have a minimum width of nine feet (9') and
a minimum depth of eighteen feet (18').
      4.   All parking spaces and parking compounds shall be hard surfaced with
asphalt or concrete.
      5.   A separate parking area for recreational vehicles shall be provided
at a ratio of one space per three (3) manufactured home spaces. Adequate
screening fences and landscaping shall enclose this area from the manufactured
home park spaces and the surrounding properties.
      6.   Guest, service and delivery parking shall be provided throughout the
park at recreational buildings, service buildings and other convenient
locations at a ratio of one parking space for every four (4) manufactured home
spaces.
   G.   Site Drainage:
      1.   A manufactured home park shall be located on a well-drained site
properly graded to provide for adequate disposition of runoff. Such areas shall
be free of flood hazards from external sources.
      2.   Storm drainage facilities shall be provided, designed and
constructed so as to protect those that will reside in the manufactured home
park as well as the property owners adjacent to the park. Such park facilities
shall be of such capacity to ensure rapid drainage and prevent the accumulation
of stagnant pools of water in or adjacent to the park.
      3.   All hard surface areas shall be designed and constructed in
conformance with a drainage plan approved by the City Engineer.
      4.   The Mayor may require dedications and improvements which will ensure
proper protection to the park and surrounding properties in accordance with
this Section.
   H.   Utilities And Services:
      1.   Adequate sanitary sewage and culinary water facilities, including
connections provided to all individual spaces, shall be provided in accordance
with City standards.
      2.   The plumbing connections to each manufactured home space or
recreational coach space shall be constructed so that all lines are protected
from freezing, from accidental bumping or from creating any type of nuisance or
health hazard.
      3.   All electric, telephone and other lines from supply poles to each
manufactured home space or recreational coach space shall be underground. When
meters are installed they shall be uniformly located.
      4.   Adequate facilities for the storage and disposal of trash and
garbage in a sanitary manner shall be provided in each park. All solid waste
containers shall be enclosed on three (3) sides with a minimum six foot (6'),
solid wall or fence.
      5.   Yard lights, attached to standards approved by the City, shall be
provided in sufficient number and intensity to permit the safe movement of
vehicles and pedestrians at night, and shall be effectively related to
buildings, trees, walks, steps and ramps.
   I.   Landscaping: A landscape planting design shall be submitted to the
Planning Commission for its approval as part of the overall development. At a
minimum such design shall include the following:
      1.   There shall be at least two (2) 2-inch caliper deciduous trees for
each manufactured home space and at least one 4-foot tall evergreen tree for
every three (3) manufactured home spaces. The required trees shall be located
within:
         a.   The setback perimeter;
         b.   Landscaped areas designed to define the circulation patterns; and
         c.   Areas that will enhance the living spaces.
      2.   The landscaped, perimeter setback area shall be developed with a
mixture of hardy deciduous and coniferous plant material and grass or ground
cover.
      3.   All required landscaping shall be maintained thereafter in a neat
and orderly manner. Withered or dead plant material shall be replaced within a
reasonable period of time, but no longer than one growing season.
      4.   The landscape design for the recreational area shall have a minimum
of one 2-inch caliper deciduous tree or one 4-foot tall evergreen tree for
every three thousand feet (3,000') of reserved recreational area. The retention
of existing trees in the recreation area can be used to meet this requirement.
   J.   Recreational Areas: A minimum of eight percent (8%) of the gross area
of the park, excluding public rights of way, shall be designed and developed as
recreational facilities for its residents. The required setback areas shall not
be counted as part of the eight percent (8%) recreational area requirement,
although the recreation areas may be next to any required setback areas. These
facilities and areas shall be designed with trees, grass, benches, equipment,
etc., in relationship to park clientele. The recreational areas design shall be
subject to the approval of the Planning Commission and the Mayor, considering
its location, accessibility and functionality.
   K.   Individual Manufactured Home Space Standards:
      1.   Space Area And Width: Each manufactured home space shall contain a
minimum area of four thousand (4,000) square feet with a minimum width of fifty
feet (50') fronting on a roadway or public right of way; provided however,
that:
         a.   Spaces larger than the above minimum sizes may be required along
the perimeter where it is determined that said space size is necessary to be
compatible with the general pattern established by adjacent development; and
         b.   Spaces on curved driveways or cul-de-sacs where space lines are
either converging or diverging from the front to the rear of the space shall
have an average width of at least fifty feet (50') measured twenty feet (20')
from the roadway or street.
      2.   Patio Area: An outdoor patio area of not less than one hundred
eighty (180) square feet shall be provided at each manufactured home space,
conveniently located to the entrance of the manufactured home and appropriately
related to open areas of the space and other facilities for the purpose of
providing suitable outdoor living space to supplement the limited interior
spaces of a manufactured home.
      3.   Stands: Each manufactured home space shall be provided with either a
gravel stand and shall be treated to prevent the growth of weeds, or a concrete
pad, mat or platform not less than four inches (4") in depth, or of equal
bearing strength if reinforced concrete is used. All stands shall be located a
minimum of five feet (5') from any roadway curb or walk.
      4.   Utility Cabinets: Each manufactured home space shall be provided
with one metal or other suitable material utility cabinet, which shall be
uniform as to size and location throughout the manufactured home park site. All
cabinets shall be kept clean and shall be maintained in good condition and kept
painted and shall contain a minimum of ninety (90) cubic feet of storage area
and be a minimum of six feet (6') in height. No other such accessory building
will be allowed.
   L.   Clearance: Manufactured homes shall be located so that they are at
least twenty five feet (25') apart side-by-side and fifteen feet (15') apart
from side-to-rear, and the manufactured home, measured from the hitch, shall be
located at least eight feet (8') from any roadway curb or walk. Manufactured
home hitches shall face the interior roads.
   M.   Height: Maximum height of all manufactured homes, buildings and
structures shall be twenty feet (20').
   N.   Skirting And Canopies:
      1.   Each manufactured home, unless placed on a permanent foundation,
shall be skirted within ninety (90) days after establishment in a manufactured
home park.
      2.   Such skirting shall be of twenty six (26) gauge metal, aluminum or
other noncorrosive metal or material of equal strength and so constructed and
attached to the manufactured home so as to deter and prevent the entry of
animals and to screen from view those materials that may be stored under the
manufactured home.
      3.   Canopies may be attached to any manufactured home, but they shall
not exceed twelve feet (12') in width, nor exceed the corresponding length or
height of the manufactured home. "Canopies" shall include any shade structure
installed, erected or used adjoining or adjacent to a manufactured home, and
which is completely open on at least two (2) sides.
   O.   Attached Garages: Notwithstanding the other provisions of this Chapter,
manufactured homes with attached garages shall be allowed, provided they meet
the following requirements:
      1.   A minimum eight foot (8') side yard setback from space line to
structure. No structure, awning, canopy, manufactured home or garage be closer
than sixteen feet (16') to an adjoining structure, manufactured home, canopy,
awning or garage except that a minimum five foot (5') side yard setback from
any space line and ten foot (10') separation from adjacent unit may be allowed;
provided, that the wall of said structure shall have no openings and in
addition have a minimum of a one hour fire rating.
      2.   Garages shall have a twenty foot (20') minimum front yard setback.
(Ord. 97-36, 5-27-1997)
CHAPTER 21
MANUFACTURING ZONES - DISTRICT CHARACTERISTICS, USE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
15-21-1: Manufacturing Zones Purpose
15-21-2: Uses Allowed In Each Manufacturing And Industrial Zone
15-21-1: MANUFACTURING ZONES PURPOSE:
The purpose of each zoning category within the manufacturing district is
described below:
   A.   Manufacturing, Research And Development Zone (MRD):
      1.   District Characteristics: This district is intended to protect and
preserve prime industrial lands for high quality manufacturing, assembly,
research and development and related supporting uses. MRD zone districts should
be established in those areas that have direct access to major transportation
thoroughfares.
      2.   Purpose Of District: To ensure the proper development and use of
land and improvements so as to achieve a high quality, master planned,
campuslike, nuisance free environment for manufacturing, assembly, research and
development land uses. All development within an MRD zone must follow an
overall master plan for the area. The uses, regulations and standards of this
district strive to upgrade industrial development standards so as to protect
the owner of each parcel against development and uses which could depreciate
the value of individual parcels. This district allows a mixture of office,
light industrial and commercial uses.
   B.   Limited Manufacturing Zone (M-1):
      1.   District Characteristics: The limited manufacturing zoning district
may be established in those areas that are appropriate for limited industrial
uses and construction contractor trades. This district should be created in
areas having access to major streets and a low likelihood of conflict with
other uses, as well as a low potential for adverse impacts on the overall
visual image of key areas, including entryways into the community.
      2.   Purpose: To accommodate a range of industrial activities that are of
limited intensity, such as construction contractor trades, warehousing and
wholesaling, and small scale production, fabrication, assembly or processing
activities. The limited manufacturing district is intended to help provide a
diversified employment base for the community by:
         a.   Allowing for light industrial uses and the development of
professional trades and construction contractor services.
         b.   Limiting uses to those that will not create traffic hazards,
noise, dust, fumes, odors, smoke, vapor, vibration or industrial waste disposal
problems.
   C.   Manufacturing And Industrial Zone (M-2):
      1.   District Characteristics: The M-2 zoning district may be established
on flat land, and larger parcels of property which have access to major roads.
The zone would be located away from homes or other uses that could be impacted
by manufacturing processes or traffic. Visual image from important entries into
the city is also a consideration when locating M-2 zones.
      2.   Purpose Of District: The purpose of the zone is intended to ensure
that the city continues to retain and encourage a broad mix of industry which
requires large areas for the use and may have some noise or other byproducts
but does not pose a threat to the environmental quality of the community.
   D.   Defense Depot Reuse District (DDR):
      1.   District Characteristics: This is a special use district that
encompasses portions of the former Defense Depot Ogden (DDO) site. The district
boundaries were defined to include those portions of the site containing older,
primarily warehouse and other industrial buildings that were developed prior to
the establishment of municipal zoning. As a result, most of the existing
buildings within this district have minimal setbacks and generally do not
conform to the development standards that have been established for other areas
of the city.
      2.   Purpose Of District: To facilitate reuse of the extensive building
stock at the former DDO site. All development within this district must conform
to the Defense Depot Ogden reuse plan. This district allows for a variety of
industrial and manufacturing uses, including office and other appurtenant uses.
   E.   Ogden Commercial And Industrial Park (OCIP):
      1.   District Characteristics: This is a Special Use District developed
to provide an area for larger scale industrial businesses. The land is flat and
away from residential uses with good access to rail and interstate
transportation routes.
      2.   Purpose Of District: The purpose of the district is to create an
attractive and safe environment for the conducting of selected manufacturing,
marketing enterprises, fabrication, research laboratories, warehousing and
distribution, wholesalers, limited offices and limited retail and service
facilities along arterial corridors. Limited retail and services are intended
to be located to take advantage of existing traffic corridors while at the same
time not introducing uses which cater to the general public and which create
conflicts when mixed with industrial uses. The uses should not create hazards
or emissions of noxious odors, smoke or noise. The general appearance from the
public streets shall be an aesthetically unified design.
   F.   Business Exchange Industrial (BEI):
      1.   District Characteristics: This Special Use District encompasses a
portion of the land formerly used as the Ogden Stockyards. The district
boundaries include areas that were formerly loading and holding areas of the
stockyards and that retain physical remnants of the past use. The area is also
adjacent to the Weber River. This creates a unique setting to develop special
spaces that can create a campus feeling that ties to nature as part of the
theme of development of the land.
      2.   Purpose Of District: The purpose of the district is to create an
area for light industrial research, development and manufacturing of outdoor
recreation products and associated business uses. The design standards look to
tie the natural environment with the developed environment and provide both
private and public access to the natural and historical amenities of the area.
The district seeks to encourage green technology and innovative development
trends in developing the buildings and site infrastructure.
   G.   Business Exchange Historical (BEH):
      1.   District Characteristics: This Special Use District is an area
surrounding the historic art deco designed Stock Exchange Building which is the
focal point of this zone. The setting around the existing structure creates an
opportunity to preserve the history of the area and at the same time allow for
new physically compatible development while providing an opportunity for
compatible manufacturing, services and office use.
      2.   Purpose Of District: The purpose of the district is to provide for
development surrounding the existing Stock Exchange Building that is in scale
with the historic building and architecturally compatible. Uses are intended to
be industrial research, development, light manufacturing and support services
for businesses within the larger redeveloped stockyard area. The district is
also an area intended to interpret the history of the earlier developments of
this area.
(Ord. 2015-4, 2-24-2015)
15-21-2: USES ALLOWED IN EACH MANUFACTURING AND INDUSTRIAL ZONE:
Of the following list of possible uses, those designated in any district as a
"P" are permitted uses; uses designated as a "C" will be allowed only when
authorized by a conditional use permit obtained as provided in chapter 7 of
this title; uses designated as "N" are not allowed in that district. Uses which
are designated with an asterisk (*) indicate special requirements exist for the
design or location of the use, which requirements can be found in chapter 23 of
this title. Accessory uses to the permitted or conditional uses are allowed.
Uses that are not listed are not allowed.
 
Uses MRD M-1 M-2 DDR OCIP BEI BEH
Entertainment and recreational:                                          
  Cabarets (see main use classification of drinking
 establishments, or restaurants, under the category of                  
  Sales).
  Indoor entertainment business which provides activities
 for patrons of all ages by means of film, performance or  N  N  N  N  N  N  N
  activities, e.g., theaters, movies, bowling alleys.
  Indoor recreation business which provides activities for
 patrons of all ages by means of indoor sports, human      N  P  P  N  N  N  P*
  powered or motor vehicle use, e.g., soccer, BMX, motor
  tracks.
  Outdoor entertainment or recreation businesses which
 provide activities for patrons of all ages by means of    N  C  C  N  N  N  N
  film, performance or activities, e.g., drive-ins, outdoor
  sports, go-cart tracks, stadiums.
 Outdoor gun range*.                                       N  C  C  N  N  N  N
 Sexually oriented businesses:                                          
  Adult live entertainment businesses or adult movie      N  P* P* N  N  N  N
    theaters.
  Outcall services or adult entertainment dance agencies. N  N  N  N  N  N  N
Institutional:                                                           
 Churches or houses of worship.                            N  P  N  N  N  N  N
 Correctional institution.                                 N  C  C  N  N  N  N
 Educational institutions.                                 N  N  N  N  N  N  N
 Private jail or prison.                                   N  N  N  N  N  N  N
 Public buildings or other public uses.                    N  C  C  C  N  N  N
 Rehabilitation/treatment facility.                        N  P  P  N  N  N  N
 Soup kitchens, shelters for the homeless and low income   N  C  C  N  N  N  N
  multiple-unit housing provided housing is:
  A. Part of the campus or in the same building as the                 
    homeless shelter.
  B. Includes counseling and other lifestyle services in               
    the facility on site.
 Trade or vocational school or post-high school education. P  P  P  P  N  N  P
Manufacturing:                                                           
 Already processed materials:                                           
    Establishment engaged in the assembly of already
    processed materials into new products, provided, all
    activities and storage are inside an enclosed building
    and outside noise, smell, or smoke is not a significant
    byproduct of the manufacturing process and no outdoor
    storage occurs, e.g., toys, book publishing, electronic
    components, medical, clothing. Accessory sales are
  allowed of product created on site, provided, the sales P  P  P  P  P  P  P
    area does not exceed 15 percent of the floor area of
    the building. Warehousing of the manufacturer's product
    line produced or assembled at another location is
    allowed to be stored in the same building; provided,
    that a minimum of 74 percent of the required parking of
    the building is for nonwarehousing uses contained in
    the building.
    Establishment engaged in the assembly of already
    processed materials into new products, provided, all
    activities are inside an enclosed building and outside
    noise, smell, or smoke is not a significant byproduct
  of the manufacturing process, e.g., sign shops, sheet                
    metal shops, trailers, truss plants, etc. No accessory
    outdoor storage shall be allowed, except that outdoor
    storage of finished product is allowed to the following
    percentage of total lot area usage:
   No outdoor storage.                                   P  P  P  P  P  P  P
   Outdoor storage area is 15 percent or less of lot     P* P  P  P* P  P* N
      area.
   Outdoor storage area is between 15.1 percent and 25   N  P* P  P* P  P* N
      percent.
   Outdoor storage area is between 25.1 percent and 50   N  P* P  N  P  N  N
      percent.
   Outdoor storage area is greater than 50 percent.      N  N  C  N  P  N  N
 Food products:                                                         
    Manufacturing, packaging, or storage inside an enclosed
    building of food products, provided, any objectionable
    fumes or odors which could be emitted are controlled by
    environmental devices to eliminate such smells, e.g.,
  dog food, sugar processing, slaughtering and            N  N  P  N  N  N  N
    meatpacking, smoked meats, etc. Accessory sales of
    products created on site are allowed, provided, the
    sales area does not exceed 15 percent of the floor area
    of the building.
  Cannabis production  establishment only in an enclosed N  N  N  N  P* N  N
    building.
    Manufacturing, packaging, or storing inside an enclosed
    building of food products for human consumption,
    provided, no objectionable fumes or odors are emitted.
    Objectionable odors are such odors as come from sugar
    beet processing, rendering of fat, sauerkraut, vinegar,
  animal byproducts other than dairy products and other   N  P  P  P  P  N  P
    similar smells. Objectionable odors shall not include
    odors emitted from bakeries, ice cream manufacturing,
    egg handling or other manufacturing processes involving
    dairy products. Accessory sales of products created on
    site are allowed, provided, the sales area does not
    exceed 15 percent of the floor area of the building.
    Manufacturing, processing, packaging and storage inside
    an enclosed building of food products for nonhuman
  consumption which do not create objectionable fumes or  N  N  P  N  P  N  N
    odors that can be detected outside the building.
    Outdoor storage of raw, unprocessed or finished
    products or byproducts is not allowed.
 Metals:                                                                
    Manufacturing process and storage inside an enclosed
    building which involves refining, casting, cutting or
    assembling metals and which does not produce noise,
    fumes or waste products which can be detected outside
  the building, e.g., light metal part molding.           C  P  P  P  P  P  P
    Warehousing of the manufacturer's product line produced
    or assembled at another location is allowed to be
    stored in the same building; provided, that a minimum
    of 75 percent of the required parking of the building
    is for nonwarehousing uses contained in the building.
    Manufacturing process inside an enclosed building which
    involves refining, casting, cutting or assembling
    metals and which does not produce noise, fumes or waste
  products which can be detected outside the building but N  N  P  P* P  N  N
    which stores the finished product outside. The
    allowable outdoor storage less than 50 percent of the
    lot area, e.g., fuel tank construction, I-beam
    construction, etc.
  Outdoor storage area between 50 and 80 percent of the   N  N  N  N  P  N  N
    lot area.
 Noise, fumes, and waste:                                               
    Manufacturing process inside an enclosed building which
    involves refining, processing or creating a product in
  which the process creates noise, fumes or waste which   N  N  N  N  N  N  N
    are detectable outside the building, e.g., steel or
    iron foundries, petroleum refining, etc.
    Manufacturing process inside an enclosed building which
    involves refining, processing or creating a product in
  which the process does not create noise, fumes or waste P  N  P  P  P  P  P
    which are detectable outside the building and which
    does not have outdoor storage of materials, e.g.,
    semiconductors, crystals, etc.
 Raw organic and inorganic materials:                                   
    Manufacturing processes involving assembly of raw
    inorganic materials, such as sand and gravel, into a
  new product, which raw and finished materials may be    N  N  C  N  N  N  N
    stored outdoors, e.g., concrete mixing, glass, brick,
    tile, pipe.
    Manufacturing processes involving assembly of raw
    organic materials, such as wood or plant material but
  excluding animals or their parts, into a new product,   N  N  C  N  N  N  N
    which raw material or finished material may be stored
    outdoors, e.g., mulch or fertilizer.
 Removal of materials from ground:                                      
    Removal of materials from the ground for use in their
  existing state or crushed or treated and intended for   N  N  N  N  N  N  N
    use off site, e.g., sand and gravel extraction, mining,
    etc.
Residential:                                                             
 Single-family, duplex or multiple-family units.           N  N  N  N  N  N  N
  Single-family dwelling unit for night watchman and
 family, provided, accessory to allowed business use on    N  P  P  N  P  P  P
  the site and no larger than 1,400 square feet.
Sales:                                                                   
 A restaurant with cabaret license shall only be allowed   N  C* C* N  N  N  P*
  as shown herein.
  Accessory sales of products warehoused or held in
  association with the main use of the building, but not
  produced or assembled on site, provided the sales area
 does not exceed the lesser of 15 percent of the floor     P  N  N  P  N  P  P
  area of the building or 10,000 square feet. Such sales
  area may be a part of, but not in addition to, any sales
  area otherwise allowed.
  An establishment engaged in the preparing, serving and
 selling of food and drink for human consumption on or off P  P  P  C  P* N  P*
  premises, e.g., restaurants, drive-ins, etc.
  An establishment engaged in the selling within an
 enclosed building of goods or merchandise to the general  N  N  N  N  N  N  N
  public for personal, household or business use, e.g.,
  grocery stores, furniture, or clothing stores, etc.
 Medical cannabis pharmacy.                                P* P* P* P* P* P* P*
  An establishment engaged in the selling within an
 enclosed building of goods or merchandise to the general               
  public for personal, household or business use limited to
  the following items:
  Manufactured houses displayed on lot.                   N  N  P  N  N  N  N
    Retail sales of commodities warehoused in the same
    building or a separate building located in the DDR Zone
    and said building is part of the same business
  operation and the sales area is not greater than 50     N  N  N  P  N  N  N
    percent of the associated warehousing floor area;
    excluding sales of food, personal and household goods,
    and tobacco products.
    Retail tobacco specialty business provided it meets the       N/    N/
  requirements of section                                 N  N  P1 N  P1 N  N
    15-13-35 of this title.
    Sales of goods and merchandise, excluding grocery
  stores, new or used cars, and tire stores; provided,    N  N  P  N  P  N  N
    stores are located and front only along 1900 West or
    2550 South.
    Sales (or rental) establishments classified as sexually
    oriented businesses* including adult bookstores or
  adult videos; provided, that in the OCIP Zone such      N  P  P  N  P  N  N
    sales are limited to businesses located along 1900 West
    or 2550 South.
  Used and rebuildable car lot.                           N  N  P* N  N  N  N
    Used car lot, provided the display area is located out
  of the front yard setback and does not exceed the       N  N  N  N  N/ N  N
    lesser of 2,500 square feet or 15 percent of the lot                P1
    area, and there be 2 or more main uses on site.
  Wholesale or retail sales of bulk petroleum products,   N  C* C* N  C* N  N
    e.g., oils, lubricants, propane.
  Wood or coal for heating.                               N  N  P  N  N  N  N
  An establishment primarily involved in the retail sale of
 motor fuels dispensed on site, e.g., convenience stores,  C  P  P  N  P  N  N
  service stations, gas stations.
  An establishment within an enclosed building engaged in
  the sale of building materials, equipment or supplies for
 the construction trade. The use may utilize outdoor       N  P  P  C* P* N  N
  storage as an accessory use, e.g., lumberyard, plumbing
  supplies, cabinet shop, etc.
 Drinking establishments:                                               
  Drinking establishments.                                C* C* C* N  N  N  P*
  Drinking establishments: with cabaret.                  N  C* C* N  N  N  P*
Services:                                                                
  A business engaged in providing health, grooming and
 kenneling services for animals, provided, all activities  N  P  P  N  N/ N  N
  other than kenneling are in a completely enclosed                     P3
  building.
  A business engaged in repairs of motor vehicles,
  recreational vehicles, aircraft or boats, provided, all
  the work occurs in a completely enclosed building. Retail
 sales or related items to these vehicles are permitted,   N  P* P* C* P* N  N
  provided, not more than 10 percent of the floor area is
  utilized for such sales, e.g., brake, body shop, repair,
  machine shop, changing oil, etc.
  A business engaged in the construction trade and located
  in a permanent enclosed building which may include
 outside storage of construction materials or equipment of N  P* P* C* P* N  N
  the business, e.g., general contractor, planing mill,
  roofing, plumbing, rental agencies, or other specific
  contractors.
  A business located in an enclosed building engaged in
  providing data processing, telemarketing, product user
 support services, or other business support services.     P  N  N  P  P  N  P
  Such businesses do not have contact with the general
  public except by means of mail or telecommunications.
  A business located in an enclosed building engaged in
  providing services directly to individuals, businesses or
 agencies such as personal, professional, financial, and   P  N  N  P  N/ N  P
  business services, e.g., barbershop, laundry, daycare,                P2
  architects, doctors, funeral homes, banking, copy
  centers, real estate, hotels, etc.
  A business located in an enclosed building which does
 research and development of products or processes but     P  P  P  P  P  P  P
  does not include materials in amounts which would be
  considered hazardous to general health and welfare.
  A business located in an enclosed building which provides
 storage for businesses excluding personal storage units,               
  e.g., warehousing, distribution centers, etc.:
  Buildings 50,000 square feet or less.                   P  P  P  P  P  P  N
  Buildings over 50,000 square feet.                      N/ N  P  P  P  N  N
                                                            C*
  Including outdoor storage not exceeding 30 percent of   N  P* P* N  P  N  N
    lot area.
  Personal storage units.                                 N  P  P  N  N  N  N
  Petroleum products, flammable or hazardous materials as N  N  C  N  C  N  N
    main storage.
  A business located on a lot without a main building which
 offers outdoor storage of recreational vehicles or        N  P  P  N  N  N  N
  storage of finished manufactured products assembled in
  Ogden City limits.
  A medical clinic located in an enclosed building engaged
 in providing medical services for workplace injuries or   P  N  N  P  P  N  P
  other work related conditions.
 A use of land or business that provides outdoor storage,               
  collection, or recycling of used materials:
  Junk or salvage yards.                                  N  N  C* N  N  N  N
  Landfill.                                               N  N  N  N  N  N  N
  Recycling collection center.                            N  P* P* N  N  N  N
  Towing or impound lots.                                 N  P* P* N  N  N  N
  Waste transfer station.                                 N  N  N  N  N  N  N
  Construction trade contractor storage within the area
 from 3300 South to Hinckley Drive, and from 1600 West to  N  P* P* N  N  N  N
  Pennsylvania Avenue if the company has its main office in
  Ogden City.
  Indoor/outdoor recreation business which provides
 activities for patrons of all ages by means of education, N  P  P  N  N  N  N
  training, meditation and physical and spiritual wellness,
  e.g., martial arts and related training businesses.
Transportation, utilities, communication uses:                           
  Business and land use which has an enclosed building and
 is engaged in trucking uses such as a truck terminal or   N  N  P  P  P  N  N
  transfer business.
  Businesses or land uses which are primarily engaged in
 uses of public transportation, e.g., parking lots, bus    P* P  P  P  N  N  N
  stations, handitrans, airports, etc.
  Communication business engaged in the delivery of
 communication services, e.g., business office, studios,   P  P  P  P  P  N  P
  broadcast, multimedia.
  Freestanding utility or communication facilities, e.g.,
 substations, relay towers, commercial transmitting        C  C  C  C  C  N  N
  towers.
 Railroads and related uses:                                            
  Main lines.                                             N  N  P  P  N  N  N
  Spurs which deliver service only to businesses.         P  P  P  P  P  N  N
  Switching yards and repair facilities.                  N  N  P  P  N  N  N
 
Notes:
   1.    On 1900 West and 2550 South only.
   2.    On 1900 West only.
   3.    On 1900 West and 2550 South only with no outdoor kenneling.
(Ord. 2018-34, 11-20-2018; amd. Ord. 2019-46, 10-22-2019; Ord. 2020-24, 6-23-
2020; Ord. 2020-25, 6-23-2020)
CHAPTER 22
MANUFACTURING ZONES - SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
SECTION:
15-22-1:Dimensional Requirements
15-22-2:Landscaping Setbacks And Coverages
15-22-1: DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS: The following dimensional requirements shall
apply in each manufacturing zone to building and parking setbacks:
 
 M-1 M-2 MRD OCIP DDR BEI BEH
Minimum    3,000 sq.   4,000 sq.   None        20,000    None         1 acre    1 acre
lot area   ft.         ft.                     sq. ft.
Minimum    40 ft.      50 ft.                  50 ft.                 60 ft.    60 ft.
lot        width       width       None        width     None         width     width
dimensions
Maximum
impervious 80%         90%         80%         80%       None         80%       70%
coverage
           50 ft.,
           except 40
Maximum    ft.
building   adjacent to None        None        None      50 ft.       50 ft.    35 ft.
height     a
           residential
           zone
                                                         None for
                                                         buildings
                                               20 ft.    existing
                                               for       prior to
                                               building, July 1999.
Front yard 20 ft.      10 ft.      20 ft.      10 ft.    For new      25 ft.    25 ft.
setback                                        for       construction
                                               parking   see section
                                               lots      15-23-2 of
                                                         this title.
                                                         10 ft. for
                                                         parking lots
                                                         None for
                                                         buildings
                                               20 ft.    existing
                                               for       prior to
Side yard                                      building, July 1999.
setback    20 ft.      10 ft.      20 ft.      10 ft.    For new      20 ft.    20 ft.
facing a                                       for       construction
street                                         parking   see section
                                               lots      15-23-2 of
                                                         this title.
                                                         10 ft. for
                                                         parking lots
                                   10 ft.,
                                   except 20
                                   ft.                   None, except
                                   adjacent to           20 ft.
                                   a                     adjacent to
                                   residential           O-1 zone,
           None,       None,       zone or O-            provided     20 ft.    20 ft.
           except 20   except 20   1 zone,               that 10 ft.  for       for
           ft.         ft.         provided              shall only   building, building,
Side yard  adjacent to adjacent to that 10 ft. 10 ft.    be required  10 ft.    10 ft.
setback    a           a           shall only            for parking  for       for
           residential residential be required           lots that    parking   parking
           or O-1 zone or O-1 zone for parking           are not      or        or
                                   lots that             adjacent to  accessway accessway
                                   are not               the Ogden
                                   adjacent to           Nature
                                   the Ogden             Center
                                   Nature                property1
                                   Center
                                   property1
                                                         None, except
                                                         20 ft.       20 ft.
                                                         adjacent to  plus 1
                                                         O-1 zone,    ft. for
                       None,       10 ft.,               provided     every     20 ft.
                       except 20   except 20             that 10 ft.  foot      for
                       ft.         ft.                   shall only   building  building,
Rear yard  20 ft.      adjacent to adjacent to 10 ft.    be required  is taller 10 ft.
setback                a           a                     for parking  than 35   for
                       residential residential           lots that    ft., 20   parking
                       or O-1 zone or O-1 zone           are not      ft. for   or
                                                         adjacent to  parking   accessway
                                                         the Ogden    or
                                                         Nature       accessway
                                                         Center
                                                         property1
 
Note:
   1.    The Ogden Nature Center property shall refer to the boundaries of the
property in the O-1 zone to be conveyed to Ogden City for the benefit of the
Ogden Nature Center pursuant to the DDOU reuse plan.
(Ord. 2016-29, 5-24-2016)
15-22-2: LANDSCAPING SETBACKS AND COVERAGES:
Notwithstanding the required landscaping for those setbacks which are along
street frontages (see table above), there may be additional landscaping
required based on other provisions of this title. Additional requirements
include, but are not limited to, installation of landscaping in public right of
way (subsection 15-4-5E3a of this title), preserving existing trees
(subsections 15-4-5E7a and E7b of this title), setbacks when next to
residential zones (subsection 15-4-5F of this title), screening of service and
storage areas (subsection 15-4-5G of this title), parking lot landscaping
(subsections 15-12-9B and C of this title) and special regulations (chapter 23
of this title) for specific requirements for listed types of development or
development in specific zones.
(Ord. 2015-4, 2-24-2015)
CHAPTER 23
MANUFACTURING ZONES - SPECIAL REGULATIONS
SECTION:
15-23-1: Parking Lots In DDR Zone
15-23-2: Regulations For New Construction In The DDR Zone
15-23-3: Special Requirements For Landscaping Setback Along 1200 West And 1200
South
15-23-4: Architectural Character And Other Guidelines For MRD Zone
15-23-5: Special Requirements For Specific Uses In The Manufacturing Zones
15-23-6: Architectural Building And Design Requirements In The OCIP Zone
15-23-7: Environmental Land Use Controls In The MRD And DDR Zones
15-23-8: Architectural Guidelines And Special Requirements For The BEI And BEH
Zones
15-23-1: PARKING LOTS IN DDR ZONE:
   A.   Notwithstanding the provisions of chapter 12 of this title, parking
lots may be located more than five hundred feet (500') from the use for which
they are intended to provide parking. A concrete sidewalk shall be installed
along the frontage of the property which leads to the required off site
parking. Where possible, sidewalks shall be installed along the frontages of
all the properties between the use which requires the parking and the parking
lot.
   B.   Parking lots in the DDR zone, except those adjacent to buildings
constructed before October 19, 1999, along 600 West from 2nd Street to 300
North, 700 West from 1st Street to 300 North, 800 West from 1st Street to 400
North, 930 West from 2nd Street to 200 North, 1000 West from 2nd Street to 200
North and 1070 West from 2nd Street to 200 North, shall be required to have a
ten foot (10') wide landscaped setback from the property line to the parking
areas. Parking along those specific streets named above shall not have a
required landscaped setback. For other locations the landscaping shall be in
accordance with the requirements defined in chapter 12 of this title for
parking areas.
   C.   Any parking lot which is developed or expanded in the DDR zone along
2nd Street, Amidan Street, or Ward Avenue shall have a twenty foot (20')
landscaped setback from the right of way line of that street. Fencing shall not
be permitted in the twenty foot (20') wide landscaped area in front of the
parking lot on these three (3) streets.
(Ord. 2015-4, 2-24-2015)
15-23-2: REGULATIONS FOR NEW CONSTRUCTION IN THE DDR ZONE:
   A.   Any new building construction which occurs in the DDR zone, whether it
is a freestanding building or an expansion of an existing building shall have a
minimum building setback of twenty feet (20') from the following street right
of way lines: Burns Avenue, Doughten Street, Clark Avenue, Craner Avenue,
Loffredo Avenue, Stitzer Avenue, 2nd Street, Amidan Street and Ward Avenue. The
setback area shall be landscaped.
   B.   Expansion of existing buildings shall be allowed, provided the
expansion does not remove any required on site parking nor increase the need
for truck maneuvering to occur off the property.
   C.   Any new building which is constructed adjacent to the Ogden Nature
Center property located in the O-1 zone shall be designed so that the loading
and unloading of trucks is screened from that portion of the O-1 zone by the
building. No vehicle accessways shall be developed between the building and the
Ogden Nature Center property located in the O-1 zone. For purposes of this
subsection, the "Ogden Nature Center property" shall refer to the boundaries of
the property to be conveyed to Ogden City for the benefit of the Ogden Nature
Center pursuant to the DDOU reuse plan.
(Ord. 2015-4, 2-24-2015)
15-23-3: SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR LANDSCAPING SETBACK ALONG 1200 WEST AND 1200
SOUTH:
A forty foot (40') wide landscaping setback is required for all uses along the
frontage of 1200 West from Harrisville Road to 1200 South and along the
frontage of 1200 South from 1200 West to 500 West which is the west side of the
main railroad line and known as the former Defense Depot Ogden site.
Landscaping in this setback shall be in accordance with the landscaping and
buffering requirements defined in chapter 4 of this title.
(Ord. 2015-4, 2-24-2015)
15-23-4: ARCHITECTURAL CHARACTER AND OTHER GUIDELINES FOR MRD ZONE:
These guidelines apply to all MRD zones:
Structures shall be developed in a way that is in harmony with the setting and
consistent with the intended uses. They should reflect a contemporary style and
should be unified in terms of materials and colors to achieve a campuslike
feel. Unsightly uses shall be screened from public view.
   A.   Building Facades: Structures shall have equally attractive sides,
rather than placing all emphasis on the front elevation of the structure. The
same types of building materials shall be used on all four (4) sides, though
the amount of material used on each side may vary. Structures shall be designed
and arranged with variations in wall surfaces by using such things as varying
textures, materials, and planes to avoid a blank wall appearance.
   B.   Materials: Buildings shall be constructed with materials of durability
and quality. Walls shall be constructed of rough textured stucco, concrete,
concrete masonry units, bricks, stone, or other material with similar
appearance. All concrete shall have texturing over a minimum of two-thirds (2/
3) of the exposed surface. No metal sided structures shall be built. Roof
materials shall have dull finishes. In the areas where the new buildings are
mixed with existing structures, compatibility of materials is required as long
as the materials meet the material types listed in this subsection.
   C.   Colors: Building colors shall be predominantly warm, muted earth tones,
with brighter colors used for accents or detailing (maximum 10 percent of
surface area, excluding signage) if desired.
   D.   Glass: Nonmirrored glass is preferred, especially at street level and
public entrances.
   E.   Screening Of Mechanical Equipment: All rooftop mechanical equipment
shall be concealed from public view to the maximum extent by screening it with
integral portions of the architecture. "Concealed from public view" is
determined by what a person would see when standing on the public sidewalk in
front of the building. All conduit, vents and other appurtenances shall be
painted to match the color of the surrounding building surfaces.
   F.   Walkways: Parking lot walkways within the site shall be located and
aligned to directly and continuously connect areas or points of pedestrian
origin and destination, and shall not be located solely based on the outline of
a parking lot configuration that does not provide such direct pedestrian
access.
   G.   Fencing: No fencing shall be allowed to extend beyond the front line of
the main building. For properties which are a corner lot, fencing shall not
extend beyond the side of the building facing the street.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4160.png]
   H.   Walls: Exterior building walls that face streets or required parking
shall have landscaped areas at least five feet (5') wide placed directly along
at least fifty percent (50%) of such walls.
   I.   Conditional Use Warehousing Adjacent To The Ogden Nature Center
Property Line: A conditional use for warehousing can only be considered if the
warehousing is adjacent to the property line of the Ogden City Nature Center
and the following development standards are met:
      1.   The building, parking and access lanes are screened by a six foot
(6') tall, landscaped berm which exists along the nature center north property
line or by installing shrubs that are six feet (6') or taller in mature height
along the east property line;
      2.   Dock orientation is prohibited on the side of the building facing
the nature center property;
      3.   Maximum building height is forty feet (40');
      4.   Any outdoor lighting is shielded so that the source is not directly
visible from the nature center and the lighting is directed down and away from
the nature center property.
      5.   Sixty foot (60') building setback along the east property line of
the nature center.
   J.   Public Transportation: Businesses or land uses which are primarily
engaged in uses of public transportation:
      1.   Stand alone parking lot: Public parking, not to exceed twenty four
(24) consecutive hours, shall be shared for different sites.
      2.   Bus station: Limited to the eastern edge of the MRD zone along
railroad tracks.
(Ord. 2015-4, 2-24-2015)
15-23-5: SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR SPECIFIC USES IN THE MANUFACTURING ZONES:
   A.   Sexually Oriented Businesses:
      1.   Purpose: It is the purpose and object of this subsection that the
city establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the concentration
of sexually oriented businesses or their location in areas deleterious to the
community of Ogden, to protect adjoining uses, to provide visibility of parking
areas in order to promote management supervision and oversight by law
enforcement agencies, and to regulate the signage of such businesses and to
control the adverse effects of such signage and prevent inappropriate exposure
to the community. This subsection is to be construed as a regulation of time,
place and manner of the operation of these businesses, consistent with the
limitations provided by provisions of the United States and Utah constitutions.
Except where the context or specific provisions require, this subsection does
not supersede or nullify any other related zoning ordinances. This subsection
together with the other provisions in this title specifically applicable to
sexually oriented businesses shall be known and referred to as the SEXUALLY
ORIENTED BUSINESS ZONING ORDINANCE.
      2.   Definitions: For the purpose of this subsection, the following terms
shall have meanings defined in this subsection:
   EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION: A public elementary or secondary school, seminary,
parochial school or private education institution having a curriculum similar
to that ordinarily given in grades 1 through 12 in a public school system. The
term educational institution for the purpose of this subsection does not
include post-high school educational facilities.
   HISTORIC BUILDING: A structure which is listed on the Ogden City register of
historic resources or the national register of historic places.
   HISTORIC DISTRICT: An area containing a significant number of historic
buildings which has been designated and listed as a historic district on the
Ogden City register of historic resources or the national register of historic
places.
   PUBLIC PARK: A park, playground, swimming pool, nature reserve, fairground,
golf course or athletic field within the city which is owned, operated or
maintained by the city or the county.
   RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION: A building which is used primarily for religious
worship and related religious activities.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES: An inclusive term used to describe
collectively those businesses for which a sexually oriented business license is
required, pursuant to the sexually oriented business license chapter, set out
in title 5, chapter 15 of this code, which businesses include for purposes of
this subsection: outcall services, adult entertainment dancing agencies, adult
businesses (an inclusive term including adult motion picture theaters, adult
bookstores or adult video stores), and adult live entertainment businesses.
This collective term does not describe a specific land use and shall not be
considered a single use category for purposes of this title.
      3.   Conditions: Sexually oriented businesses classified as adult
businesses and adult live entertainment businesses as such terms are defined in
title 5, chapter 15 of this code, as permitted in section
15-21-2 of this title, shall be subject to the following additional
restrictions:
         a.   No adult business or adult live entertainment business shall be
located:
            (1)   Within a six hundred sixty foot (660') radius of any
religious institution, educational institution, public park, public library,
the Ogden Entertainment Subdivision, the Newgate Mall, the Ogden River Parkway
Trail or the Weber River Parkway Trail;
            (2)   Within a one thousand foot (1,000') radius of any residential
zoning district;
            (3)   Within six hundred sixty feet (660') of any historic building
or district;
            (4)   Within a one thousand foot (1,000') radius of any other adult
business or adult live entertainment business.
         b.   Distance requirements between structures and uses specified in
this subsection shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures or zoning districts, from the closest property boundary
of the educational institution, park, religious institution, library, mall,
subdivision, river parkway trail, zoning district, historic building, historic
district, or other sexually oriented business.
      4.   Additional Site Development Standards: Notwithstanding anything
contrary contained in this title regarding minimum site development standards
under chapter 4 of this title, minimum parking standards under chapter 12 of
this title, or dimensional or landscaping requirements under chapter 22 of this
title, the more restrictive site development or parking standard shall apply.
The following additional site development or parking standards shall apply to
such sexually oriented businesses:
         a.   All parking spaces or parking lots for adult businesses or adult
live entertainment businesses shall be:
            (1)   Located on the same lot with the main building; and
            (2)   At a location visible from a public street.
         b.   Building entrances for customers or patrons shall face or be
visible from a public street.
      5.   Sign Restrictions: Notwithstanding anything to the contrary
contained in title 18 of this code, the more restrictive standards for signs
shall prevail. Signs for sexually oriented businesses shall be limited as
follows:
         a.   No more than one sign shall be allowed on any sexually oriented
business premises;
         b.   No sign on the sexually oriented business premises shall be
allowed to exceed eighteen (18) square feet;
         c.   No animation shall be permitted on or around any sexually
oriented business sign, or on the exterior walls or roof of the premises;
         d.   No descriptive art or designs depicting any activity related to,
or inferring, the nature of the business shall be allowed on any sexually
oriented business sign, which shall contain alphanumeric copy only;
         e.   Only flat wall signs shall be permitted for any sexually oriented
business;
         f.   No painted signs or painted wall advertising shall be allowed,
including any signage or advertising painted on the inside of any window or
other translucent material which is visible from the outside of the building;
         g.   Other than the signs specifically allowed by this subsection, the
sexually oriented business shall not attach, construct, or allow to be attached
or constructed any temporary sign, banner, spotlight, searchlight, or other
device designed to draw attention to the business location.
   B.   Outdoor Storage:
      1.   In the DDR, MRD or OCIP zone, whenever outdoor storage is permitted,
it may be located in the most accessible manner to the side or rear of the main
building, provided that such storage does not exceed the height of the
screening fence and is screened from the public right of way in one of the
following manners, with no stored items exceeding the height of the screening
fence:
 
                                        Screens ground level lights, noise,
                                        objectionable views, provides privacy
                                        and access restriction, and texturing
A minimum 6 foot tall solid fence of    provides aesthetic relief. "Decorative
either wood, vinyl or chainlink with    masonry" shall include split face block
interlocking opaque vinyl or a minimum  or brick, brick, fluted block, or
6 foot tall decorative masonry wall     masonry wall with stucco finish, but
with textured surfacing facing the      shall not include openings in the wall
street                                  surface below a height of 6 feet.
                                        Bumper guards set back a minimum of 2
                                        1/2 feet from the fence shall be
                                        required when fence abuts parking.
A minimum 6 foot wide landscaped strip  Screens ground level lights, higher
with either a minimum 6 foot tall solid level lights, noise, objectionable
fence of either wood, vinyl or          views; provides privacy, access
chainlink with interlocking opaque      restriction and additional noise
vinyl or a minimum 6 foot tall          mitigation. Trees shall be a minimum of
decorative masonry wall with textured   2 inch caliper in size, spaced at a
surfacing facing the street             minimum of 20 feet on center.
                                        Provides security and access
                                        restriction. Inserts help screen
                                        objectionable views. Inserts shall be
Minimum 6 foot chainlink fence with     of a durable opaque material and shall
inserts in the fence fabric             be kept in good repair. Bumper guards,
                                        set back a minimum of 21/2 feet from
                                        the fence, shall be required when fence
                                        abuts parking.
                                        Screens ground level and higher level
                                        lights, provides security and access
                                        restriction. Vegetative screen provides
                                        additional noise mitigation and screens
                                        objectionable views. Trees and shrubs
                                        shall be of a locally adapted evergreen
6 foot open fence with evergreen trees  species such as arborvitae, juniper,
and shrubs                              pyracantha, evergreen euoynumus, pines
                                        or spruces, with a planted size of at
                                        least 15 gallons for trees and 5
                                        gallons for shrubs, and shall be
                                        expected to reach a height of at least
                                        5 feet within 5 years of planting.
                                        Trees shall be planted at 20 feet on
                                        center and shrubs at 5 feet on center.
 
      2.   In the BEI zone, the outdoor storage area associated with a
permitted use shall not be located between the building wall which faces the
Weber River and the property line. The outdoor storage area shall be screened
from public view from the street and any public accessway with a wall that is
of sufficient height, but not taller than seven feet (7'), to screen the view
of the stored items from a pedestrian level. The screening wall shall be an
integral part of the architecture of the building and use the same materials
found on the building or may be a retaining wall with a landscaped berm of
sufficient height to screen the storage on the public view sides.
   C.   Used And Rebuildable Car Lot: The following standards apply to this
use:
      1.   Any rebuildable vehicle parked in display areas visible from any
public street must be capable of being moved without towing and the body must
be substantially intact, although portions of the body may require repair or
replacement.
      2.   Vehicles not meeting the above standard must be stored or displayed
in an area screened from view from the public street by seven foot (7') high
screening fence made of the following materials:
         a.   Chainlink with vertical plastic or vinyl slats spaced no farther
than three-eighths inch (3/8") apart;
         b.   Solid wood, vinyl or other fencing materials having an appearance
of wood or one inch by four inch (1" x 4") to one inch by eight inch (1" x 8")
members spaced no farther apart than one- eighth inch (1/8");
         c.   Baked enamel finish, metal ribbed fence;
         d.   A decorative masonry wall;
         e.   Other fence materials and construction approved by the director
that provides adequate screening of the storage area similar to the above
fencing materials.
      3.   All vehicles displayed outside of the fenced area shall be on a hard
surface.
   D.   Aboveground Storage Tanks: The storage of flammable, combustible
liquids in aboveground tanks outside of buildings and aboveground bulk storage
of liquefied petroleum gas shall not be closer than two hundred feet (200') to
any residential structure. Storage tanks may be closer only when all tanks are
enclosed in a designed monolithic poured concrete case.
   E.   Motor Vehicle, RV Or Boat Repair Shops: Outdoor storage of junk
vehicles intended for restoration, repair, or limited salvage, as described in
subsection E3 of this section, may be allowed as an accessory use to an auto
repair or body shop in the M-1, M-2, OCIP and DDR zones, provided the following
conditions are met:
      1.   The area dedicated to outdoor storage does not exceed ten percent
(10%) of the lot in the OCIP and DDR zones, thirty percent (30%) of the lot in
an M-1 zone, or fifty percent (50%) of the lot in an M-2 zone.
      2.   All such outdoor storage shall be in a completely enclosed area
screened by a seven foot (7') tall screening fence made of the following
materials:
         a.   Solid wood, vinyl or other fencing material having the appearance
of wood of one inch by four inch (1" x 4") to one inch by eight inch (1" x 8")
members spaced no farther apart than one- eighth inch (1/8");
         b.   Baked enamel finish, metal ribbed fence;
         c.   A decorative masonry wall; or
         d.   Other fence materials and construction approved by the director
that provides adequate screening of the storage area similar to the above
fencing materials.
      3.   Limited salvage of parts from such vehicles shall be permitted only
as necessary for the repair of other vehicles on site and not as part of any
other type of salvage operation.
   F.   General Contractor Or Rental Business: Outdoor storage of certain goods
may be allowed as an accessory use in M-1, M-2, DDR, and OCIP zones, or as a
primary use when specifically allowed by section
15-21-2 of this title, provided the following conditions are met:
      1.   The area dedicated to outdoor storage does not exceed eighty percent
(80%) of the lot area for construction trade contractor uses and thirty percent
(30%) of the lot area for other uses;
      2.   All such outdoor storage shall be in a completely enclosed area
screened by a seven foot (7') tall screening fence made of the following
materials:
         a.   Solid wood, vinyl or other fencing material having the appearance
of wood of one inch by four inch (1" x 4") to one inch by eight inch (1" x 8")
members spaced no farther apart than one- eighth inch (1/8");
         b.   Baked enamel finish, metal ribbed fence;
         c.   A decorative masonry wall; or
         d.   Other fence materials and construction approved by the director
that provides adequate screening of the storage area similar to the above
fencing materials;
      3.   No salvage or repair operations shall be allowed as part of such
use; and
      4.   Such goods shall be limited to either new goods or merchandise, or
to used or secondhand goods that are intended to be reused or resold in their
original form.
   G.   Recycling Collection Center: The following minimum standards apply to
this use:
      1.   All buildings, parking, loading, unloading and storage areas shall
be set back a minimum of twenty feet (20') from any property line adjacent to a
public street and any property line which abuts a residential zone. The twenty
foot (20') setback shall be completely landscaped. All landscaping shall be
according to an approved landscape plan. Any landscaped areas shall be
maintained.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4164.png]
 
      2.   Loading and unloading facilities shall be designed so that the
recyclable material is unloaded and stored inside a building. "Limited
recyclable materials" may be unloaded outside a building so long as:
         a.   The "limited recyclable material" is immediately placed inside a
weather resistant container or enclosed trailer which is used for
transportation of the materials off the site.
         b.   All containers or trailers are located behind the front line of
the building and not placed in any required yard setback area.
         c.   The planning commission will determine if compacting or crushing
of material may occur on the site. Factors such as noise and its impact on
adjacent residential properties, containment of materials and other potential
impacts will be reviewed.
         d.   Such other conditions as determined by the planning commission to
be required under chapter 7 of this title.
         e.   No loading, unloading or storage of materials shall be permitted
within the public right of way or setback areas.
   H.   Junk Or Salvage Yards And Recycling Processing Centers: The following
standards apply to these uses:
      1.   Purpose: The purpose of the following provisions is to protect
against the environmental, health, safety and aesthetic concerns created by
this land use. Such concerns include, but are not limited to: contamination or
pollution of surface water or groundwater, contamination of soils, conditions
creating harborage for insects and rodents, unsanitary conditions, visual
pollution affecting adjacent property and public thoroughfares, fire hazards,
dust and noise. The following minimum standards and conditions shall be imposed
by the planning commission in and upon their determination that the specific
location meets the requirements of chapter 7 of this title.
      2.   Screening Fence: A minimum seven foot (7') high screening fence is
required for screening all outdoor storage and operational areas, which fencing
shall be continually maintained. The screening fence shall be a unified design
and may be constructed of any of the following fencing materials:
         a.   Chainlink with vertical plastic or vinyl slats spaced no farther
than three-eighths inch (3/8") apart, provided no stacking of materials within
two feet (2') of the fence;
         b.   Solid wood fence of one inch by four inch (1" x 4") to one inch
by eight inch (1" x 8") horizontal members spaced no farther than one-eighth
inch (1/8") apart:
         c.   Earth tone baked enamel ribbed metal;
         d.   Decorative masonry; or
         e.   Other fence materials approved by the planning commission if it
is determined that the material and design is opaque, is not easily damaged by
weather or objects placed against it, does not detract from the appearance of
the finished site development, and the colors of the required screening wall
are subdued and nonreflective. Materials which are not standard fencing
materials such as canisters, pallets, reflective metals, or other similar items
shall not be used for fencing.
         f.   The planning commission may waive the screening fence requirement
for all or part of the storage area, if it is shown that because of the
location, topography, or surrounding uses the screening fence will not achieve
any of the following purposes: protecting adjacent properties from the adverse
visual impact of the open storage because an adjacent land use also has legal
open storage of junk or salvage materials, screening the storage area from any
public street or the Weber or the Ogden River, and storage areas are defined to
avoid unauthorized expansion.
      3.   Height Of Stacked Material: The height of stacked material is
limited to the stacked material not being visible when viewed at ground level
at any location within one hundred feet (100') of any required screening fence.
This shall not preclude enforcement of any other codes which regulate stacking
heights of types of material.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4162.png]
 
      4.   Loading, Unloading, Stacking Of Material: No loading, unloading or
stacking of material shall be permitted within the public right of way or
required setback areas. Facilities shall be designed so that all functions take
place on the site behind the required screening fence. There shall be provided
one ten foot by twenty five foot (10' x 25') hard surfaced unloading pad for
lots one-half (1/2) acre in size or less and two (2) hard surfaced loading pads
for lots over one-half (1/2) acre. The unloading pad may be included in meeting
one required parking stall. This provision shall not preclude the ability of
customers in passenger cars from parking in any legal parking area and hand
carrying items from their car to the designated unloading area.
      5.   Setback Required: A minimum twenty foot (20') setback is required
for all buildings and parking adjacent to 12th Street, 20th Street, 21st
Street, 24th Street, 31st Street Expressway (Hinckley Drive), or Wall Avenue.
All storage areas, required screening fencing, and unloading areas shall be set
back thirty feet (30') from the above designated streets. A minimum ten foot
(10') setback is required for buildings, storage areas, required screening
fencing, unloading areas or parking from all other public streets. The setback
area shall be completely landscaped. All landscaping shall be according to an
approved landscape plan which meets the objectives of this section. All
landscaped areas shall be maintained.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4166.png]
 
      6.   Screening From Street: Due to the elevation of the road along
portions of 20th Street, 21st Street, 24th Street and 31st Street Expressway
(Hinckley Drive), the planning commission may determine that the required
screening fence for the storage areas may be ineffective in screening the
storage area from the street. In such cases, the planning commission may
require that screening from the public street be achieved by one of the
following options:
         a.   Screening of the view from the street by planting, on site or
along the public street, a row of trees (2 inch caliper minimum) spaced in such
a manner that the trees will form a solid screening of the storage area from
public view. If high water table conditions do not exist, evergreen trees shall
be used for screening trees. The trees planted shall be species whose height
and width will completely block the view of the storage area from a public
street. The trees shall be planted in a location which will be between the
required fence and the public viewing area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4171.png]
 
         b.   Alternative screening of view from the street at the public right
of way according to an approved design which blocks the view of the storage
areas from the street.
The above requirement may be in lieu of all or a portion of the screening fence
if waived under subsection H2f of this section, or in addition to fencing if
other purposes still exist for all or a portion of the fencing requirement.
      7.   Setback From Rivers; Screening: The planning commission shall
determine the appropriate setback of the storage area, fencing or building from
the rivers, which setback requirement may not exceed fifty feet (50'). In
determining the appropriate setback factors such as elevation difference from
the river and the surrounding land, existing vegetative conditions, floodplain
elevations and past changes in the channel flow shall be considered in
determining that the river corridor is not adversely impacted. Vegetation and
riverbanks shall be maintained in their natural conditions. The planning
commission shall require a screening fence which faces the river frontage when
the storage areas are visible from the river. A planting buffer between the
fence and the river may be required if it is determined that existing river
corridor vegetation or topography does not buffer the effect of the required
screening fence in order to create a natural riparian environment and there are
no other land uses between the storage and the river.
      8.   Irrigation Canals: All irrigation canals running through the
property shall be enclosed in a pipe of sufficient size to convey the maximum
flow capacity of the canal and which shall be sealed to prevent contamination
of the irrigation water, or, if piping is not allowed, all storage shall be set
back ten feet (10') from the open canal.
      9.   Interior Access Lanes: Interior access lanes shall be maintained and
kept open and free from storage as required by the fire department to provide
adequate access for fire protection.
      10.   Outdoor Storage: All materials stored out of doors shall be
contained so that the wind will not carry the items to adjacent properties.
      11.   Other Conditions: Such other conditions as determined by the
planning commission to be required under chapter 7 of this title.
   I.   Waste Transfer Station:
      1.   Purpose: The purpose of the following is to protect against the
environmental health, safety, and aesthetic concerns created by this land use.
Such concerns include, but are not limited to: the general circulation and
stacking patterns of user vehicles, odors, blowing trash, rodent control,
noise, visual pollution, limitations on future land use, use and marketability
of surrounding properties, off site needs and impacts, and architectural
quality. The following minimum standards and conditions shall be imposed by the
planning commission in and upon their determination that the specific location
meets the requirements of chapter 7 of this title.
      2.   Site Development Standards: A site plan for a waste transfer
facility shall comply with the following minimum development standards:
         a.   Access: The site must have access to a major collector or
arterial roadway without introducing user vehicles onto local roads that are
primarily used for residential traffic.
         b.   Off Site Circulation: Off site roads shall be capable of handling
vehicles traveling to and from the facility without disrupting normal traffic
flow of a public street. In order to maintain the traffic flow such things as
directional signing, turning lanes, turning islands, traffic signals, etc.,
need to be in place. If these types of improvements are to be installed, the
improvements must be reviewed and approved by the local, state, or federal
entity responsible for such road.
         c.   On Site Circulation: The site plan shall demonstrate adequate on
site queuing and circulation lanes (loop patterns) that reflect the design
complexity and capacity of the site for use by commercial trucks and private
vehicles. The circulation patterns shall segregate self-haul from commercial or
municipal traffic and prevent crossing patterns between them.
         d.   Queuing Lanes To Scales: All queuing lanes, from the public road
to the scales, shall provide adequate on site distance for accepting user
vehicles arriving to the site to prevent stacking of user vehicles onto a
public road. In no case shall the on site queuing distance be less than two
hundred feet (200').
         e.   Setbacks; Main Building: All main buildings used for waste
transfer activities shall be set back a minimum of one hundred feet (100') from
all property boundaries. The planning commission may reduce the setback if it
is determined that a reduction in the setback:
            (1)   Provides adequate room to reduce the environmental impacts
(noise, odor, unsightliness) to surrounding properties, including public rights
of way;
            (2)   Provides adequate room for the site circulation system;
            (3)   Provides adequate room to provide landscape buffering that
will visually enhance the site, screen objectionable views and define
circulation patterns when considering the areas between buildings and
circulation systems, between circulation systems and property lines and between
buildings and property lines; and
            (4)   Utilizes the topography to minimize visual impacts of the
buildings and to screen objectionable views.
         f.   Perimeter Setback: All other buildings, access lanes, circulation
lanes, parking lots, recycling areas, and other related activities shall be set
back a minimum of twenty five feet (25').
         g.   Environmental Protection: No part of the transfer building and
its accessory ramps and access lanes, recycling or household hazardous waste
collection centers shall be located within fifty feet (50') of an open or
unsealed drainage canal, stream, pond, or other body of water.
         h.   Landscaping: A landscaping plan shall be submitted with the site
plan depicting the purpose, design, and layout of all landscaped areas. All
landscaping shall be designed, installed and maintained to serve the following
purposes: buffer or screen the site, parking, buildings, recycling areas, and
waste transfer operations from public view from public rights of way and
adjoining properties. All landscaping shall meet the following minimum
standards:
            (1)   Types Of Trees: Use of coniferous and deciduous trees, of
which no more than forty percent (40%) of the types of trees are deciduous;
            (2)   Height Of Trees: All trees must be a minimum of ten feet
(10') in height at the time of planting;
            (3)   Shrubs: Shrubs used for screening must be a minimum of forty
two inches (42") in height at the time of planting, at a spacing no greater
than three feet (3') on center;
            (4)   Ground Cover: Living ground cover and new turf grasses must
be planted to cover the ground within three (3) years;
            (5)   Irrigation: An underground irrigation system must be
installed to maintain all landscaping;
            (6)   Perimeter Setback: The perimeter setback shall incorporate
landscaping (trees, berms, hedges, grasses, etc.) which shall be installed and
maintained to buffer or screen objectionable views into the site. There shall
be a minimum of five (5) trees per one thousand (1,000) square feet of
landscaped area;
            (7)   Access And Circulation Lanes: Landscaping (i.e., trees,
hedges, berms, decorative walls, etc.) shall be installed and maintained to
define and screen views of the access and circulation lanes for the facility;
            (8)   Parking Lots And Accessory Recycling Areas: Landscaping
(i.e., trees, hedges, berms, decorative walls, etc.) shall be installed and
maintained to define and screen views of the parking lots and accessory
recycling areas for the facility; and
            (9)   Areas To Be Landscaped: All areas not used for buildings,
recycling areas, parking, circulation and access lanes, shall be landscaped and
maintained.
         i.   Building Orientation And Site Design:
            (1)   All building orientations, landscaping, screening walls or
fencing must be designed, installed, and maintained to control windblown trash,
provide security, and prevent direct views, from a public street and adjacent
properties, into the interior of any waste transfer structure.
            (2)   All features such as fences, walls, container enclosures,
light fixtures, and secondary buildings shall be designed to be consistent with
the architectural design of the main building.
         j.   Building Design And Architectural Form:
            (1)   Building facades shall incorporate elements such as
stepbacks, offsets, angled facets, deep roof overhangs, recesses and/or other
architectural features which serve to diminish scale. Pitched roof forms are
preferred in order to enhance the compatibility of structure. However, under
certain circumstances, a stepped roof form may be used to achieve a similar
effect.
            (2)   All mechanical equipment which is located on the roof shall
be screened from view, from adjacent public roads or adjacent properties, in an
architecturally compatible manner with the building.
            (3)   All signing shall be compatible or similar in nature with the
architectural theme of the facility.
      3.   Waste Transfer Facility Operation Standards: All applications for
development of a waste transfer facility shall submit a "detailed operations
plan" which shall include the following:
         a.   Waste Transfer Activities: All on site waste transfer and
accessory recycling materials or household hazardous waste collection
activities shall be conducted within enclosed buildings (except for "limited
recycling" conducted in accordance with subsection G of this section).
         b.   Dust And Odor Control: The facility shall demonstrate that
adequate odor and dust control systems are to be operated and maintained (e.g.,
frequent wash downs, water sprays, and ventilation fans).
         c.   Overnight And Continual Or Outdoor Storage: Overnight and
continual storage of waste is prohibited, except for recyclable materials and
household hazardous waste or sealed waste containers awaiting shipment (e.g.,
recycle containers, railcars, and trailers). The operations plan shall identify
the time frame for the temporary storage and transfer of recyclable materials
and household hazardous waste or sealed waste containers. Outside storage of
solid waste, recyclable materials and household hazardous waste is prohibited.
         d.   Acceptance Of Waste: Waste shall not be accepted before seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. and after seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. to ensure that adequate
time is provided to conduct required wash downs and cleaning activities and
minimize impact on surrounding properties.
         e.   Storage And Maintenance Of Equipment: The storage and maintenance
of trucks, loaders, and equipment shall be done within enclosed buildings.
         f.   Environmental Quality: The facility shall be designed to protect
air quality and surface and ground water. Appropriate monitoring systems shall
be installed in the facility and/or included in the operating plan to detect
emissions or discharge of contaminants and household hazardous waste from the
facility into the atmosphere or surface and ground water.
         g.   Mitigation Of On And Off Site Impacts: The operating plan shall
include provisions to mitigate or establish enforcement measures regarding on
and off site impacts, but not be limited to litter control, cleanup procedures,
odor, noise, road damage, and other waste transfer facility related impacts
(e.g., litter crews, mitigation fees, interlocal agreements, tarp violation
enforcement and tracking, etc.).
         h.   Mitigation Of Noise: The maximum permissible noise level at the
property line between the transfer station and the receiving property is sixty
(60) dBA for a residential receiver, sixty five (65) dBA for commercial
receiver, and seventy (70) dBA for a manufacturing receiver. The following
qualifiers apply to the above maximum levels:
            (1)   Combined Background And Facility Noise: In the case where the
combined background and facility noise results in a noise level above the
respective dBA for each receiver, the relative increase shall not exceed three
(3) dBA over the background.
            (2)   Nighttime Reduction: Reduce by ten (10) dBA at night (10:00
P.M. to 7:00 A.M.) for residential receiving properties.
            (3)   Reduction For Certain Sounds: Reduce by five (5) dBA for
impulsive or pure tone sounds for any receiving property at any time.
            (4)   Short Duration Increase: Increase for a short duration for
any receiving property at any time:
               (A)   Increase by five (5) dBA for fifteen (15) minutes in any
one hour period.
               (B)   Increase by ten (10) dBA for five (5) minutes in any one
hour period.
               (C)   Increase by fifteen (15) dBA for 1.5 minutes in any one
hour period.
            (5)   Public Education And Recycling Programs: The waste facility
operating plan shall identify plans and programs that are to be implemented to
educate or provide to the public information regarding use of the facility,
proper recycling materials and hazardous waste disposal, yard waste disposal or
composting, and other related activities. These programs must be designed to
help educate the public about using the facility, minimize traffic by educating
and directing users to appropriate alternative disposal sites (e.g., off site
recycling centers, back yard or commercial composting sites), and to provide
needed capacity for the management of solid waste for the anticipated future
population growth of the waste transfer facility's service area.
   J.   Additional Conditions For Drinking Establishment: In addition to the
requirements of any applicable conditional use process, the following
conditions shall apply to drinking establishments:
      1.   Maximum Number: No more than two (2) drinking establishments per
linear block;
      2.   Parking: Parking shall be located on the same lot with the building
and conveniently located to the entrance of the building. In determining
conveniently located parking, the planning commission shall consider:
         a.   The visibility of the parking area from the building;
         b.   The lighting, existing physical development, and types of uses
adjacent to the parking lot and drinking establishment;
         c.   The potential for parking conflicts with the parking lots of
adjacent uses;
         d.   The potential for customer usage of on street parking in front of
residential uses.
      3.   Operational Hours: Operational hours shall be considered to assure
compatibility with the surrounding uses.
      4.   Drinking Establishment With Cabaret License: In addition to the
above requirements:
         a.   The planning commission shall consider, in granting a conditional
use permit for a drinking establishment with cabaret, the potential effects of
cabaret operations on adjacent uses, including in particular any residential
dwellings in the vicinity, considering hours of operation, noise, parking and
traffic conflicts, and possible activities of patrons on and around the site;
         b.   Cabaret activities in the BEH zone are allowed only after regular
business hours from 5:00 p.m. to 1:00 a.m., Monday through Friday and from 10:
00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m., Saturday and Sunday, and are not permitted outdoors
except as part of a special event.
   K.   Restaurant With Cabaret:
      1.   In addition to the general requirements of the conditional use
process, the planning commission shall consider the potential effects of
cabaret operations on adjacent uses, including in particular any residential
dwellings in the vicinity, considering hours of operation, noise, parking and
traffic conflicts, and possible activities of patrons on and around the site.
      2.   Cabaret activities in the BEH zone are allowed only after regular
business hours from 5:00 p.m. to 1:00 a.m., Monday through Friday and from 10:
00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m., Saturday and Sunday, and are not permitted outdoors
except as part of a special event.
   L.   Restaurant:
      1.   OCIP Zone: In the OCIP zone, full service restaurants which are
designed mainly for sit down dining and are over two thousand (2,000) square
feet in floor area and drive-in restaurants are permitted only along properties
with street frontage on either 1900 West or 2550 South. Restaurants which serve
mainly lunchtime customers (e.g., sandwich shops) and are two thousand (2,000)
square feet or less are allowed in all locations of OCIP zones.
      2.   BEH Zone: In the BEH zone, no drive-through windows for restaurants
or fast food establishments are permitted. A walk-up take out window is
permitted.
   M.   Building Materials Sales In OCIP: Businesses exceeding thirty thousand
(30,000) square feet in total building floor area are limited to 1900 West and
2550 South. The screening requirements for outdoor storage of building material
found in subsection F of this section are applicable to all building material
sales operations in the OCIP.
   N.   Towing Or Impound Lots: The following standards apply to these uses:
      1.   Screening Fence: A minimum seven foot (7') high screening fence is
required for screening all outdoor storage and operational areas, which fencing
shall be continually maintained. The screening fence shall be located behind
the required landscaped setbacks facing public streets. The screening fence
shall be a unified design and may be constructed of any of the following
fencing materials:
         a.   Chainlink with vertical plastic or vinyl slats spaced no farther
than three-eighths inch (3/8") apart, provided no storage of vehicles within
two feet (2') of the fence;
         b.   Solid wood fence of one inch by four inch (1" x 4") to one inch
by eight inch (1" x 8") horizontal members spaced no farther than one-eighth
inch (1/8") apart;
         c.   Decorative masonry; or
         d.   Other fence materials approved by the planning staff if it is
determined that the material and design is opaque, is not easily damaged by
weather or objects placed against it, does not detract from the appearance of
the finished site development, and the colors of the required screening wall
are subdued and nonreflective. Materials which are not standard fencing
materials such as canisters, pallets, reflective metals, or other similar items
shall not be used for fencing.
         e.   The screening fence requirement for all or part of the storage
area may be waived if it is shown that the adjacent use on the side required to
be screened is also outdoor storage.
      2.   Certification: All towing or impound lots shall comply with Utah
state tax commission standards for impound yards and shall provide the city
with their state issued identification number. All tow trucks and operators
accessing the yard shall obtain and meet all necessary state certification and
licensing requirements.
      3.   Loading Or Unloading Of Vehicles: No loading and/or unloading of
vehicles shall be permitted within the public right of way or required setback
areas. Facilities shall be designed so that all loading and unloading takes
place on the site behind the required screening fence without having to move
vehicles in and out of the screened storage area.
      4.   Setback Required: A minimum twenty foot (20') setback is required
for all buildings and parking lots adjacent to all public streets for
properties that are to function exclusively as a towing or impound lot. All
outdoor storage areas, required screening fencing, and unloading areas
associated with towing or impound lots shall be set back thirty feet (30') from
all public streets. In situations where multiple uses are to occur on the site,
building, parking and outdoor storage areas will only have to comply with the
underlying zone setbacks; but all storage, loading and unloading activities in
the outdoor storage area that are associated with the towing or impound lot
will need to occur thirty feet (30') from all public streets. The screened
outdoor storage shall either be paved or have a gravel/road base surface. The
parking lots and access driveways shall be paved to the storage area with
either concrete or asphalt, and setback areas shall be completely landscaped.
All landscaping shall be according to an approved landscape plan which meets
the objectives of this section. All landscaped areas shall be properly
maintained.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4173.png]
 
      5.   Screening From Street: Due to the elevation of the road along
portions of 20th Street, 21st Street, 24th Street and 31st Street Expressway
(Hinckley Drive), the required screening fence for the storage areas may be
ineffective in screening the storage area from the street. In such cases,
screening of the view from the right of way shall be achieved by planting on
site or along the public street, a row of trees (minimum 2 inch caliper for
deciduous trees or 4 foot minimum height for evergreen trees) spaced in such a
manner that the trees shall form a solid screening of the storage area from
public view. The trees planted shall be species whose height and width at
maturity will completely block the view of the storage area from a public
street. The trees shall be planted in a location which will be between the
required fence and the public viewing area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4169.png]
 
      6.   Setback From Rivers; Screening: A minimum setback of fifty feet
(50') from a river or stream of all storage areas, fencing or buildings is
required. Additional setback distances may be required based on factors such as
elevation difference from the river and the surrounding land, existing
vegetative conditions, floodplain elevations and past changes in the channel so
that the river corridor is not adversely impacted. Vegetation and riverbanks
shall be maintained in their natural conditions. A planting buffer between the
fence and the river may be required if it is determined that existing river
corridor vegetation or topography does not buffer the effect of the required
screening fence in order to create a natural riparian environment and there are
no other land uses between the storage and the river.
      7.   Irrigation Canals: All irrigation canals running through the
property shall be enclosed in a pipe of sufficient size to convey the maximum
flow capacity of the canal and which shall be sealed to prevent contamination
of the irrigation water, or, if piping is not allowed, all storage shall be set
back ten feet (10') from the open canal.
      8.   Interior Access Lanes: Interior access lanes shall be maintained and
kept open and free from storage as required by the fire department to provide
adequate access for fire protection.
      9.   Dismantling Or Salvaging Vehicles: No dismantling or salvaging is to
occur on the site unless the property is located in an M-2 zone and has
obtained a conditional use permit from the planning commission to allow junk
and salvage operations on the site.
   O.   Outdoor Gun Ranges: An outdoor gun range shall meet the conditions of
this section in addition to any other conditions that may be required by a
conditional use permit.
      1.   Operational Standards:
         a.   A certified range master shall be present for each firing line at
all times when an outdoor gun range is in use;
         b.   Only firearms shall be discharged at gun ranges. No cannons,
artillery or rockets, or other devices may be discharged;
         c.   No retail sales or repair of firearms shall be permitted as an
accessory use to an outdoor gun range, except as part of a special event;
         d.   Outdoor gun ranges shall meet noise ordinance standards;
         e.   Reclamation and recycling of bullets and shot shall be done on a
regular basis as needed (following the EPA's "Best Management Practices For
Lead And Outdoor Shooting Ranges" manual) for all gun ranges, but not less
frequently than in five (5) year intervals;
         f.   If not otherwise required by the county health department or by
the current building code, as adopted by title 16, chapter 2 of this code or
its successor provision, an outdoor gun range shall have permanent bathroom
facilities, with at least one toilet available for each sex, at all times the
range is in operation.
      2.   Design Standards: Outdoor gun ranges shall:
         a.   Be completely enclosed by a seven foot (7') high security fence
and have controlled access;
         b.   Be equipped with all weather warning signs posted around the
entire perimeter of the shooting range. The signs shall be posted on the
average of one sign each one hundred (100) linear feet along the perimeter.
Each sign shall be a minimum of two (2) square feet and shall contain wording
which warns of shooting on the premises;
         c.   Be designed so that no lead shot can be discharged or deposited
into any wetland;
         d.   Not have any shooting lane located within five hundred feet
(500') of any residential structure, airstrip, or runway;
         e.   Be located on a parcel of five (5) acres or more in area;
         f.   Have complete containment by being confined by features and
structures that effectively prevent bullets and shot from escaping the range;
         g.   Be designed to provide protection from accidental or stray
ammunition discharge for surrounding properties and uses;
         h.   Be designed to minimize noise and meet noise ordinance
regulations;
         i.   Have appropriate bullet and shot containment traps to allow for
effective reclamation and recycling;
         j.   Have appropriate engineered runoff controls to prevent
contamination of areas outside of the gun range;
         k.   Meet all applicable standards established in the "NRA Range
Source Book". Documentation indicating compliance with the aforementioned
standards shall be submitted with the site plan designed by an engineer or
architect licensed by the state;
         l.   Meet all applicable state and federal regulations including, but
not limited to: the Utah department of natural resources, environmental
protection agency and occupational safety and health administration.
Documentation indicating compliance with the aforementioned regulations shall
be submitted with the site plan designed by an engineer or architect licensed
by the state.
   P.   Indoor Recreation In The BEH Zone: In the BEH zone, indoor recreation
uses are limited to nonmotorized activities only.
   Q.   Special Requirements For Cannabis Production Establishment And Medical
Cannabis Pharmacy:
      1.   A cannabis production establishment:
         a.   Unless waived by the Utah Department of Agriculture and Food, may
not be located within six hundred feet (600’) of any primarily residential zone
or within one thousand feet (1,000’) of any community location, measured from
the nearest entrance to the cannabis production establishment following the
shortest ordinary route of pedestrian travel to the boundary of the community
location or residential zone;
         b.   Shall be operated entirely within an enclosed building;
         c.   Shall be designed to filter inside air exchanges to the outside
through air filter systems that remove odors before exiting the building; and
         d.   Shall maintain any exterior brick in an unpainted condition and
leave brick in its natural color in order to avoid drawing attention to the
building.
      2.   A medical cannabis pharmacy:
         a.   Unless waived by the Utah Department of Health, shall be located
no closer than six hundred feet (600’) from the border of any primarily
residential zone and two hundred feet (200’) from any community location,
measured from the nearest entrance to the cannabis production establishment
following the shortest ordinary route of pedestrian travel to the boundary of
the community location or residential zone;
         b.   Shall have one public entry door at the front of the building
facing the street;
         c.   Shall not darken or cover any windows on the front of the
building but shall maintain windows clear and allow visibility into the
pharmacy from the street;
         d.   Shall maintain any exterior brick in an unpainted condition and
leave brick in its natural color in order to avoid drawing attention to the
building;
         e.   Shall limit the hours of operation it is open to the public to 8:
00 A.M. to 8:00 P.M.
   R.   In the BEH zone, accessory sales of products in a business that
manufactures, packages, or stores food products for human consumption inside an
enclosed building, includes, in addition to the general provisions of chapter
21 of this title, the ability to sell products created off site and that are
related to the business.
(Ord. 2015-4, 2-24-2015; amd. Ord. 2019-46, 10-22-2019; Ord. 2020-25, 6-23-
2020)
15-23-6: ARCHITECTURAL BUILDING AND DESIGN REQUIREMENTS IN THE OCIP ZONE:
   A.   Building Materials: Any building erected on the property shall have an
exterior finish of either concrete masonry units, brick, tilt-up concrete,
precast concrete, stucco or stucco appearing material or colored enamel metal
panels.
   B.   Specific Materials: The front of the building shall be finished with
architectural block, face brick, glass, stucco or stucco appearing material,
tilt-up or precast concrete or a combination of these materials. For buildings
finished with colored enamel panels a portion of the front may use metal panels
to help maintain architectural continuity.
   C.   Minimum Front Design Details: The materials used for the exterior
treatment of the front of the building need to be arranged to provide
architectural relief. This may be achieved by, but is not limited to, any or a
combination of the following methods: windows, awnings, varying facial planes,
covered entryways, colonnades, etc. For concrete tilt-up buildings, indented
patterns, windows and a use of colors on the facade in a specific theme shall
be acceptable as meeting this requirement.
   D.   Screening Of Mechanical Equipment: All rooftop mechanical equipment
shall be concealed from public view to the maximum extent by screening it with
integral portions of the architecture. Concealed from public view is determined
by what a person would see when standing on the street in front of the
building. All conduit, vents and other appurtenances shall be painted to match
the color of the surrounding building surfaces.
(Ord. 2015-4, 2-24-2015)
15-23-7: ENVIRONMENTAL LAND USE CONTROLS IN THE MRD AND DDR ZONES:
   A.   The following terms, for purposes of this section, shall have the
respective meanings as defined in this subsection:
   ARMY: The United States Of America, acting by and through the department of
the army.
   PERMIT: Any permit, approval or authorization issued or granted by the city
for an improvement to, or alteration of, real property within the city,
including, but not limited to: a land use permit pursuant to subsection C of
this section, a building, demolition, or other construction permit pursuant to
title 16 of this code; an approval for the subdivision or development of land
pursuant to title 14 of this code; or any approval pursuant to this title,
which authorizes any type of grading, digging, excavation, improvements, or
construction activity.
   RESIDENTIAL PURPOSES: A use of property other than for commercial or
industrial purposes and not for residential purposes. For purposes of this
definition, "commercial or industrial purposes" includes, but is not limited
to, office, manufacturing, warehousing, or retail uses; "residential purposes"
includes, but is not limited to, housing, daycare facilities, schools
(excluding on site employee training), or assisted living facilities.
"Residential purposes" specifically includes a single-family dwelling unit for
night watchman and family, provided accessory to an allowed business use on the
site.
   RESIDENTIAL USE RESTRICTION: A restrictive covenant contained in any deed
conveying any portion of the military installation formerly known as the
Defense Depot Ogden, Utah, to the city, its successors or assigns, and recorded
in the records of the Weber County recorder's office, which restrictive
covenant prohibits the city, its successors or assigns, from using the property
for residential purposes.
   RESTRICTED BUILDINGS: The following buildings in the DDR zone that provide a
protective cap over contaminated soil the condition of which could not be
remediated without demolition of such buildings:
      1.   Building no. 359 (15C), 425 North 1070 West.
      2.   Building no. 367 (16C), 426 North 1140 West.
   RESTRICTED PROPERTY: Property located in Ogden City, Weber County, state of
Utah, bounded generally by 400 North (Loffredo Street) to the south, 1070 West
(Davis Avenue) to the east, 1140 West (Clark Avenue) to the west and 700 North
(Craner Street) to the north, and more particularly described as follows:
      Northern portion of Parcel 9, FOST 3 of Defense Depot Ogden City Corp
      Beginning at a point located 3214.13 feet North and 251.36 feet East from
the Weber County Survey witness corner monument located at the intersection of
1200 West Street and 200 North Street, said witness corner is also 689.28 feet
Westerly from the Northeast Corner of Section 13, Township 6 North, Range 2
West, Salt Lake Base and Meridian and running thence N 86°21'05" E 760.00 feet;
thence S 03°29'53" E 1598.48 feet; thence S 86°37'20" E 53.82 feet; thence S
86°28'41" W 651.61 feet; thence N 03°30'00" W 1650.62 feet to the Point of
Beginning.
      Containing 28.68 acres, more or less.
   RESTRICTED WORK: 1. Any excavation or disturbance of the soil beneath the
foundations of the restricted buildings.
      2.   Any disturbance of the foundations of, or any activity which would
compromise the integrity of, the foundations of the restricted buildings, in a
manner which would result in human contact with the underlying soils.
      3.   Any activity which results in the accessing, extracting, or use of
groundwater, or the injection of any materials into any wells located on the
restricted property.
   B.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, no portion of the
restricted property may be used for residential purposes, whether as a
permitted use, conditional use, or accessory use, if such use would be in
violation of a residential use restriction.
   C.   No person shall perform restricted work on restricted property, unless
and until a land use permit is granted by the city.
   D.   No permit shall be granted for restricted work on, over, under, or
within restricted property or restricted buildings in the MRD or DDR zone,
unless and until the applicant receives prior written approval of the United
States, acting by and through the department of the army, the environmental
protection agency region 8, and the Utah department of environmental quality,
and submits a copy thereof to the city.
(Ord. 2015-4, 2-24-2015)
15-23-8: ARCHITECTURAL GUIDELINES AND SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR THE BEI AND BEH
ZONES:
In the BEI and BEH zones, main and accessory structures shall be designed and
constructed in a manner that is in harmony with the physical setting and
consistent with the intended use of the building. Generally buildings should
have a contemporary style but are encouraged to incorporate design concepts of
former stockyard buildings such as clerestory windows and building shapes and
materials.
   A.   Building Facades: Structures shall have equally attractive sides,
rather than placing all emphasis on the front elevation of the structure. The
same types of building materials shall be used on all four (4) sides, though
the amount of material used on each side may vary. Structures shall be designed
and arranged with variations in wall surfaces by using such things as varying
textures, materials, and planes to avoid a blank wall appearance.
   B.   Colors: Building colors shall be predominantly earth tones. Shades of
brown, tan, green, off white, darker oranges and rust colors are the examples
of colors that will be considered appropriate. Use of brighter colors,
including silvers and other metallic colors, is limited to accents or details
on a building and shall not exceed more than ten percent (10%) of the wall
surface of each wall.
   C.   Building Materials:
      1.   BEI Zone: Building walls shall be constructed with materials of
durability and quality and limited to the following types of exterior surfaces:
         a.   Architecturally treated precast concrete.
         b.   Brick.
         c.   Baked colored architectural metals. In no case shall ribbed metal
skin systems typical of preengineered metal buildings be permitted.
         d.   Integral colored split face or honed CMU. Smooth face CMU may be
used on portions of the building not visible from public areas.
         e.   Tilt up wall systems or site cast concrete provided exterior
surface has sandblasted finish and architectural joint detailing.
         f.   Stucco including EIFS is limited to architectural detailing
surfaces and articulation and are a minimum of eight feet (8') above grade.
      2.   BEH Zone: Building walls shall be constructed with materials of
durability and quality that are compatible to the building materials of the
existing Stock Exchange Building which are the following exterior materials:
         a.   Brick veneer.
         b.   Concrete and other masonry materials that create texture, visual
lines and color similar to brick.
      3.   Glass: Clear glass, low E or slightly tinted glazing is permissible.
Reflective glass over an exterior reflectance rating of .4 is not permitted.
      4.   Roof: Roofs over a two to twelve (2:12) pitch shall utilize standing
seam nonreflective metal roofs. Flat roofs shall use built up roofing or single
ply roofing of light colors to reduce heat absorption. "Green" roofs of living
plant material may also be considered as an appropriate roof treatment.
   D.   Building Architecture In BEH Zone: In the BEH Zone, buildings shall be
designed to be compatible with the Stock Exchange Building. As a minimum:
      1.   The design requires facade modules of columns and punched areas for
windows or architectural lines which suggest window patterns within a defined
modular pattern of bays between twenty four feet (24') and thirty six feet
(36').
      2.   Windows shall:
         a.   Be required on the facade of the building facing the public
street and used as the public entrance to the building;
         b.   Have divided lites and expressed lintels and sills;
         c.   Be required on all other facades when office or public spaces are
the interior uses along the exterior walls.
      3.   Walls shall have a minimum solid wall to glass space of twenty four
percent (24%) glazing of the wall surface on the front face as described in
this section.
      4.   The exterior wall treatments within the modular design bays when the
interior wall area is warehousing or manufacturing operations shall have
architectural details which suggest the same required window treatments as the
public face of the building. Architectural details include but are not limited
to scoring patterns, use of different materials, indentations, or color
changes.
      5.   The upper portion of the building shall have a defined cornice
treatment which hides the roof.
   E.   Maximum Building Footprint In BEH Zone: The maximum building footprint
allowed in the BEH Zone is sixty thousand (60,000) square feet.
   F.   Screening Of Mechanical Equipment: All rooftop mechanical equipment
shall be concealed from public view to the maximum extent by screening it with
integral portions of the architecture. "Concealed from public view" is
determined by what a person would see when standing on the public accessways.
All conduit, vents and other appurtenances shall be painted to match the color
of the surrounding building surfaces. Ground mounted mechanical equipment shall
be screened from public view by means of walls that have the same design
characteristics and materials as the main building on the lot.
   G.   Lighting: All freestanding or wall mounted exterior lighting shall be
designed to shine down in a controlled manner to light only areas on the
property where the light source is found. Shields to prevent uplighting will be
required if the luminaire design has a complete glass fixture.
   H.   Fencing: No fence or fence structure is allowed between the building
and the public pathway on the Weber River side of the building. Chainlink
fencing is prohibited as a fencing material in the zones.
   I.   Signs: The provisions of sign type, size and height for the BEH and BEI
Zones are as follows. All signs must be located on private property.
      1.   Temporary signage:
         a.   Project announcement sign: One sign per site not to exceed sixty
four (64) square feet or be taller than twelve feet (12') from grade.
         b.   Construction directional signage: Four feet by four feet (4' x
4') sign with a maximum height of four feet (4'). Signs to be removed after
construction of site.
         c.   Leasing/for sale sign: One per street front four feet by eight
feet (4' x 8') sign with maximum height of seven feet (7').
      2.   Permanent sign:
         a.   Business sign: One freestanding sign and two (2) wall mounted
signs. Wall mounted sign forty eight (48) square foot maximum per sign.
Freestanding sign thirty six (36) square feet maximum with a maximum height of
five feet six inches (5'6") only as a monument type design.
         b.   Building complex sign: One freestanding sign per lot when three
(3) or more tenants are on a lot or in a building. Thirty six (36) square feet
maximum with a maximum height of five feet six inches (5'6") only as a monument
type sign.
         c.   Directional sign: Maximum twelve (12) square feet and maximum
five foot (5') height.
         d.   Development directory sign: Four (4) locations in subdivision.
Maximum two hundred (200) square feet per location. Maximum height nine feet
(9'). Monument sign only.
(Ord. 2015-4, 2-24-2015; amd. Ord. 2018-40, 12-18-2018; Ord. 2019-11, 3-26-
2019)
1CHAPTER 24
AIRPORT ZONE DISTRICTS AND USES
SECTION:
15-24-1: Airport District
15-24-2: Airport Districts Purpose
15-24-3: Definitions
15-24-4: Uses Allowed In Each Airport Zone
15-24-5: Site Development Standards
15-24-6: Landscaping Setbacks And Coverages
15-24-7: Special Limitations
15-24-8: Architectural Character And Other Guidelines For The Airport
Commercial (A-C) Zone
15-24-9: Architectural Character And Other Guidelines For The Airport
Industrial (A-I) Zone
15-24-10: Airport Overlay Zone And Airport Area Special Regulations
15-24-1: AIRPORT DISTRICT:
The "airport district" is defined as those properties that are within the area
bordered by Hinckley Dr., 4400 South (south city boundary), the west city
boundary adjacent to Roy City, and the east city boundary adjacent to Riverdale
City. The area is centered about the Ogden-Hinckley airport and contains both
public and private lands.
(Ord. 2002-24, 6-4-2002, eff. 6-16-2002)
15-24-2: AIRPORT DISTRICTS PURPOSE:
The purpose of each zoning category within the airport district is described
below:
   A.   Airport Commercial Zone (A-C):
      1.   District Characteristics: This airport commercial zone is intended
to protect and preserve prime lands within the airport district for high
quality aeronautically related commercial development.
      2.   Purpose Of District: The airport commercial zone provides for sales
and services with access to the Ogden-Hinckley airport. It is intended that
such sales and services be aeronautically related in nature, or support other
aeronautical activities.
   B.   Airport Industrial Zone (A-I):
      1.   District Characteristics: The airport industrial zone is intended to
protect and preserve lands within the airport district for limited
aeronautically related industrial, research or manufacturing uses. The airport
industrial zone is also intended to protect and preserve land for aeronautical
uses such as airplane hangars, taxi lanes, fixed base operators, etc. The
airport industrial zone may be established on airport district properties that
are appropriate for limited aeronautically related industrial, research, or
manufacturing uses, as well as properties that are appropriate for aeronautical
uses in support of airport operations.
      2.   Purpose Of District: The purpose is to accommodate a range of
aeronautically related industrial uses that are of limited intensity, e.g.,
aeronautically related parts manufacturing and research and development, and
other aeronautical uses in support of airport operations, e.g., hangars, tie
down areas, fixed base operators, etc. The uses should be aeronautical in
nature, or support aeronautical activities, should not create hazards or
emissions of noxious odors, smoke or noise, nor have exterior storage of
materials or parts.
(Ord. 2002-24, 6-4-2002, eff. 6-16-2002)
15-24-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms mean:
AERONAUTICAL ACTIVITY OR PRODUCT: Any activity or product which involves, makes
possible or is required for the operation of aircraft, or which contributes to
or is required for the safety of such operations.
AIRPORT APPROACH AREA: The specified area at each end of the airport landing
area required for the safe flight of aircraft in landing, taking off or
maneuvering at or in the vicinity of the airport.
AIRPORT APPROACH, TRANSITIONAL, HORIZONTAL, AND CONICAL SURFACE ZONES: These
zones apply to the area under the approach, transitional, horizontal, and
conical surfaces as defined in subsection 15-24-10D of this chapter.
AIRPORT ELEVATION: The elevation in feet above mean sea level of the highest
point of the landing area of the airport.
AIRPORT HAZARD: Any structure or natural growth of use of land which
penetrates, obstructs, or restricts the airspace required for the safe flight
of aircraft in landing, taking off, or maneuvering at or in the vicinity of an
airport, or is otherwise hazardous to such landing, taking off, or maneuvering
of aircraft.
AIRPORT INSTRUMENT LANDING AREA: A landing area equipped with precision
electronic air navigation aids adequate to permit the landing of aircraft by an
instrument approach under restricted visibility conditions.
AIRPORT LANDING AREA: The runway or the specially prepared surface within the
boundaries of an airport designed for aircraft landing and taking off
operations.
AIRPORT NONINSTRUMENT LANDING AREA: Any landing areas other than an instrument
landing area.
AIRPORT NONPRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY: A runway having an existing instrument
approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only horizontal
guidance, or area type navigation equipment, for which a straight in
nonprecision instrument approach has been approved or planned, and for which no
precision approach facilities are planned or indicated on an FAA planning
document or military service's military airport planning document.
AIRPORT PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY: A runway having an existing instrument
approach procedure utilizing an instrument landing system (ILS), or a precision
approach radar (PAR). It also means a runway for which a precision approach
system is planned and is so indicated by an FAA approved airport layout plan or
any other FAA planning document, or military service's military airport
planning document.
AIRPORT PRIMARY SURFACE: A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When
the runway has a specifically prepared hard surface, the primary surface
extends two hundred feet (200') beyond the end of that runway; but when the
runway has no specifically prepared hard surface, or planned hard surface, the
primary surface ends at the end of that runway. The width of the primary
surface of a runway will be that width prescribed in part 77 of the federal
aviation regulations (FAR) for the most precise approach existing or planned
for either end of that runway. The elevation of any point on the primary
surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway
centerline.
AIRPORT RUNWAY: The paved surface of an airport landing area.
AIRPORT VISUAL RUNWAY: A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft
using visual approach procedure with no straight in instrument approach
procedure and no instrument designation indicated on an FAA approved airport
layout plan, a military service's approved military airport layout plan, or by
any planning document submitted to the FAA by competent authority.
AIRSIDE: The movement and nonmovement areas of the airport accessible to
aircraft. Includes all runways, taxiways, taxi lanes, hangars and ramps.
LANDSIDE: The areas of the airport property accessible to vehicles only,
generally limited to the terminal areas, public parking areas, and other
buildings and businesses inaccessible to aircraft.
(Ord. 2002-24, 6-4-2002, eff. 6-16-2002)
15-24-4: USES ALLOWED IN EACH AIRPORT ZONE:
Of the following list of possible uses, those uses designated in any district
as a "P" are permitted uses; uses designated with a "C" will be allowed only
when authorized by a conditional use permit obtained as provided in chapter 7
of this title; uses designated with an "N" and uses that are not listed are not
allowed. Accessory uses to the permitted or conditional uses are allowed.
 
Uses A-C A-I
Entertainment and recreational:                                               
  Indoor cultural, entertainment and recreation uses and businesses which
 provide as a main use activities for patrons of all ages by means of      P N
  film, performance or action, e.g., movie theaters, live theater, sports.
 Indoor or outdoor public events or civic activities.                      P P
Institutional:                                                                
 Aeronautically related educational institutions, e.g., flight schools,    P P
  flight simulator training facilities, etc.
 Aeronautically related trade or vocational school, e.g., flight support   P P
  services, aircraft maintenance training, etc.
 Public buildings or other public uses.                                    P P
Manufacturing:                                                                
  Manufacturing establishments solely engaged in the assembly of already
  processed materials into new aeronautically related products, e.g.,
 flight simulators, flight instruments, avionics, airframes, etc.,           
  provided the activity is conducted and all materials and new products are
  stored within a completely enclosed building, and:
  The activity does not produce noise, smell, or smoke detectable outside C P
    the building.
    The activity does not produce smoke or smell and does not produce noise
  greater than the maximum allowable sound levels listed in title 12,     N P
    chapter 14 of this code.
  Manufacturing process which involves refining, casting, cutting,
  processing, creating, or assembling of new aeronautically related
 products, e.g., light metal part molding, aircraft engine components,       
  composite materials, tool machining, semiconductors, crystals, etc.,
  provided manufacturing process and storage of materials and new products
  occurs inside an enclosed building, and:
  The process does not produce noise, fumes, smoke, or waste products     C P
    that can be detected outside the building.
    The process does not produce smoke, fumes or waste products that can be
  detected outside the building, or noise greater than the maximum        N P
    allowable sound levels listed in title 12, chapter 14 of this code.
  Manufacturing process which involves refining, casting, cutting,
  processing, creating, or assembling of new nonaeronautically related
  products, e.g., book publishing, printing, foreign trade zone (FTZ)
  companies, etc., provided manufacturing process and storage of materials
 and new products occurs inside an enclosed building, does not produce     C N
  noise, smell, or smoke or waste products detectable outside the building,
  and does not occupy more than 20 percent of the floor area of an existing
  building. Existing building must have at least 80 percent floor area
  occupied by other allowed uses when the conditional use permit is
  granted.
Residential:                                                                  
 Dormitories for air support operations or facilities.                     N P
 Dormitories for flight training or other educational facilities.          C P
 Single-family dwelling unit for night watchman and family provided unit   C C
  is attached to and accessory to a permitted use on the site.
Sales:                                                                        
  A sales establishment of less than 1,000 square feet of floor area doing
  business in an enclosed permanent structure engaged in the selling of
 goods or merchandise to the general public for personal, household, or    P N
  business use (excluding retail tobacco specialty business) and rendering
  services incidental to the sale of such goods, e.g., grocery, clothing,
  supplies, jewelry, toys, etc.
  A sales establishment of 1,000 to 5,000 square feet of floor area doing
  business in an enclosed permanent structure engaged in the selling of
 goods or merchandise to the general public for personal, household, or    C N
  business use (excluding retail tobacco specialty business) and rendering
  services incidental to the sale of such goods, e.g., grocery, clothing,
  supplies, jewelry, toys, etc.
  A sales establishment of greater than 5,000 square feet of floor area
  doing business in an enclosed permanent structure engaged in the selling
 of goods or merchandise to the general public for personal, household, or N N
  business use and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods,
  e.g., grocery, clothing, supplies, jewelry, toys, etc.
  A sales establishment engaged in the preparing, serving and selling of
 food and drink for human consumption on or off premises, e.g.,            P N
  restaurants, drive-ins, etc.
  A sales establishment that in addition to food and drink provides live
  entertainment, e.g., cabaret. In addition to the requirements of the
  conditional use permit process, the planning commission shall consider
 the potential effects of cabaret operations on adjacent uses, including,  C N
  but not limited to, any residential dwellings in the vicinity,
  considering hours of operation, noise, parking and traffic conflicts, and
  possible activities of patrons on and around the site.
  Sales establishments which engage in the sales of aircraft or aircraft
 parts and equipment, e.g., aircraft brokers, aircraft distributors,       P C
  aircraft dealers, aircraft accessories, etc.
 Sales establishment primarily involved in the retail sale of motor fuels  C N
  dispensed on site, e.g., service station, gas station, convenience store.
  Sales establishment that has general and aviation fuel storage tanks,
 e.g., fuel farms, aboveground tanks intended to be used for storage of    C C
  fuel for retail sales.
  Sales establishments that engage mainly in selling alcoholic beverages,
 e.g., drinking establishments, liquor stores. In addition to the          C N
  requirements of the conditional use process, the following conditions
  shall apply:
  A. Establishment must be located in, or accessory to, a hotel,            
       restaurant, or terminal.
       Parking shall be located on the same lot with the building and
  B. conveniently located to the entrance of the building. In determining   
       conveniently located parking, the planning commission shall
       consider:
    1. The visibility of the parking area from the building;               
    2. The lighting, existing physical development, and types of uses      
       adjacent to the parking lot and sales establishment;
    3. The potential for parking conflicts with the parking lots of        
       adjacent uses; and
    4. The potential for customer usage of on street parking in front of   
       residential uses.
  Operational hours shall be considered to assure compatibility with the    
    surrounding uses.
  Sales (or rental) establishment classified as sexually oriented
 businesses including adult bookstores or adult videos (see section        P N
  15-13-13 of this title for applicable conditions).
Services:                                                                     
  A business engaged in aircraft repairs provided all the work and storage
  occurs in a completely enclosed building, e.g., aircraft maintenance,
 aircraft repair, MRO, aircraft completion centers, propeller repair,      P P
  avionics repair, etc. Retail sale of related aeronautical items is
  permitted provided not more than 10 percent of the floor area is utilized
  for such sales.
 A business engaged in aircraft restoration provided all the work and      C C
  storage occurs in a completely enclosed building.
  A business located in an enclosed building engaged in providing services
  directly to individuals, businesses or agencies such as personal,
 professional, financial and business services, e.g., appraisal and        P N
  marketing, insurance, corporate office, barbershop, laundry, architects,
  banking, real estate, hotels, engineering, electrical systems design,
  emergency training, etc.
  A business located in an enclosed building engaged in providing data
 processing, telemarketing, product uses, support services, or other       P C
  business support services. Such businesses do not have contact with the
  general public except by means of mail or telecommunications.
  A business located in an enclosed building engaged in providing
  aeronautically related services to individuals, businesses or agencies
 such as air charter, air ambulance, air cargo, aircraft cleaning/         P P
  detailing, aircraft management, flight lessons, simulator training, air
  consulting services, aerial photography, hangar rental, helicopter
  services, crop dusting services, airplane storage, flight planning, etc.
  A business located in an enclosed building engaged in providing airport
 terminal services, e.g., ticketing office, automobile rental, cafe or     P N
  cafeteria, etc.
  A medical clinic located in an enclosed building engaged in providing
 medical services, e.g., corporate flight department medical service,      P C
  executive medical services, workplace injuries, or other work related
  conditions, etc.
 Flying clubs or other fractional aircraft ownership services.             P P
Sexually oriented business (see section                                       
15-13-13 of this title for applicable conditions):
 Adult live entertainment businesses or adult movie theaters.              N N
 Outcall services or adult entertainment dance agencies.                   P N
Transportation, utilities, communication:                                     
 Businesses or land uses which are primarily engaged in uses or public     P P
  transportation, e.g., parking lots, bus stations, etc.
  Utility or communication business engaged in the delivery of services
 aboveground, e.g., substations, relay towers, commercial transmitting     C C
  towers, etc.
 
(Ord. 2013-50, 12-3-2013; amd. Ord. 2020-24, 6-23-2020)
15-24-5: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The following dimensional requirements shall apply in each airport zone to
building and parking setbacks, measured from the property line:
 
    A-C Zo   A-I Zone
Minimum lot area                       3,000 square fee   4,000 square feet
Minimum lot dimensions                 40 foot width      50 foot width
Maximum impervious coverage            80 percent         90 percent
                                       See section        See section
Maximum building height             15-24-10              15-24-10
                                       of this chapter    of this chapter
Front yard setback                     20 feet            10 feet
Side yard setback (facing a street)    20 feet            10 feet
Side yard setback                      10 feet            10 feet
Rear yard setback                      20 feet            10 feet
 
   A.   Distance Between Buildings: Hangars may be constructed without a
minimum distance between buildings to the side or rear in accordance with the
international building code. Hangar locations must allow a taxi lane area to
the front of at least eighty feet (80') between buildings.
   B.   Landscaping Requirements: No landscaping other than grass or turf is
required on airside area of structures, e.g., aircraft hangar, taxi, or tie
down areas.
(Ord. 2002-24, 6-4-2002)
15-24-6: LANDSCAPING SETBACKS AND COVERAGES:
Notwithstanding the required landscaping for those setbacks that are along
street frontages (see table at section
15-24-5 of this chapter), there may be additional landscaping required based on
other provisions of this title. Additional requirements include, but are not
limited to, installation of landscaping in public rights of way 1 , preserving
existing vegetation 2 , screening of service and storage areas 3 , parking lot
landscaping 4  and special requirements 5  for specific requirements for listed
types of development or development in specific zones. See section
15-24-10 of this chapter for landscaping height limitations.
(Ord. 2002-24, 6-4-2002)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection 15-4-5E3a of this title.
2 2. See subsections 15-4-5E7a and E7b of this title.
3 3. See subsection 15-4-5G of this title.
4 4. See subsections 15-12-9B and C of this title.
5 5. See chapter 23 of this title.
15-24-7: SPECIAL LIMITATIONS:
   A.   Landscaping Limitations:
      1.   No tree or shrub species shall be allowed that produces berries or
seeds that would attract wildlife to the airport.
      2.   Trees must be selected to grow within the height limitations of
section
15-24-10 of this chapter.
   B.   Hangar Limitations:
      1.   Hangars are intended to be used for the storage of aircraft. Not
more than fifty percent (50%) of hangar floor space may be used for storage or
business use.
      2.   Hangars may be used for the general maintenance of aircraft in
compliance with restrictions found in title 8 of this code and any applicable
fire and building codes.
(Ord. 2002-24, 6-4-2002, eff. 6-16-2002)
15-24-8: ARCHITECTURAL CHARACTER AND OTHER GUIDELINES FOR THE AIRPORT
COMMERCIAL (A-C) ZONE:
Structures shall be developed in a way that is in harmony with the setting and
consistent with the intended uses. They should reflect a contemporary style and
should be unified in terms of materials and colors to achieve a campus like
feel.
   A.   Building Facades: Structures shall be designed with equal emphasis
placed on all sides, rather than placing all emphasis on the front elevation of
the structure. The same types of building materials shall be used on all four
(4) sides, though the amount of material used on each side may vary. Structures
shall be designed and arranged with variations in wall surfaces by using such
things as varying textures, materials and planes to avoid a blank wall
appearance.
   B.   Materials: Buildings shall be constructed with materials of durability
and quality. Walls shall be constructed of rough textured stucco, concrete,
concrete masonry units, bricks, stone or other material with similar
appearance. All concrete shall have texturing over a minimum of two-thirds (2/
3) of the exposed surface. In no case are metal premanufactured buildings
permitted nor shall metal sided structures be built. Roof materials shall have
dull finishes. In the areas where the new buildings are mixed with existing
structures, compatibility of materials is required as long as the materials
meet the material types listed in this subsection.
   C.   Colors: Building colors shall be predominantly warm, muted earth tones.
Brighter colors may only be used for accents or detailing (maximum 10 percent
of surface area, excluding signage) if desired.
   D.   Screening Of Mechanical Equipment: All rooftop mechanical equipment
shall be concealed from public view to the maximum extent possible by screening
it with integral portions of the architecture. "Concealed from public view" is
determined by what a person would see when standing on the public sidewalk in
front of the building. All conduits, vents and other appurtenances shall be
painted to match the color of the surrounding building surfaces.
   E.   Walkways: Parking lot walkways within the site shall be located and
aligned to directly and continuously connect areas or points of pedestrian
origin and destination, and shall not be located solely based on the outline of
a parking lot configuration that does not provide such direct pedestrian
access.
   F.   Fencing: No fencing shall be allowed to extend beyond the front line of
the main building. For properties that are a corner lot, fencing shall not
extend beyond the side of the building facing the street.
(Ord. 2002-24, 6-4-2002, eff. 6-16-2002)
15-24-9: ARCHITECTURAL CHARACTER AND OTHER GUIDELINES FOR THE AIRPORT
INDUSTRIAL (A-I) ZONE:
Structures shall be developed in a way that is in harmony with the setting and
consistent with the intended uses.
   A.   Building Materials: Structures shall have an exterior finish of either
concrete masonry units, brick, tilt up concrete, precast concrete, stucco or
stucco appearing material or colored enamel metal panels. Roof materials shall
have dull finishes.
   B.   Colors: Building colors shall be predominantly warm, muted earth tones.
Brighter colors may only be used for accents or detailing (maximum 10 percent
of surface area, excluding signage) if desired.
   C.   Screening Of Mechanical Equipment: All rooftop mechanical equipment
shall be concealed from public view to the maximum extent possible by screening
it with integral portions of the architecture. "Concealed from public view" is
determined by what a person would see when standing on the public sidewalk in
front of the building. All conduits, vents and other appurtenances shall be
painted to match the color of the surrounding building surfaces.
(Ord. 2002-24, 6-4-2002, eff. 6-16-2002)
15-24-10: AIRPORT OVERLAY ZONE AND AIRPORT AREA SPECIAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Purpose And Intent: It is hereby found that an airport hazard endangers
the lives and property of users of the Ogden-Hinckley airport and of occupants
of land or to property in its vicinity, and also that if in effect such hazard
substantially reduces the size of the area available for the landing, taking
off and maneuvering of aircraft, it tends to destroy or impair the utility of
the Ogden-Hinckley airport and the public investment therein and causes adverse
effects on the safety of residents and the economic development of the region.
   B.   Height Limiting Zones: In order to carry out the provisions of this
title, there are hereby created and established certain height limiting zones,
which include all the incorporated land lying within the nonprecision and
precision instrument approach zones, noninstrument approach zones, transitional
surface zones, horizontal surface zones, and conical surface zones. Such zones
are shown on the airport zoning map, on the Ogden-Hinckley airport layout plan
(ALP), which is available in the airport manager's office, and as an airport
overlay zone on the Ogden City zoning map.
   C.   Objects That Affect Navigable Airspace: Federal aviation regulation
part 77 "objects affecting navigable airspace" prescribes airspace standards
which should be free from penetrations which represent obstructions to air
navigation. These standards and their relationship to the physical features and
terrain on and around Ogden-Hinckley airport must be considered prior to
construction or alteration of any building or tower located within the
airport's navigable airspace. Plan sheets that present the part 77 standards,
existing obstructions, and limiting heights and elevations for future
development adjacent to the airport and within the airport environs are part of
the Ogden-Hinckley airport layout plan and are available in the airport
manager's office. Plans include the following:
      1.   Part 77 airspace plan.
      2.   Runway 3-21, approach plan and profile.
      3.   Runway 3-21, protection zone detail.
      4.   Runway 16-34, approach plan and profile.
      5.   Runway 16-34, protection zone detail.
      6.   Runway 7-25, approach plan and profile.
      7.   Runway 7-25, protection zone detail.
   D.   Federal Aviation Part 77 Surfaces: Airport imaginary surfaces (FAR part
77) are established relative to the airport and each runway. The size of each
imaginary surface is based on the category of each runway with respect to the
existing and proposed approaches for that runway. The slope and dimensions of
each approach surface are determined by the most precise approach existing or
proposed for that runway end. The part 77 imaginary surface definitions
include:
      1.   Primary Surface: A rectangular area, symmetrically located about the
runway centerline and extending a distance of two hundred feet (200') beyond
each runway threshold. Its elevation is the same as that of the runway.
      2.   Horizontal Surface: An oval shaped, level area situated one hundred
fifty feet (150') above the airport elevation. Its dimensions are governed by
the runway service category.
      3.   Conical Surface: A sloping area whose inner perimeter conforms to
the shape of the horizontal surface. It extends outward for a distance of four
thousand feet (4,000') measured horizontally, while sloping upward at a twenty
to one (20:1) (horizontal:vertical) ratio.
      4.   Transitional Surface: A sloping area which begins at the edge of the
primary surface and slopes upward and outward at a ratio of seven to one (7:1)
(horizontal:vertical) until it intersects the horizontal surface.
      5.   Approach Surfaces: These surfaces begin at the ends of the primary
surface (200 feet beyond the runway threshold) and slope upward and outward at
a predetermined ratio while flaring outward horizontally. The width and
elevation of the inner ends conform to that of the primary surface; while
slope, length and width of the outer ends are governed by the runway service
category and existing or proposed instrument approach procedure. The Ogden-
Hinckley airport approach surfaces are as follows:
 
Runway Surface
3      50:1
21     20:1
16     20:1
34     20:1
7      20:1
25     20:1
 
   E.   Height Restrictions: Construction of buildings and other structures
within the airport vicinity must not conflict with airport operations.
Therefore, all proposed construction and development must be reviewed in
accordance with FAR part 77 regulations to ascertain obstructions and/or
potential penetrations.
By this zoning ordinance, the city hereby notifies proposed builders/developers
of the FAA notification requirement for construction (FAA form 7460-1) or
alteration of manmade structures. This FAA notification requirement applies to
any construction or alteration of: 1) a structure (permanent or temporary) more
than two hundred feet (200') in height above the ground level at its site, and/
or 2) a structure of greater height than an imaginary surface extending outward
and upward at one hundred to one (100:1) slope for a horizontal distance of
twenty thousand feet (20,000') from the nearest point of the nearest runway.
Forms and additional information are available at the Ogden-Hinckley airport
manager's office.
   F.   Airspace Plan: The Ogden-Hinckley airport airspace plan depicts the FAR
part 77 surfaces on a series of quadrangle maps for the area around the
airport. These surfaces illustrate the instrument approach surfaces to runways
3 and 7 and visual approach surfaces to runways 16, 21, 25 and 34.
   G.   Approach Zones And Runway Protection Zones: The runway approach zone,
defined previous, contains the runway protection zone (RPZ). The RPZ is merely
the inner portion of the approach zone. It begins at ground level, two hundred
feet (200') beyond the end of the area usable for takeoff or landing. It is
trapezoidal in shape and centered about the extended runway centerline. Like
the approach zone, the RPZ dimensions are a function of the design aircraft,
type of operation and visibility minimums. The approach zone and RPZ geometric
are smaller for visual approaches than for nonvisual approaches, which are
smaller than precision approaches. The approach zone and RPZ slopes
(horizontal:vertical) vary dependent upon the availability and precision of air
navigation facilities provided.
At Ogden-Hinckley airport, runway 3 has an existing precision instrument fifty
to one (50:1) approach requirement. Runway 7 has an existing nonprecision
twenty to one (20:1) instrument approach. Runways 16, 21, 25 and 34 have visual
twenty to one (20:1) approaches. The ALP and property records show the
ownership of the RPZs. The airport has achieved and should continue to try to
maintain obstruction free approach zones and RPZs.
The following height limiting zones are hereby established:
      1.   Runways 21, 16, 34, 7 And 25 Approach Zones: A nonprecision approach
surface zone is established at the end of each of these runways for
nonprecision landings and takeoffs. The approach zone shall have an inner width
(W1) at a distance of two hundred feet (200') beyond the end of the runway,
widening thereafter uniformly to an outer width (W2) at a distance of five
thousand two hundred feet (5,200') beyond the end of the runway, its centerline
being the continuation of the centerline of the runway. The approach zone shall
rise one foot (1') in height for each twenty feet (20') in horizontal distance
beginning at a point two hundred feet (200') from and at the centerline
elevation of the runway and extending to a distance of five thousand two
hundred feet (5,200) from the end of the runway.
 
Runway W1         W2
21     1,000 feet 1,500 feet
16     500 feet   1,000 feet
34     500 feet   1,500 feet
7      500 feet   2,000 feet
25     500 feet   2,000 feet
 
      2.   Runway 3 Precision Approach Surface Zone: A precision instrument
approach surface zone is established at the end of runway 3. The approach zone
shall have a width of one thousand feet (1,000') at a distance of two hundred
feet (200') beyond the end of the runway; widening thereafter uniformly to a
width of sixteen thousand feet (16,000') at a distance of fifty thousand two
hundred feet (50,200') from the end of the runway. The approach zone shall rise
one foot (1') in height for each fifty feet (50') in horizontal distance
beginning at a point two hundred feet (200') from and at the centerline
elevation of the precision instrument runway and for a distance of ten thousand
feet (10,000'); thence, shall rise one foot (1') in height for each forty feet
(40') in horizontal distance for the remaining forty thousand feet (40,000') of
the approach.
      3.   Transitional Surface Zones: Transitional surface zones are hereby
established adjacent to each nonprecision and precision instrument runway and
approach zones as indicated on the zoning map and ALP. Transitional zones are
symmetrically located on either side of the primary surface and have variable
widths as shown on the zoning map and ALP. Transitional surfaces extend outward
and upward at right angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline
extended at a slope of seven to one (7:1) (horizontal:vertical) from the sides
of the primary surface and from the sides of the approach surfaces. The primary
line is five hundred feet (500') on either side of the runway extending for a
distance two hundred feet (200') beyond each end of the runway.
      4.   Horizontal Surface Zone: A horizontal surface zone is hereby
established as the oval area within arcs and connecting tangent lines of ten
thousand feet (10,000') radius from points two hundred feet (200') beyond the
runway end. The horizontal surface of a place one hundred fifty feet (150')
above the established airport elevation which is four thousand four hundred
seventy one feet (4,471') above mean sea level.
      5.   Conical Surface Zone: A conical surface zone is hereby established
as the area that commences at the periphery of the horizontal surface and
extends outward and upward at a slope of twenty to one (20:1) (horizontal:
vertical) for a distance of four thousand feet (4,000'). The conical surface
extends to a height of three hundred fifty feet (350') above the established
airport elevation.
   H.   Height Limitations: Except as otherwise provided in this title, no
structure or tree shall be erected, altered, allowed to grow, or maintained in
any height limiting zone created by this title to a height penetrating the
limits herein established for each of the zones.
      1.   Excepted Height Limitations: Nothing in this title shall be
construed as prohibiting the growth, construction or maintenance of any tree or
structure to a height consistent with the terms of this chapter.
      2.   Most Restrictive Limitation Prevails: Where a zone is covered by
more than one height limitation the more restrictive limitation shall prevail.
   I.   Use Regulations:
      1.   Height Limiting Zones: Notwithstanding any other provisions of this
title, no use shall be made of land within any height limiting zone established
by this title in such a manner as to do any of the following:
         a.   Create electrical interference with radio communication between
the airport and aircraft;
         b.   Make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport
lights and other lights;
         c.   Result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport;
         d.   Impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport; or
         e.   Otherwise endanger the landing, taking off, or maneuvering of
aircraft.
      2.   Places Of Public Assembly: Notwithstanding any other provisions of
this title, no places of public assembly, including, but without limitation,
apartments, barracks, churches, hospitals, hotels, mobile home parks, multiple-
family dwellings, recreational vehicle parks, schools and theaters, shall be
erected or otherwise located within any of the areas established as an approach
zone in subsection D of this section. Places of public assembly are discouraged
in the extended approach zones due to noise associated with aircraft takeoff
and landing operations.
      3.   Runway Protection Zones (RPZ): The RPZ is trapezoidal in shape and
centered about the extended runway centerline. Some uses are permitted within
the RPZ provided they do not attract wildlife and do not interfere with
navigational aids. Land uses prohibited from the RPZ are: residences and places
of public assembly (churches, schools, hospitals, office buildings, shopping
centers, and other uses with similar concentrations of persons typifying places
of public assembly). The dimensions of the RPZs are as follows as shown on the
ALP:
 
Runway Inner Width At 200 Feet Length     Outer End Width
3      1,000 feet              1,700 feet 1,510 feet
21     500 feet                1,700 feet 1,010 feet
16     500 feet                1,000 feet 700 feet
34     500 feet                1,000 feet 700 feet
7      250 feet                1,000 feet 450 feet
25     250 feet                1,000 feet 450 feet
 
   J.   Nonconforming Uses:
      1.   Regulations Not Retroactive: The regulations prescribed by the
ordinance codified as this chapter shall not be construed to require the
removal, lowering or other changes or alterations of any structure or tree not
conforming to the regulations as of the effective date hereof, or otherwise
interfere with the continuation of any nonconforming use. Nothing herein
contained shall require any change in the construction, alteration, or intended
use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which was begun prior
to the effective date hereof and is diligently prosecuted.
      2.   Marking And Lighting: Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A
of this section, the owner of any nonconforming structure or tree is hereby
required to permit the installation, operation and maintenance thereon of such
markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the airport manager to
indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport, the
presence of such airport hazards. Such markers and lights shall be installed,
operated, and maintained at the expense of the property owner involved.
   K.   Permits:
      1.   Future Uses: Except as specifically provided in subsections K1a
through K1c of this section, no material change shall be made in the use of the
land and no structures or tree shall be erected, altered, planted or otherwise
established in any zone hereby created unless a permit thereof shall have been
applied for and granted by the mayor. Each application for a permit shall
indicate the purpose for which the permit is desired, with sufficient
particularity to permit it to be determined whether the resulting use,
structure, or tree would conform to the regulations herein prescribed. If such
determination is in the affirmative, the permit shall be granted.
         a.   In the territory lying within the limits of the horizontal
surface zone and the conical surface zone, no permit shall be required for any
tree or structure less than seventy five feet (75') of vertical height above
the ground, except when because of terrain, land contour or topography features
such tree or structure would extend within twenty five feet (25') of the height
limits prescribed for such zone.
         b.   In the territories lying within the limits of the nonprecision
and precision approach zones, no permit shall be required for any tree or
structure more than twenty five feet (25') of vertical height below the
approach surface.
         c.   In the territories within the limits of the transitional surface
zone beyond the perimeter of the horizontal surface zone, no permit shall be
required for any tree or structure more than twenty five feet (25') of vertical
height below the limit prescribed for such transition area.
         d.   Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions shall be
construed as permitting or intending to permit any construction, alteration or
growth of any structure or tree in excess of any of the height limits
established by this title.
      2.   Existing Uses: No permit shall be granted that would allow the
establishment or creation of an airport hazard or permit a nonconforming use,
structure or tree to be made or become higher, or become a greater hazard to
air navigation, than it was on the effective date hereof, or any amendments
thereto, or than it is when the application for a permit is made. Except as
indicated, all applications for such permit shall be granted.
      3.   Nonconforming Uses Abandoned Or Destroyed: Whenever the building
official determines that a nonconforming structure or tree has been abandoned
or more than eighty percent (80%) torn down, physically deteriorated, or
decayed, any existing permit shall be rescinded and the nonconforming structure
or tree shall be removed by the owner.
      4.   Variances: Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of
any structure or permit the growth of any tree or use his property not in
accordance with the regulations prescribed in this title, may apply to the
board of zoning adjustment for a variance from such regulations. Such variances
shall be allowed where it is duly found that a literal application or
enforcement of the regulation would result in practical difficulty or
unnecessary hardship and the relief granted would not be contrary to the public
interest but will do substantial justice and be in accordance with the spirit
of this title.
      5.   Hazard Marking And Lighting: Any permit or variance granted may, if
such action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of this title and be
reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the owner of
the structure or tree in question at his own expense, to install, operate, and
maintain thereon such markers and lights as may be necessary to indicate to
flyers the presence of any airport hazard.
   L.   Conflicting Regulations: Where there exists a conflict between any of
the regulations or limitations prescribed in this title or any other
regulations applicable to the same zone, whether the conflict be with respect
to the height of structures or trees, the use of the land, or any other matter,
the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail.
(Ord. 2002-24, 6-4-2002, eff. 6-16-2002)
CHAPTER 25
12TH STREET CORRIDOR OVERLAY ZONE 12TH CO
SECTION:
15-25-1: Purpose And Intent
15-25-2: Definitions
15-25-3: Scope And Applications
15-25-4: Building Location And Design Standards
15-25-5: Uses
15-25-6: Special Requirements
15-25-7: Review And Administration
15-25-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The 12th Street corridor overlay zone is designed to create mixed use
residential and commercial development. This is done by recognizing the
existing uses and physical characteristics and through design based standards
that create a unique environment on this major corridor street for new
development so that existing and new uses can function and be visually
compatible.
(Ord. 2006-17, 4-18-2006)
15-25-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the indicated meanings:
FACADE: The exterior wall of a building.
LIGHT SOURCE: The lamp or bulb that produces light.
LOCAL STREET: Any public dedicated street except 12th Street, Monroe, and
Harrison.
PARAPET: A low wall used along the edge of a roof.
PUBLIC VIEW: The visual ability of any person at street level on or across a
public street within a one hundred fifty foot (150') distance to see
unobstructed any item on the property. Any ground mounted item set back more
than thirty feet (30') from the required building line and not visible except
when viewed at fifteen degrees (15°) or less from perpendicular is considered
not in the public view.
REQUIRED BUILDING LINE (RBL): The building shall be built to the required
building line (RBL) as shown on the regulating plan. The RBL is a requirement,
not a permissive minimum as is a setback.
ROOF, FLAT: A roof with only enough pitch (less than 2:12) so that rain or
melting snow can drain from it.
ROOF, GABLE: A sloping (ridged) roof that terminates at one or both ends in a
gable.
ROOF, GAMBREL: A roof having a double slope on two (2) sides of the building.
ROOF, HIP: An external angle formed by the meeting of two (2) sloping roof
surfaces.
ROOF, MANSARD: A roof having two (2) slopes on all four (4) sides; the lower
slope is much steeper than the upper.
ROOF, PARAPET: A low wall or protective railing along the edge of a roof or
balcony.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4175.png]
 
SETBACK: The minimum distance that is required to be landscaped between a
property line and the closest parallel edge of a building or parking area to
that property line.
12th STREET: Refers to both 12th Street and Canyon Road east of 1200 East.
(Ord. 2006-17, 4-18-2006)
15-25-3: SCOPE AND APPLICATIONS:
   A.   The 12th Street corridor overlay zone applies to those properties
defined by the overlay district on the zoning map of Ogden City. The overlay
applies to properties that have their widest frontage on 12th Street or
properties that are combined with properties that have frontage on 12th Street.
The overlay provisions shall not apply to properties if they are combined with
other properties that have their frontage on streets parallel to 12th Street.
   B.   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all new construction
which seeks to use the land use provisions of this chapter notwithstanding the
underlying existing zone and its regulations. When not stated otherwise the
provisions of the other land use regulations of Ogden City are still applicable
to development under the overlay provisions. If there are conflicts between the
other land use regulations and the provisions of this chapter the provisions of
this chapter shall apply. The utilization, remodeling, or expansion of
buildings existing prior to January 2006, or construction of new buildings on a
lot that has residential buildings constructed prior to January 2006, can only
be developed or have land uses according to the respective regulations and land
uses of the underlying zone whether it be R-
1-10, R-
1-8, R-
1-6, R-2, R-3, R-4, PI, CP-1, and CP-2 unless specific regulations in this
chapter state otherwise.
(Ord. 2006-17, 4-18-2006)
15-25-4: BUILDING LOCATION AND DESIGN STANDARDS:
New construction on vacant or cleared sites that are to be developed according
to the regulations of the overlay zone shall be developed according to the
following standards:
   A.   Build-To Line And Setbacks: The 12th Street facade and the side facing
a local street (if applicable) of all commercial and/or office buildings shall
have a minimum of forty percent (40%) of the building built to the required
build-to line (RBL). The required parking areas shall be set back from the
property lines based on the following minimum standards. Interior side yard
setbacks shall be the same width for both interior side yards. Building side
and rear yard setback minimum distances shall increase with the height of the
building.
      1.   Street facing build-to lines for all building types:
                  Building      Parking
         12th Street      20'         30'
         Side facing      15'         25'
         a street
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4177.png]
      2.   Side and rear yard setbacks:
         One-Story Building
               Building      Parking
          Side      10'         10'
          Rear      10'         10'
         Two-Story Building
               Building      Parking
          Side      20'         10'
          Rear      20'         10'
         Three-Story Building
               Building      Parking
          Side      30'         10'
          Rear      30'         10'
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4179.png]
 
   B.   Building Height: The maximum height for an office building or mixed use
building is three (3) stories with the top of the peak of any roof not to
exceed forty five feet (45'). The maximum height of a commercial building is
thirty feet (30') to the peak of the roof or parapet.
   C.   Minimum Lot Area: There is no minimum lot area requirement. Appropriate
lot size is determined by the ability to meet all development requirements of
this chapter to determine if the lot is of sufficient size for the use.
   D.   Vehicle Access:
      1.   The main vehicle access into or out of any development shall be from
12th Street. A secondary car-only access from a local street perpendicular to
12th Street will be allowed only if it meets the following conditions:
         a.   The driveway width is a minimum of twenty four feet (24') wide
and a maximum of twenty eight feet (28') wide; and
         b.   The access on the local street has a minimum separation from the
nearest existing residential driveway on the same side of the street of fifty
feet (50').
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4181.png]
 
      2.   Lots shall have a shared access on 12th Street with adjacent
properties when possible. The developer must contact the adjacent property
owner closest to the proposed driveway and supply a letter that the owner is
willing or not willing to enter into a shared access. If the adjacent owner is
not willing to share access their reason should be stated on the letter. A
commercial use next to a single-family residential use will be exempt from this
requirement. If a shared accessway occurs it shall be secured by a shared
reciprocal access easement recorded on both properties which share the access
prior to issuing a building permit.
      3.   If parking lots do not share an access, the accessway shall be set
back a minimum of ten feet (10') from any side or rear yard property line
extended to the street and shall not be closer than fifty feet (50') to any
street corner.
      4.   Two (2) access driveways may be considered along 12th Street only
when the 12th Street frontage of the development is wider than two hundred feet
(200').
   E.   Parking Lot Locations:
      1.   Parking areas shall be located to the side or rear of the building.
      2.   For the purpose of this regulation the side of a building facing a
public street shall also be considered the front of the building and parking
cannot be located between the front of the building and the street.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4183.png]
 
   F.   Parking Lot Designs:
      1.   Required parking areas shall install landscaped islands with raised
curbs. Islands shall not be placed over asphalt or concrete. A curb shall be
provided along all interior roadways to prevent vehicular intrusion into
landscaped areas. Whenever a landscaped island under this provision is required
it shall be a minimum width of nine feet (9') and the length of the parking
stalls it abuts. Landscaped islands shall be required for each of the following
conditions:
         a.   The end of each row of stalls if the row exceeds ten (10) parking
stalls in length.
         b.   A row of parking has over twenty (20) parking stalls. One island
shall be placed between every twenty (20) stalls in the row.
         c.   To define parking lot entrances.
         d.   To define the main interior circulation road pattern.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4185.png]
 
      2.   When landscaped islands are required, a minimum of one deciduous
tree shall be planted in each island. This tree requirement is in addition to
the number of trees required on the remainder of the lot. The surface of the
island shall be planted in grass or shrubs. If shrubs are used they shall meet
the requirement of seventy five percent (75%) of the landscaped area covered
with living plant material within three (3) years. Plantings shall be
maintained at a height not to exceed three feet (3').
      3.   Required public and employee parking areas over two hundred (200)
stalls shall be divided by a minimum ten foot (10') wide landscaped planting
island perpendicular to the parking stalls. The planting island shall be placed
along every fourth row of parking. Trees shall be planted in the island at
forty feet (40') on center and shall be a minimum two foot (2') caliper size.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4187.png]
 
   G.   Lighting:
      1.   The maximum height for freestanding parking lot lighting shall be
fifteen feet (15').
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4189.png]
 
      2.   All parking lot and security light sources shall direct the light
downwards through the means of shields or light fixture designs. The maximum
light angle from the light source shall be sixty degrees (60°) from vertical.
      3.   Notwithstanding the maximum light angle, no direct lighting shall be
permitted to occur on adjacent residential properties. Direct view of the light
source and the light they produce from the rear or side yard of residential
properties including light from signs is also prohibited.
      4.   A lighting plan showing all light distribution must be provided to
ensure compliance to these provisions is being addressed.
      5.   A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the parking lot lighting shall
be extinguished one hour after the close of business. Lighting to ensure
security of the property shall be allowed. Complaints of the amount of security
lighting that is left on and the amount needed to provide security to the site
shall be addressed on an individual basis and resolved after meeting with all
concerned parties by the planning staff.
   H.   Building Design Facing 12th Street:
      1.   All buildings shall be designed in such a manner as to appear to
have the front of the building face 12th Street. Building design elements which
create a front facing appearance include the combination of main entry doors,
store front or larger window openings than on the other sides of the building,
cornice or parapet detailing, roof detailing such as dormers or the gabled end
of the roof facing the street, covered porches, etc. A front entrance may be
located on the corner of the building and be considered as facing the street.
      2.   Buildings that are on a corner shall also have a front appearance on
the local streets and Monroe or Harrison; however more of the architectural
features shall be towards 12th Street and Monroe and Harrison rather than the
local streets.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4191.png]
 
      3.   Covered porches or patios for dining can encroach into the required
building line a maximum of ten feet (10').
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4193.png]
   I.   Fencing:
      1.   Fences or walls in front yards or side yards facing a street shall
be no taller than three feet (3'). Fence piers may extend an additional twelve
inches (12").
         a.   Fences or walls along the street frontage shall be at a minimum
eighty percent (80%) transparent and reflect the design of the buildings within
the development in regards to textures, colors and materials. No chainlink or
coated chainlink fencing is allowed.
         b.   The minimum distance between piers is six feet (6'); the maximum
width of each pier is one foot (1').
         c.   Signage can be incorporated into the fencing. See subsection M of
this section for types of signs allowed.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4195.png]
      2.   Fences or walls along the side or rear yards shall be a minimum of
six feet (6') and a maximum of seven feet (7').
         a.   Fences or walls should reflect the design of the buildings within
the development in regards to textures, colors and materials; these fences or
walls can be opaque.
         b.   A solid nonsee-through wall of the design style listed in
subsection I2a of this section is required when a commercial or office
development's side or rear yard is adjacent to a residential use. Chainlink
with vision slats shall not be considered as meeting this requirement.
         c.   If the development is adjacent to a commercial or office use then
no wall or fence is required. However if a wall or fence is desired then one
can be installed but can be either this type or one similar to the one in
subsection I1, except it can be six feet (6') in height.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4198.png]
 
   J.   Mechanical And Service Equipment:
      1.   All ground mounted equipment, including transformers and dumpsters,
shall be screened from the public view and adjacent property owners by use of
fences or walls.
         a.   Fences and walls must be one hundred percent (100%) opaque and
should reflect the design of the buildings within the development in regards to
textures, colors and materials.
         b.   Dumpsters should be confined to portions of the site least
visible from public view.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4200.png]
 
      2.   Mechanical equipment that is mounted on the roof, including
satellite dishes and antennas, shall be fully screened from public view and
adjacent property owners by means of a penthouse structure or behind parapet
walls. Screening materials should be compatible with the materials, textures,
and colors of the building. Screening designs should be architecturally
integrated with the building top and maintain balance in the building design.
   K.   Commercial And Office Architectural Design Standards:
      1.   Adams Avenue to Harrison Boulevard:
         a.   The exterior wall finish within this portion of the overlay zone
will be limited to materials that are durable and have the visual qualities
equal to or better than brick, stone, stucco, wood clapboard or Hardi-plank.
Vinyl or aluminum siding, split faced or concrete block or similar materials
are not allowed. No facade shall be faced with only one exterior finish wall
material unless the material is brick. When using materials other than brick no
less than seventy percent (70%) or more than eighty five percent (85%) of any
one material may be used.
         b.   The roof type of any structure can be any of the following:
gable, hip or any combination or variation. The mansard or gambrel styles are
not allowed. A flat roof is allowed on buildings over ten thousand (10,000)
square feet provided the street facades have parapets hiding the flat roof
design.
         c.   The roofline of a parapet shall have visual relief that adds
variety and rhythm to the design. The roofline needs to vary in height, shape,
character, etc., thus avoiding monotonous straight lines. See pictures and
illustration for examples.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4207.png]
 
         d.   Rooflines shall be designed to create the appearance of
individual commercial units. Facade proportions including the height to width
and wall to windows ratio should also help to create the appearance of
individual units.
         e.   The street facing portion of the building shall be designed to
avoid flat planes or visual lines that give the appearance of one flat wall
face for the length of the building facade fronting the street. Street facing
facades greater than forty feet (40') in length must exhibit a change in the
wall plane. Change of the wall plane shall be in offset modules of a maximum of
forty foot (40’) with at least a five foot (5’) change in alignment or by add-
on features such as porticos, porte-cocheres, vestibules, decks or similar
features.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4205.png]
 
         f.   Each separate office or business in a common building with an
exterior, street oriented exposure shall have an individual public entry
directly accessible from the public sidewalk.
      2.   Harrison Boulevard to mouth of Ogden Canyon:
         a.   The exterior wall finish material within this portion of the
overlay zone will have a mountainous or canyon feel. The exterior finish
materials allowed are large timber, logs, stone, rock, brick, wood clapboard or
Hardi-plank. Vinyl or aluminum siding, split faced or concrete block or similar
materials are not allowed.
         b.   The roof type of any structure can be any of the following:
gable, hip or any combination or variation with the main roof having a slope of
six to twelve (6:12) for single story buildings. The flat, mansard or gambrel
roof types are not allowed within this portion of the zone.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4202.png]
 
         c.   The use of gable, hip or shed dormers and/or articulation of the
roof is strongly encouraged, to help add visual interest and character. Such
features are required on pitched roofs of buildings over four thousand (4,000)
square feet as a means to minimize the massiveness of the roof and to avoid a
straight main roof ridgeline. When provided, dormers shall be in scale with the
roof on which they are located
         d.   Eaves are required on all buildings with a minimum two foot (2')
overhang. If the structure is two (2) or more stories then roof design
techniques are required to help minimize the scale of the building (i.e., roof
pitches 4:12 or shallower, extending the eave line below the ceiling level of
the upper story).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4209.png]
         e.   The portions of the buildings that front onto a public street
will have a minimum of sixty percent (60%) of the facade having a gable end
toward the street.
         f.   The street facing portion of the building shall be designed to
avoid flat planes or visual lines that give the appearance of one flat wall
face for the length of the building fronting the street. Street facing facades
greater than forty feet (40') in length must exhibit a change in the wall
plane. Change of the wall plane shall be in offset modules of a maximum of
forty feet (40’) with at least a ten foot (10') change in alignment or by add-
on features such as porticos, porte-cocheres, vestibules, decks or similar
features.
         g.   Roofing materials must be muted earth tone colors. If a metal
roof is proposed it must be colored and cannot be shiny or reflect light upon
installation.
         h.   The building colors shall be muted earth tone colors to blend
with the color schemes found in the mountains to the east.
   L.   Multi-Unit Residential Design Standards: Design standards for multi-
unit residential is as follows:
      1.   Build-To Line And Setbacks:
         a.   The portions of a lot that face a public street shall be subject
to a required build-to line of twenty feet (20') for a multiple-unit building
or the units of a single-family row house adjacent to the street. The setback
of the parking area for the residential development shall have a minimum
setback of thirty feet (30') from the property lines along the street frontage.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4211.png]
 
         b.   Buildings, parking and access lanes shall be set back from the
side and rear interior property lines as defined by the orientation of the
building as illustrated as follows:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4213.png]
 
 
     Multi-Family Row House Parking/
     Building               Accessway
Side 30'          10'       8'
Rear 30'          30'       8'
 
      2.   Building Height:
         a.   For multiple-family dwellings or single-family row house
dwellings between Monroe Boulevard and Harrison Boulevard on the north side of
12th Street:
            (1)   Height of buildings shall be measured on the side of the
building that is most exposed and shall be measured from the finished grade to
the parapet or roof peak;
            (2)   The maximum height for all buildings adjacent to the 12th
Street frontage shall be three (3) stories and forty five feet (45');
            (3)   A maximum height of four (4) stories and forty five feet
(45') is possible for other buildings on the property not adjacent to 12th
Street if parking is located under the entire footprint of the building; and
            (4)   The planning commission may approve four-story building
heights up to fifty feet (50') for buildings on the property not adjacent to
12th Street if it finds the following:
               (A)   There is adequate distance and existing vegetation between
existing adjacent residential homes and the proposed buildings to screen the
view of the proposed buildings;
               (B)   The building elevation design and materials are visually
compatible with the surrounding area;
               (C)   A view shed analysis shows the proposed building heights
will have a minimal impact on views from adjacent residential homes when
compared to permitted heights; and
               (D)   A hillside profile shows that the existing topography is
utilized to lower the building height.
         b.   The maximum height for multiple-family dwellings and single-
family row house dwellings in all other areas is three (3) stories with the
peak of any roof not to exceed thirty eight feet (38').
      3.   Building Orientation:
         a.   A multiple-family dwelling building shall have the front of the
building facing 12th Street. In facing the street one key design feature is a
ground level front door or doors being on the 12th Street facade of the
building. Other entry doors are allowed on other sides of the building.
         b.   A single-family row house building may either have the front
facade of the building facing 12th Street or the side facade of the building
facing 12th Street. When the front of the single- family row house faces 12th
Street no garage doors are allowed in the front facade.
         c.   When more than one line of row houses is proposed, the buildings
shall be oriented so that like sides of each building face each other (e.g.,
front facade without garage faces front facade without garage, rear facade with
garage faces rear facade with garage). When the front facades without garage
entrances face each other a minimum thirty foot (30') separation between
parallel buildings is required. This area shall remain open from fencing
obstructions and be landscaped and front entrances connected by a common
sidewalk. When the rear facades without a garage entrance face each other a
minimum thirty foot (30') separation between parallel buildings is required.
This area is required to be landscaped but may be fenced off into private
yards.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4215.png]
 
   4.   Parking:
         a.   Single-family row house parking is required to be provided in a
two (2) car garage integrated into each unit of the row house. The garage may
be double wide with a minimum interior width of eighteen feet (18') or single
wide with a minimum interior width of ten feet (10') and the cars parked one
behind the other in the garage. If the garage is less than twenty four feet
(24') wide, the shortest length internal to the garage may not be less than
twenty feet (20').
         b.   The garage entrance may either be in the front or rear facade of
the row house except when the front faces a public street and then it must be
located in the rear of the row house. The garage entrance shall be designed to
appear as part of the facade and not an attachment extending out from the
facade. It shall be even or indented a minimum of four feet (4') from the rest
of the facade where the entrance is located.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4217.png]
 
         c.   When the garage entrance for the single-family row house is in
the front facade, the access lane shall be set back a minimum of ten feet (10')
from the front of the garage. The area between the garage entrance and the
access lane not used for access to the garage shall include front stairs or
porch and landscaping which shall create a visual break between straight lines
of garage entrances. The access lane parallel to the building shall have a
minimum width of twenty four feet (24').
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4219.png]
 
         d.   When the garages are located on the rear facade of the building
the access lane width parallel to the building shall be thirty feet (30'). No
setback of the access lane from the building is required in this design option.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4221.png]
 
         e.   Multiple-family unit parking shall meet the standard parking lot
design requirements of subsection F of this section and the setbacks of
subsection L1 of this section. The parking shall not be closer than fifteen
feet (15') to the exterior walls of the multiple-family structure. The space
between the parking and building shall be landscaped except when sidewalk
access is needed from parking to the building. The sidewalk in those situations
shall not be wider than seven feet (7').
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4223.png]
 
      5.   Building Design:
         a.   A single-family row house unit shall have a minimum of one
thousand four hundred (1,400) square feet of living space excluding the garage
area. The dwelling unit size in a multiple- family building shall be a minimum
of one thousand (1,000) square feet.
      b.   The main roof design shall be either gabled or hipped and have a
minimum pitch of six to twelve (6:12).
         (1)   Roofing materials shall either be architectural grade asphalt
shingles or wood shingles.
         (2)   In order to break up long straight lines of main roof
ridgelines, projections or variations in the roof ridgeline and the roof plane
with elements such as dormers, gabled ends, height variations in the roof
because of variations in the roof span, or module offsets are required. The
breaks in the roofline shall follow the offset module lengths.
            (3)   The choice of which type of roof variation treatment is
dependent on the architectural style of the building and that the use of such
elements relates to the wall planes and features of the facade of the building.
            (4)   Eaves shall project a minimum of eighteen inches (18") from
the wall of the building.
      c.   All facades of a multiple-family dwelling building shall have
variations in the wall plane to reflect the scale of the single-family homes
along 12th Street.
         (1)   Long flat walls shall be avoided by including room projections,
covered porches and other elements found in the design of homes along 12th
Street.
         (2)   No building shall be more than one hundred fifty feet (150') in
length.
         (3)   Change of the wall plane shall be in offset modules of a maximum
of fifty feet (50') with a minimum five foot (5') offset when the development
is west of Harrison Boulevard and ten foot (10') offset when the development is
east of Harrison Boulevard.  The offset can also be achieved by add-on features
such as porticos, balconies, vestibules, cantilever floors, decks or similar
features.
         d.   Between Adams and Harrison the exterior wall finish materials for
both single-family row houses and a multiple-family dwelling building is
limited to brick or stone as the main material but not both on the same
building. Accent materials around windows, gable ends or indented wall planes
can be stucco, Hardiboard, or similar appearing material excluding vinyl or
metal siding.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4378.png]
 
         e.   Between Harrison and the mouth of Ogden Canyon the exterior wall
materials for both single-family row houses and multiple- family dwelling
building is limited to brick, stone, wood, logs or Hardiboard as the main
material but no more than two (2) materials on any one building. Accent
materials around windows, gable ends or indented wall planes may include stucco
or any of the other main wall materials allowed in this location or similar
appearing material excluding vinyl or metal siding.
         f.   The exterior colors shall be earth tones in the grey, brown,
yellow or red tones. Accent trim colors may also include greens.
      6.   Open Space:
         a.   Open space requirements for single-family row houses are met with
the setbacks, build-to lines and spaces between buildings. These areas are
required to be landscaped according to all applicable regulations of the land
use codes of Ogden City.
         b.   In addition to the setbacks and required build-to lines which are
required to be landscaped an additional open space requirement for a multiple-
family building is three hundred (300) square feet of open space per unit in
the building. This open space is to be contiguous as one area with a minimum
width of thirty feet (30'). This area is required to be landscaped according to
all applicable regulations of the land use codes of Ogden City.
   M.   Signage: Notwithstanding the provisions of the sign ordinance (title 18
of this code), the sign type, general design, sign size and heights shall be
according to the provisions of this chapter for uses developed according to the
12th Street overlay zone.
      1.   Permitted Signage: The only permitted sign types are:
         a.   Monument.
         b.   Awnings, however the signage can only be on the valance.
         c.   Wall mounted sign, either flat or perpendicular to the wall.
         d.   Electronic message provided included in a monument sign.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4225.png]
 
      2.   Sign Design Standards:
         a.   The sign should be in the architectural character of the building
or development in terms of scale, materials, colors, and lighting levels.
         b.   Signs shall be constructed with high quality, durable materials
appropriate to the physical demands such as the canyon winds of the area.
Monument sign materials should be of metal, stone, brick, concrete or other
durable material.
      3.   Sign Height: The maximum height of a monument sign, including the
base of the sign, is eight feet (8') measured from the street curb line.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4227.png]
 
      4.   Sign Lighting:
         a.   Light for a sign shall be generally from an exterior lighting
system and not interior lighted except for neon lighting or internal lighting
only when the sign face has cutouts in lettering or symbols that are
backlighted or is an electronic message board. In no case shall the entire sign
face be illuminated from an interior source.
         b.   Exterior sign lighting shall be shielded in order to direct the
light only to the sign.
      5.   Sign Size: The maximum square footage for signage for all types of
signs permitted in the overlay zone is two (2) square feet of signage per
linear foot of building fronting 12th Street.
(Ord. 2006-17, 4-18-2006; Ord. 2007-51, 7-17-2007; Ord. 2007-77, 12-4-2007;
Ord. 2016-54, 10-27-2016; Ord. 2020-2, 1-7-2020)
15-25-5: USES:
The following uses are permitted (P) or not allowed (N) in the 12th Street
corridor overlay zone. The uses specified in this regulation apply to only new
construction under the provisions of this chapter. Properties within the 12th
Street corridor overlay zone that have not been developed using the overlay
zone shall be governed by the use regulations of the underlying zone and cannot
take advantage of any of the uses permitted by the overlay zone.
 
 Use 12th CO
A. Entertainment and recreational:                                             
   A business located east of Harrison Boulevard in a permanent enclosed
   building which provides instruction or recreational activities.
  Recreational activities which are nonmotorized can have an outdoor use on  P
   the site except batting cages, e.g., swimming, rock climbing, indoor
   sports, kayaking, etc.
  An entertainment business in a permanent enclosed building located east of P
   Harrison Boulevard, e.g., live theater, movies, indoor sports, etc.
  Sexually oriented business, adult business and adult live entertainment    N
   business, outcall services and adult entertainment dancing agencies.
B. Institutional:                                                              
  Churches, public and private schools, public and private parks.            P
   Public buildings and public uses that have outdoor storage, correctional
  facilities public or private, public or private rehabilitation/treatment   N
   facilities, shelters for homeless, soup kitchens.
C. Manufacturing:                                                              
   Any manufacturing use whether in an enclosed building or not.
  Manufacturing is generally considered any procedure or activity which      N
   produces, assembles or stores materials or items created from raw or
   processed materials to become a product or assembled into a product.
D. Residential:                                                                
  Dwelling units above ground floor retail or office.                        P
  Group dwellings.                                                           N
  Multiple-family dwelling.                                                  P
  Single-family and duplex dwellings.                                        N
  Single-family row house dwelling.                                          P
E. Sales:                                                                      
   A sales establishment doing business in an enclosed permanent building
   with a gross square footage of 20,000 square feet or less engaged in the
  selling of new goods or new merchandise to the general public for          P
   personal, household or business use and rendering service incidental to
   the sale of such goods, e.g., clothing, food, office supplies, jewelry,
   toys, crafts.
   A sales establishment doing business in an enclosed building which
   prepares and serves food and drink for human consumption on and off site
  provided that the facility has no drive-up window and that outdoor dining  P
   areas are allowed along the front or side of the building which is visible
   from the street, e.g., restaurants, cafes, diners, sandwich shops, delis,
   etc.
   A sales establishment doing business in an enclosed permanent building
  engaged in the sale of motorized vehicles, e.g., automobile, recreation    N
   vehicle, boat, motorcycle, etc.
  A sales establishment engaged in the sale of building materials or         N
   building equipment as the primary use.
  A sales establishment engaged mainly in selling alcoholic beverages, e.g., N
   taverns, private clubs, liquor stores.
   A sales establishment classified as a sexually oriented business (see
  section                                                                    N
   15-13-13 of this title for applicable conditions) including adult
   bookstores and adult video stores.
   A sales establishment which dispenses gasoline and other combustible fuels
  as a product for sale, e.g., convenience store, service stations,          N
   automated gas pumps, etc.
F. Services:                                                                   
   A service business located in a permanent building of 20,000 square feet
   or less gross floor area that provides services directly to individuals,
   businesses and agencies such as offices of professional, personal,
  financial and business services and which does not store vehicles or other P
   equipment of the business outdoors, e.g., barbershops, laundry, daycare,
   medical office, financial institutions, real estate offices, funeral
   homes, wedding reception, etc.
   A business located within a permanent building of 20,000 square feet or
  less of gross floor area providing data processing, telemarketing, product P
   user support or other service support businesses that does not have
   contact with general public except by means of telecommunications.
   A business that provides service and repair to motor vehicles, e.g., brake
  shop, oil lube, tire change, muffler, auto body, machine shop, towing,     N
   etc.
   A business that provides business or personal storage facilities whether
  indoor or outdoor, e.g., storage units, RV storage, warehousing, transfer  N
   storage business, etc.
  A business that provides services to animals such as kenneling, pet        N
   grooming, veterinarian, etc.
  A business engaged in the construction trade which would have storage of   N
   materials or vehicles used in construction.
  A business involved in collecting or recycling materials.                  N
 
(Ord. 2006-17, 4-18-2006)
15-25-6: SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Properties on the local or National Register of Historic Places shall
only be allowed to utilize the overlay zone provisions of this chapter provided
the historic building is retained. Removal of the historic building prior to,
during or after development shall subject the property to compliance to the
regulations of the underlying zone.
   B.   Uses that are commercial or office in nature shall not have any
freestanding accessory buildings, structures or temporary structures or storage
containers on the property. All storage shall be located in the main building.
   C.   No outdoor display of products or merchandise, nor outdoor storage of
items whether in containers or not is permitted.
   D.   The minimum required number of parking spaces for uses permitted in the
overlay zone shall be determined by the parking regulations of sections
15-12-3 through
15-12-7 of this title. The maximum parking permitted for a use shall be one
hundred twenty percent (120%) of the minimum required.
   E.   Properties that are developed shall either be held in single ownership
and any lots assembled combined to create one lot with frontage on 12th Street
regardless of the number of buildings on the lot or may be subdivided as a
private subdivision according to the private subdivision requirements of Ogden
City.
(Ord. 2006-17, 4-18-2006)
15-25-7: REVIEW AND ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   The 12th Street corridor overlay zone is intended to provide an
incentive for developments that are willing to take advantage of the design
regulations of this chapter. There are two (2) review processes provided in the
overlay zone: an administrative review and a special exception review. The
special exception review is based on the size of the proposed development or
the need for minor variations from this chapter which can only be approved by
the planning commission.
   B.   Plans for development shall be submitted and reviewed according to
chapter 4 of this title.
   C.   Commercial or office development on lots larger than forty thousand
(40,000) square feet or multi-family residential development of more than
thirty (30) units will be reviewed by the planning commission as a special
exception review. Developments less than either of these two (2) standards will
be reviewed administratively.
   D.   1. When a plan is reviewed administratively it shall be reviewed for
compliance with the regulations of this chapter and other applicable land use
ordinances. If the applicant seeks an exception to the standards for
development for their project a request for an exception shall be applied for
and a review with the planning commission will be scheduled for their next
regular planning commission meeting. In considering a request for an exception
the planning commission shall review the request for:
         a.   Compliance with the vision strategies of section 16D of the
general plan which is the 12th Street corridor plan;
         b.   The exception not having any negative impact to adjacent property
owners;
         c.   The exception maintaining the character of design and visual
appearance of the surrounding uses; and
         d.   The reason the exception is needed and if other alternatives are
possible that would not require an exception.
      2.   If the commission finds the requested exception can comply with the
first three (3) criteria and that there are not other options available then an
exception can be granted. If the commission finds the request does not meet the
criteria then the exception shall be denied and the development must either
comply with the regulation standards of this chapter or follow the regulations
of the underlying zone.
   E.   1. When a development plan is being reviewed by the planning commission
as a special exception because the size of the development requires a special
exception review, the commission will review the proposal for compliance with:
         a.   The regulations of this chapter and the other applicable land use
regulations;
         b.   On and off site traffic patterns, access and parking areas being
located to reduce impacts to adjoining neighbors and potential traffic impacts
and the ability to share accesses with adjoining properties or create secondary
accesses;
         c.   Development patterns not adversely impacting the use and privacy
of the adjacent uses when they are single-family uses; and
         d.   Resolving design issues of impact to adjacent properties which
may need to be resolved on a case by case basis that the design regulations of
this chapter may not have adequately addressed.
      2.   The purpose of the planning commission review, when the review is
based on the size of the development, is to work out design issues of impact
which larger developments may create on adjoining uses. All adjoining property
owners shall be notified of the proposed meeting to consider the proposed plan
and its impacts. The commission cannot deny the development if it complies with
the regulations of this chapter but it can require additional site improvements
or relocation of components of the site development in order to mitigate
potential impacts of the design.
(Ord. 2006-17, 4-18-2006)
CHAPTER 26
FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY ZONE FP
SECTION:
15-26-1: Purpose
15-26-2: Flood Insurance Study For Ogden, Utah
15-26-3: Relationship Of Regulations To Zoning Use District
15-26-4: Definitions
15-26-5: Administration
15-26-6: Application And Permits
15-26-7: FIRM Amendment
15-26-8: Development Standards
15-26-9: Floodways
15-26-10: Appeal Process; Floodplain Variances
15-26-11: Certification Of Actual Elevations Required
15-26-12: Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability
15-26-1: PURPOSE:
In accordance with the authority granted cities in Utah Code Annotated sections
10-3-701 and 10-9a-101 et seq., to adopt ordinances regulating zoning, and in
order to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the city and
inhabitants thereof, there is hereby established a floodplain overlay zone with
development standards and regulations for land within the floodplains of the
city. The floodplains are potentially subject to periodic inundation which
adversely affects the public health, safety and general welfare and which may
result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of
commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood
protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base. The establishment of
floodplain regulations and identification of the floodplains in the city will
help owners of structures therein to qualify for federally subsidized flood
insurance through the national flood insurance program. It will also serve as a
notification to potential buyers that property is in a flood area and as a
guide in designing and regulating future development and construction in such
areas in order to preclude and/or minimize exposure to flooding and to mitigate
any damage or loss caused by such flooding.
(Ord. 2015-21, 5-26-2015)
15-26-2: FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY FOR OGDEN, UTAH:
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the federal emergency
management agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood
Insurance Study For Ogden City, Utah" dated June 2, 2015, with accompanying
flood insurance rate maps and flood boundary floodway maps, and any revisions
or updates thereto, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part
of this chapter. This flood insurance study is on file with the city engineer
and is available for public inspection.
(Ord. 2015-21, 5-26-2015)
15-26-3: RELATIONSHIP OF REGULATIONS TO ZONING USE DISTRICT:
   A.   The floodplain management regulations in this chapter shall:
      1.   Be supplemental to, and not in lieu of, the applicable provisions of
the use district in which the land is located and/or general provisions of the
use district in which the land is located and/or general provisions applicable
to all zones.
      2.   Be considered as minimum requirements.
      3.   Not be interpreted to reduce or limit other more restrictive
standards that may apply to land within the floodplain, including those
established by ordinance, state law, easements, recorded covenants or deed
restrictions.
   B.   No structure shall be constructed, located, extended, converted, or
altered and no land shall be developed, occupied or modified without full
compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations.
   C.   Property located within an area of shallow flooding or area of special
flood hazard shall be developed only in conformance with the provisions set
forth herein. In cases of conflict between such district classifications and
the floodplain regulations, the most restrictive provisions shall govern.
   D.   Permitted, conditional and accessory uses allowed in the area of
shallow flooding or area of special flood hazard are those which are allowed
uses in the underlying zone or use district except that all floodway
encroachments are prohibited unless they meet the requirements of section
15-26-9 of this chapter. Additionally, all uses, whether principal or secondary
which would alter the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse, involving: 1)
construction or relocation of permanent buildings (or structures); or 2)
placement of temporary structures, manufactured homes; or 3) excavation or
placement of fill materials; or 4) placement of any structure or any
development; shall further meet the supplemental conditions and standards set
forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 2015-21, 5-26-2015)
15-26-4: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms mean:
ALLUVIAL FAN FLOODING: Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or
similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high
velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and
deposition; and unpredictable flow paths.
APEX: A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path
of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan
flooding can occur.
APPEAL: A request for review of any requirement, decision, determination or
interpretation of an administrative official under the provisions of this
chapter.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING: A designated AO, AH, or VO zone on the FIRM with a
one percent (1%) or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth from
one to three feet (3'); a clearly defined channel does not exist, the path of
flooding is unpredictable; and velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: The land in a floodplain subject to a one percent
(1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This area may be
designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map, and after detailed
ratemaking is completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, is usually
refined into zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-99, VO, V1-30, VE or V. For purposes of
these regulations the term "special flood hazard area" is synonymous in meaning
with the phrase "area of special flood hazard".
BASE FLOOD: A flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION: The probable water surface elevation (in relation to mean
sea level) of the base flood as determined by the flood insurance rate map or
approved by the city engineer.
BASEMENT: Any area of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level)
on all sides.
COMPENSATORY STORAGE: An equal volume of flood storage created by excavation or
other compensatory measures at, or adjacent to, a development site for the
volume of the loss of floodwater storage due to filling in an area of special
flood hazard.
CRITICAL FEATURE: An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood
protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire
system would be compromised.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real property,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials located within the floodplain area, whether or not the
same requires building or other permits under this code.
ELEVATED BUILDING: A nonbasement building that is: a) built, in the case of a
building in zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, to have the top of
the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns
(posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the floor of the water; and b)
adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the
building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case
of zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, "elevated building" also
includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter
walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of
floodwaters.
Ogden City does not currently have a zone V, V1-30 or VE. But an elevated
building also includes a building in zones V1-30, VE, or V with the bottom of
the lowest horizontal structure member of the elevated floor elevated above the
ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls
parallel to the floor of the water. In the case of zones V1-30, VE, or V,
"elevated building" also includes a building otherwise meeting the definition
of "elevated building", even though the lower area is enclosed by means of
breakaway walls if the breakaway walls met the standards of section 60.3(e)(5)
of the national flood insurance program regulations.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION: Structures for which the start of construction commenced
before January 19, 1983. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as
"existing structures".
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION: A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities
for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed before January 19, 1983, the effective date of the initial floodplain
management regulations adopted by the city.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP; FIRM: The official map on which the federal emergency
management agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the
risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: The official report provided by the federal emergency
management agency with an examination and determination of flood hazards as
well as the flood boundary floodway map and, if appropriate, corresponding
water surface elevations, or an examination evaluation and determination of the
mudslide and/or flood related erosion hazards.
FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general or temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland waters or the
unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Also mudslides which are proximately caused by flooding and are akin to a river
of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land area, as when
earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the
current. Includes also the collapse or subsidence of land along a body of water
as a result of erosion or undermining caused by currents of water exceeding
anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unanticipated force of
nature such as a flash flood or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable
event which results in flooding.
FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM: Those physical structural works for which funds have
been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed
specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas
within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the
depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal
barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying
works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
FLOODPLAIN: Any land area, susceptible to a flood or flooding by water from any
source. Specifically, for purposes of this title, floodplain shall be that area
of this city designated within the boundaries of the official flood insurance
rate map and approved amendments, which may be subject to inundation in the
event of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS: The provisions of this chapter, together
with any other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes,
health regulations, engineering standards, and other applications of police
power, or any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of
flood damage prevention and reduction.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY ENCROACHMENT: Any encroachment, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements and other development within the regulatory floodway.
FLOODWAY/REGULATORY FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or other watercourse and
the adjacent land area that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE: A use which cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term
includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair
facilities, but does not include long term storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
   A.   Listed individually in the national register of historic places or
preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the national register;
   B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as
a registered historic district;
   C.   Individually listed on the state inventory of historic places; or
   D.   Individually listed on the Ogden City register of historic resources.
LEVEE: A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control,
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
LEVEE SYSTEM: A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees,
and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are
constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
LICENSED ARCHITECT: An architect who is registered with the department of
registration of the state of Utah.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or incidental storage, in an area other
than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided
such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirement of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is
built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
"manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL: For the purposes of the national flood insurance program, the
national geodetic vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929, or other datum to which base
flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are
referenced.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: Structure for which the start of construction commenced on or
after January 19, 1983, and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
NEW DEVELOPMENT: Any development proposal and/or plan submitted for approval,
for which the development activities as described in the definition of
"development", as set forth in this section, will commence on or after January
19, 1983.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (includes, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after January 19,
1983.
READY FOR HIGHWAY USE: A recreational vehicle that is on its wheel or a jacking
system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and
security devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle which is: a) built on a single chassis; b) four
hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projections; c) designed to be self- propelled or permanently towable by a
light duty truck; and d) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling
but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use.
REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR: A land surveyor who is registered with the department
of registration of the state of Utah.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty
(180) days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of
permanent construction on a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work
beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include
the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
The actual start of construction for a substantial improvement means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank, that is principally above ground as well as a manufactured home.
Structure, for insurance purposes, means: a) a building with two (2) or more
outside rigid walls and a fully secured roof, that is affixed to a permanent
site; b) a manufactured home; or c) a travel trailer without wheels, built on a
chassis and affixed to a permanent foundation, that is regulated under this
floodplain ordinance or Ogden City's building code.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred. Substantial damage also means flood related damage sustained
by a structure on two (2) separate occasions during a ten (10) year period for
which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average,
equals or exceeds twenty five percent (25%) of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent
(50%) of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of
the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial
damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either:
   A.   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications
which have been identified by a local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
   B.   Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure.
VARIANCE: A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits
construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter.
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the floodplain management regulations. A structure or other
development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other
evidence of compliance required by this chapter or 44 CFR section 60.3(b)(5),
(c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION: The height, in relation to the national geodetic
vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of
various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine
areas.
(Ord. 2015-21, 5-26-2015)
15-26-5: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Director: The director is hereby appointed to jointly administer and
implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications
in accordance with its provisions.
   B.   Officials; Responsibilities: Each application for subdivision and site
development permit approval shall be submitted to the director and applications
for building permits shall be submitted to the building official. Respectively,
said officials shall be responsible to:
      1.   Verify if the location of the proposed development or construction
site or any portion thereof is situated within the area of shallow flooding or
area of special flood hazard;
      2.   Determine that the reviews and approvals required by this chapter
have been obtained to satisfy its requirements;
      3.   Determine that all necessary permits have been obtained from the
federal, state or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is
required;
      4.   Maintain for public inspection the following records pertaining to
the provisions of this chapter:
         a.   The actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level elevation) of
the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved
structures, and specifying whether or not the structure includes a basement;
         b.   For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures,
verification and record of the actual elevation of the lowest floor (in
relation to mean sea level elevation) and the floodproofing certification
required in provisions of this chapter;
         c.   Records of any variance granted in accordance with the national
flood insurance program regulations.
   C.   City Engineer; Evaluations: The director in the administration of this
chapter shall rely on the expertise of the city engineer for technical
evaluation to:
      1.   Identify designated water passage areas or regulated floodways per
the information shown on the flood insurance rate maps;
      2.   Obtain, review and utilize any base flood elevation and floodway
data which may be or become available for assistance in administering these
regulations;
      3.   At the request of the building official or director, review
applications for permits within the area of shallow flooding or area of special
flood hazard;
      4.   Review as provided below, any requests by said officials or others
for interpretation of the boundaries of the area of shallow flooding or area of
special flood hazard where conflicts appear between the mapped boundaries of
the area of shallow flooding or area of special flood hazard and actual field
conditions. Said requests shall include the data and conclusions of an
investigation performed by the licensed civil engineer retained by the
applicant or property owner;
      5.   Review and process, as provided below, requests for amendments to
the flood insurance rate map;
      6.   Maintain two (2) copies of the official flood insurance rate map
(FIRM) as amended;
      7.   Notify the Utah floodplain manager, the Utah state division of water
resources, the FEMA and any affected adjacent communities of alterations or
relocation of any course or drainageway which results from the permitted
development when in the opinion of the city engineer the alterations or
relocations are substantial in nature and effect. Notification of any work to
alter any drainageway must be made prior to work being commenced. The carrying
capacity of altered or relocated watercourses shall be maintained, however.
      8.   Make the necessary interpretation when needed as to the exact
location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example,
where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions).
(Ord. 2015-21, 5-26-2015)
15-26-6: APPLICATION AND PERMITS:
   A.   Subdivision proposals must be submitted and approved and building and/
or site development permits for development or construction within area of
shallow flooding or area of special flood hazard must be obtained before such
development or construction begins. Applications for subdivision, conditional
use permits and commercial site plan review shall be made to the director on
forms to be provided. Applications for building or site development permits
shall be made to the building official on forms to be provided. Application
forms shall require the applicant to specify if any or all of the property
involved in the proposal is located within the area of shallow flooding or area
of special flood hazard as it appears on the flood insurance rate map as
officially amended.
   B.   Additionally, if the property is so situated within the area of shallow
flooding or area of special flood hazard, the applicant shall provide
information, including, but not limited to:
      1.   Plans drawn to scale;
      2.   The nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the land
involved;
      3.   A description and identification of existing or proposed structures,
fill, storage of materials, utilities and any ground mounted utility or
mechanical systems for the structures, drainageways, drainage facilities and
the location of the foregoing;
      4.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all structures, including new and substantially
improved structures;
      5.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure is
floodproofed or to be floodproofed;
      6.   Type of floodproofing, if any, to be employed;
      7.   Volumetric calculations demonstrating compensatory storage, if
applicable;
      8.   Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural
drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development;
      9.   Certification by a registered professional engineer or licensed
architect retained by the applicant or property owner that the floodproofing
standards of subsection
15-26-8C of this chapter, and that the flood carrying capacity within any
watercourse is maintained; and a determination of the base flood elevation
based upon flood insurance rate map information as provided in section
15-26-7 of this chapter and a thorough investigation of the site. In
determining the base flood elevations for property situated in A zones on the
flood insurance rate map where no base flood elevations are shown, the
applicant's or property owner's registered engineer shall obtain and utilize
any base flood elevation data available from a federal, state or other source;
and shall perform such analyses (see Weber County, Utah, flood insurance study)
as necessary to identify the base flood. Once information has been obtained and
approved by the city engineer, it should be used to implement the elevation and
floodproofing requirements contained herein.
      10.   Where, in the opinion of the applicant, the floodplain boundary or
the base flood elevation data determined by the flood insurance study is in
error, the applicant shall have a professional engineer supply supporting
documentation to the city engineer to verify correct boundaries and elevation
data to request interpretation or amendment.
   C.   Approval or denial of a development permit shall be based on all of the
provisions of this chapter and the following relevant factors:
      1.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      2.   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      3.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owners;
      4.   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
      5.   The necessity to the facility of the waterfront location, where
applicable;
      6.   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
      7.   The compatibility of the proposed use with the existing and
anticipated development;
      8.   The relationship of the proposed use to the general plan and
floodplain management regulations for that area;
      9.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      10.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment, transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
      11.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, streets and bridges.
(Ord. 2015-21, 5-26-2015)
15-26-7: FIRM AMENDMENT:
   A.   Requests For Amendment Or Interpretation: Requests for administrative
site specific amendments to the FIRM or requests for an interpretation of the
FIRM boundaries based on the conflicts between the mapped boundaries and the
actual field conditions shall be submitted to the city engineer for review.
This is not to preclude the city engineer or FEMA from initiating amendments to
the FIRM.
   B.   Supporting Documentation And Certification: Such request shall be
accompanied by the applicant's supporting documentation which shall include a
certification by a registered professional engineer. Such certification shall
specify that in his professional judgment the boundaries of the FIRM, as they
relate to the specific site under consideration:
      1.   Are incorrect, or
      2.   Have been or will be modified by existing or proposed improvements,
etc.
   C.   City Engineer Review: After review, if documentation and request are
found to be in order, the city engineer shall submit the request, together with
the city engineer's recommendation, to the federal emergency management agency
to request consideration of amendment of the FIRM unless FEMA approval has
already been obtained.
   D.   Administrative Approval Of FEMA Amendment Of FIRM: In the event FEMA,
based on the request of the city engineer's recommendation and for good cause
shown, approves the request and issues an amendment to the FIRM, the city
engineer shall submit two (2) copies of the FEMA amendment to the mayor for
approval of administrative amendment to the official floodplain map. Each
amendment so approved shall be certified by the city recorder and numbered
consecutively. One copy shall be retained on file with the city recorder and
the second copy retained on file with the director and attached to the FIRM and
available for public inspection.
   E.   Effect Of Administrative FIRM Amendment: Any amendment to the FIRM so
issued by FEMA and approved by the official executive action of the mayor under
this section shall become a part of the official floodplain map and shall be
incorporated herein by reference and have the full force and effect of this
chapter as of the date of the mayor's action.
(Ord. 2015-21, 5-26-2015)
15-26-8: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   General Provisions: No final subdivision plat shall be approved nor
shall any site development or building permit be issued for property located
within the area of shallow flooding or area of special flood hazard until the
proposed development, construction, substantial improvement or work under
permit complies with the following criteria:
      1.   All proposals for new development, new construction or substantial
improvements to existing structures within the floodplain area, including
prefabricated and manufactured homes, must:
         a.   Be designed or modified and adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
         b.   Be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage;
         c.   Utilize construction methods and practices that will minimize
flood damage; and
         d.   Be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing
and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed
and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding.
      2.   All proposals for construction or improvements (including
replacements) shall be designed:
         a.   To minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into water
supply and sanitary sewage systems;
         b.   To minimize and eliminate discharges from the sanitary sewage
system into floodwater; and
         c.   With any on site waste disposal systems located and constructed
to minimize or eliminate flood damage to the system or contamination from the
system during flooding.
      3.   The buildings or structures shall be constructed and placed on the
building site so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flood or
floodwaters. Whenever possible, buildings or structures shall be constructed
with longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of flood flow. So far as
practicable, buildings or structures shall be placed approximately on the same
flood flow lines as those of adjoining structures.
      4.   Within the AH and AO zones, adequate drainage paths are required
around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures.
      5.   All new construction and substantial improvements that fully enclose
areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles,
building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are
subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic
flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for entry and exit of floodwaters.
Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by the
applicant's registered professional engineer or architect or must have the
following minimum criteria:
         a.   A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch per one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided;
         b.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1')
above grade; and
         c.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit
of floodwaters.
      6.   All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development,
including residential manufactured home parks, shall:
         a.   Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
         b.   Have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate
flood damage;
         c.   Provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards;
and
         d.   Include base flood elevation data for each lot on the preliminary
plat if the subdivision or proposed new development contain fifty (50) lots or
five (5) acres (whichever is less).
      7.   Fill within an area of special flood hazard shall result in no net
loss of natural floodplain storage, or increase in water surface elevations
during the base flood and shall be offset by compensatory storage.
   B.   Residences:
      1.   New construction or substantial improvements of residential
structures in the A, A1-30, AH or AE zones of the Weber County, Utah, and
incorporated areas FIRM shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated to, or above, the base flood elevation;
      2.   All new construction and substantial improvements of residential
structures within the AO zone of the Weber County, Utah, and incorporated areas
FIRM shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade or above the depth number specified on the Weber County,
Utah, and incorporated areas FIRM, which shall be at least two feet (2') if no
depth number is specified;
   C.   Nonresidential Construction:
      1.   All new development, new construction and substantial improvements
of nonresidential structures within any A1-30, AE and AH zones on the Weber
County, Utah, and incorporated areas FIRM shall have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation, or together
with the attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below
the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to passage of water and with hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and
effects of buoyancy. Floodproofing may be utilized to meet the above standard.
Where floodproofing is utilized:
         a.   The applicant's registered professional engineer or licensed
architect shall certify that the floodproofing methods comply with building
codes and are adequate, according to accepted engineering standards, to
withstand the flood depths, pressure velocities, impact and uplift factors and
other factors associated with the base flood; and
         b.   A record of said certificates (including calculations) indicating
the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which said structures
are floodproofed shall be maintained by the building official with the copy of
the building or other permits.
      2.   All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential
structures within the AO zone on the Weber County, Utah, and incorporated areas
FIRM shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade to or above the depth number specified in feet on the
Weber County, Utah, and incorporated areas FIRM (at least 2 feet if no depth
number is specified) or, together with the attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, be completely floodproofed to that level to meet the floodproofing
standard specified in subsection C1 of this section.
   D.   Manufactured Home Parks; Manufactured Homes:
      1.   Manufactured homes shall be elevated on a permanent foundation so
that the lowest floor of the home is elevated to or above the base flood
elevation and the home is securely anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement if the
home is to be placed, or substantially improved, on any site in an A zone, or
on the following sites in zones A1-30, AH, and AE:
         a.   Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision;
         b.   In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;
         c.   In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision; or
         d.   In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a
manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as a result of a flood.
      2.   Manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites
in existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions which were created before
the implementation of the flood regulations and are within zones A1-30, AH and
AE and that are not subject to the provisions of subsection D1 of this section
shall be elevated so that either:
         a.   The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base
flood elevation; or
         b.   The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or
other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are not less
than thirty six inches (36") in height above the grade and is securely anchored
to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and
lateral movement.
      3.   When required by this chapter, methods of anchoring a manufactured
home may include, but are not limited to, use of over the top or frame ties to
ground anchors. Anchoring installed to meet the requirements of this chapter is
in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting
wind forces.
   E.   Recreational Vehicles: Recreational vehicles placed on sites within the
A1-30, AH, and AE zones are required to either:
      1.   Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive
days, be fully licensed and be ready for highway use; or
      2.   Meet the requirements of being placed on a pad elevated to or above
the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequate anchored
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
   F.   Approval: Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, if the
city first applies for a conditional FIRM revision, fulfills the requirements
for such revision as established under the provisions of 44 CFR 65.12, and
receives the approval of the federal insurance administrator, certain
development in zones A1-30, AE and AH which increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood by more than one foot (1') may be approved.
(Ord. 2015-21, 5-26-2015)
15-26-9: FLOODWAYS:
Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as floodways
or regulatory floodways. The floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the
velocity of floodwaters carrying debris and potential projectiles, and the
potential for erosion within the floodway:
   A.   Floodway encroachments are prohibited unless certification by the
applicant's registered professional engineer or architect is provided
demonstrating through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance
with standard engineering practice that the encroachment would not result in
any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
   B.   If subsection A of this section is satisfied, all floodway
encroachments shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction
provisions of section
15-26-8, "Development Standards", of this chapter.
   C.   If the floodway has not been designated, no new construction,
substantial improvement, or other development (including fill) shall be
permitted within zones A1-30 and AE as shown on the FIRM, unless it is
demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed activity, when combined
with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot (1') at any point
within the city.
   D.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, if the city first
applies for a conditional FIRM and floodway revision, fulfills the requirements
for such revision as established under the provisions of 44 CFR 65.12, and
receives the approval of the federal insurance administrator, a floodway
encroachment that would result in an increase in base flood elevations may be
permitted.
(Ord. 2015-21, 5-26-2015)
15-26-10: APPEAL PROCESS; FLOODPLAIN VARIANCES:
   A.   Board Of Building And Fire Code Appeals: The board of building and fire
code appeals, as established by the city, shall hear and decide appeals and
requests for variances from the requirements of the floodplain overlay zone.
The board of building and fire code appeals shall hear and decide appeals when
it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination
made by any administrative official in the enforcement or administration of
this chapter. Those aggrieved by the decision of the board of building and fire
code appeals, or any taxpayer, may appeal the decision to a court of competent
jurisdiction.
   B.   Factors To Be Considered In Decision: In passing upon such
applications, the board of building and fire code appeals shall consider all
technical evaluation, all relevant factors, standards specified in other
sections of this chapter, and the specific factors described in subsection 15-
26-6C of this chapter.
   C.   Approval With Conditions: Upon consideration of the above factors
(subsection B of this section) and the purposes of this chapter, the board of
building and fire code appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.
   D.   Recordkeeping: The director shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions, including technical information, and report any variances to the
federal emergency management agency upon request.
   E.   Conditions For Variances:
      1.   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base level, providing items in subsection B of this
section have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-
half (1/2) acre, the technical justifications required for issuing the variance
increases.
      2.   Variances, without regard to the procedures set forth in the
remainder of this section, may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation
or restoration of a historic structure upon determination that the proposed
repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary
to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
      3.   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
      4.   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size
contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below
the base flood level in conformance with the requirements of issuing a
variance.
      5.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      6.   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         a.   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         b.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
         c.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the
public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
      7.   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a
functionally dependent use provided that:
         a.   The criteria outlined in this subsection E are met, and
         b.   The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats
to public safety.
   F.   Notice To Applicant: Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall
be given written notice that permitting the structure to be built with a lowest
floor below the base flood elevation will result in increased flood insurance
cost commensurate with the increased risk from the reduced lowest floor
elevation and that such construction below the base flood level increases risks
to life and property.
(Ord. 2015-21, 5-26-2015)
15-26-11: CERTIFICATION OF ACTUAL ELEVATIONS REQUIRED:
   A.   Certificate: Every applicant who is issued a building permit governed
by this chapter shall be required to submit to the building official a
certificate of actual elevations of construction by a registered land surveyor
or registered professional engineer. Said certificate shall specify the
specific elevations (in relation to mean sea level) of the actual elevation of
the poured foundation. The certificate shall certify that the lowest floor
elevation is at or above the base flood elevation.
   B.   Submission: The certificate of actual elevation described in subsection
A of this section shall be submitted after the pouring of footings and
foundation, but prior to the time of final inspections or request for any
certificate of occupancy.
   C.   Waiver: The building official, in his discretion, may waive all of the
inapplicable portions of the certificate required by this chapter, if the
construction work authorized by permit does not occur in or affect those
portions of the structure below the base flood elevation.
(Ord. 2015-21, 5-26-2015)
15-26-12: WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on engineering and scientific
methods of study. Larger floods will occur on rare occasions and flooding
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes such as ice jams or
bridge openings being restricted by debris. This chapter does not imply that
areas outside the floodplain and areas of special hazards, or land uses
permitted within such areas, will be free from flooding or flood damages. This
chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city or any officer or
employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made under this chapter.
(Ord. 2015-21, 5-26-2015)
CHAPTER 27
SENSITIVE AREA OVERLAY ZONE SA
SECTION:
15-27-1: Purpose And Intent
15-27-2: Definitions
15-27-3: Scope And Application
15-27-4: Density, Lot Size, Width And Characteristics
15-27-5: Development Standards
15-27-6: Review And Approval Procedure
15-27-7: Issuance Of Building Permits
15-27-8: Appendix A
15-27-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   Certain areas of the City are characterized by slope, vegetation,
drainage, rock outcroppings, geologic conditions, and other physical factors
which, if disturbed for the purposes of development, can cause physical damage
to public or private property or both. Therefore, the development of such areas
and adjacent land requires special care on the part of the public and private
sectors.
   B.   The standards, guidelines and criteria established by this Chapter
shall include, but not be limited to the following:
      1.   The protection of public from natural hazards of storm water runoff
and erosion by requiring drainage facilities and the minimal removal of natural
vegetation.
      2.   The minimization of the threat and consequential damages of fire in
hillside areas by establishing fire protection measures.
      3.   The preservation of natural features, wildlife habitat and open
space.
      4.   The preservation of public access to mountain areas and natural
drainage channels.
      5.   The retention of natural topographic features such as drainage
channels, streams, ridge lines, rock outcroppings, vistas, trees, and other
natural plant formations.
      6.   The preservation and enhancement of visual and environmental quality
by use of natural vegetation and the prohibition of excessive excavation and
terracing.
      7.   The assurance of an adequate transportation system for the total
hillside area to include consideration of the approved Master Street Plan of
the City. This system design will consider densities and topography with
minimal cuts, fills and other visible scars.
      8.   The establishment of on-site traffic facilities that ensure ingress
and egress for vehicles including, emergency vehicles into all developed areas
at any time.
      9.   The encouragement of a variety of development designs and concepts
that are compatible with the natural terrain of the sensitive areas and will
preserve open space and natural landscape.
(Ord. 76-15, 5-6-1976; amd. Ord. 85-27, 6-13-1985)
15-27-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this Section:
AVERAGE SLOPE: Shall mean and be determined by the use of the following
formula:
   A.   S = .00229 (I) (L)
                A
      S = Average slope in percent.
      .00229 = The conversion factor of square feet to acres.
      A = Total number acres in the parcel.
      I = Contour interval in feet. The contour interval may not exceed ten
feet (10').
      L = Summation of the length of all contour lines, in feet, within the
parcel.
   B.   In the determination of the average slope, the average (A) need not
include any part of the site having a slope greater than thirty percent (30%).
If such areas are excluded from determination of average slope, their acreage
shall not be included as part of the total area of the site for purposes of
determining the number of dwelling units allowed, but may be included with
individual building lots.
   C.   Areas with slopes exceeding thirty percent (30%) may be:
      1.   Placed in permanent open space and maintained by a responsible legal
entity; or
      2.   Platted with adjacent approved building lots with an open space
easement; or
      3.   Other proposals may be prepared by the developer and submitted for
approval of the Planning Commission.
BUILDABLE LAND: That land within a lot or development site, no part of which
has slope exceeding thirty percent (30%).
DEVELOPMENT SITE: Shall mean and include the total perimeters of a subdivision
or a planned unit development, or a tract, lot or parcel of land intended to be
used as commercial, industrial or institutional use.
GROSS ACREAGE: The total area of the development, including all rights of way
and other nonresidential uses.
IMPERVIOUS MATERIALS MATTER: That is impenetrable by moisture.
NATURAL VEGETATION: This term shall include orchards, indigenous trees, shrubs,
grass and perennial growth.
NET RESIDENTIAL ACREAGE: All land within a development site devoted exclusively
to a residential use.
OPEN SPACE: Includes land area of the site not covered by buildings, parking
structures, or accessory structures except recreational structures. May also
include any combination of public, private and common spaces.
USABLE OPEN SPACE: Is that which:
   A.   Has been properly designed;
   B.   Has been provided with landscaping and perhaps other facilities; and/or
   C.   Has been provided with a program of continuing maintenance.
(Ord. 76-15, 5-6-1976; amd. Ord. 85-27, 6-13-1985; 1999 Code)
15-27-3: SCOPE AND APPLICATION:
   A.   Creation: There is hereby created a Sensitive Area Overlay Zone
consisting of those areas shaded on that certain plat of the City, dated May 2,
1985, which has been filed with the City Recorder and made a part hereof.
   B.   Jurisdiction Of Sensitive Area Overlay Zone: The provisions of this
Chapter shall apply to all lands in the City which lie within the area
designated on the Zoning Map as the Ogden City Sensitive Area Overlay Zone. No
building or structure may be erected or reconstructed on land which is
designated on the Zoning Maps of the City as sensitive area, nor shall such
land be subdivided, graded or otherwise disturbed for purposes of development
or subdivision, unless such construction, subdivision or disturbance is
undertaken in accordance with this Chapter.
   C.   Effect Of Provisions: The regulations of this Chapter shall be
supplemental to, and not in lieu of, the applicable zoning provisions of the
use district in which the land is located and/or general provisions applicable
to all zones. However, in the event of conflict between such additional
provisions and the provisions of this Chapter, the more restrictive provisions
shall apply.
   D.   Application To Previous Development: The provisions of this Chapter
shall have no application to any development or other construction project
which has been granted preliminary approval prior to the effective date hereof.
(Ord. 76-15, 5-6-1976; amd. Ord. 85-27, 6-13-1985)
15-27-4: DENSITY, LOT SIZE, WIDTH AND CHARACTERISTICS:
   A.   Single-Family Dwelling Units:
      1.   Minimum Lot Size: The minimum lot size with respect to lots upon
which single-family detached dwelling units are located in subdivisions or
otherwise shall be determined by reference to the following table:
 
   Average Slope    Minimum Lot Size     Minimum Lot Width
   Development Site
0-10%               Same as underlying zone Same as underlying zone
10.01-20%           15,000 sq. ft.          At least 100' at front setback line
20.01-30%           20,000 sq. ft.          At least 120' at front setback line
30.01+%             Not permitted           Not permitted
 
      2.   Planned Unit Development And Cluster Subdivision: The maximum
density with respect to dwelling units per gross acre for dwelling units in a
planned unit development for cluster subdivision shall be the same as that
allowed for single-family detached dwellings unless otherwise approved by the
planning commission.
      3.   Maximum Impervious Material Coverage: The maximum impervious
material coverage that shall be allowed upon lots which single- family dwelling
units are located shall be thirty percent (30%) of the total lot area or seven
thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet, whichever is smaller, including
accessory buildings, patios, and driveways; provided however, that the maximum
impervious material coverage may exceed thirty percent (30%) or seven thousand
five hundred (7,500) square feet upon approval of the mayor after review and
recommendation by the planning commission.
      4.   Buildable Area:
         a.   Single-family dwelling structures shall be located only upon
areas constituting buildable land, which area shall be fully contiguous and
shall be at least five thousand (5,000) square feet in size, and shall have
minimum dimension, either length or width, of fifty feet (50');
         b.   Single-family dwelling structures shall be set back no further
than two hundred fifty feet (250') from a public or private street except by
approval of the planning commission and subject to the following standards:
            (1)   The home is connected to city water and sewer;
            (2)   The access drive does not require substantial cuts or fill,
but can be developed on existing topography and meet all other requirements for
access in this chapter; and
            (3)   The driveway layout follows natural openings and does not
require removal of large amounts of vegetation.
         c.   All accessory structures shall be located upon buildable land,
unless otherwise approved by the planning commission, upon a showing by the
developer that such location will not be contrary to the purposes of this
chapter.
      5.   Flag Lot: A flag lot may be approved by the planning commission
after determining that due to topographic conditions, sensitive land concerns,
or other requirements of this chapter, streets cannot or should not be extended
to access substantial buildable areas that would otherwise comply with the
minimum lot standards. Also, the following criteria must be met:
         a.   Only one single-family dwelling may be constructed as a main use
on a flag lot;
         b.   The minimum lot area, exclusive of the access stem, shall be one
hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the minimum lot area required in the
zoning district;
         c.   The width of the access stem shall be at least thirty feet (30')
with a paved twenty foot (20') wide driveway and a minimum five foot (5') wide
landscaped buffer on each side of the driveway. The buffer area is provided to
help screen adjacent properties and to provide a drainage area for the paved
portion of the access strip;
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4229.png]
 
         d.   The planning commission may require that one access stem serve
two (2) lots and that a cross access agreement be recorded. Where such access
is shared, the width and frontage requirements for each property may be reduced
to fifteen feet (15'). The landscape buffer shall not be required between
abutting access stems operating as a shared access;
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4231.png]
 
         e.   Approved street numbers shall be located in such a manner as to
be plainly visible and legible from the street fronting the lot.
   B.   Multiple Units In R-2 Through R-5 Zones:
      1.   Maximum Lot Width And Density: Maximum lot width and maximum density
shall be determined by the following table:
 
Average Slope Of Minimum Lot Width       Maximum Density
Development Site
   0-10%      Same as underlying zone Same as underlying zone
   10.01-20%  100'                    Maximum density of underlying zone x
                                         0.70
   20.01-30%  120'                    Maximum density of underlying zone x
                                         0.50
   30.01+%    Not permitted           Not permitted
 
      2.   Maximum Impervious Material Coverage: The maximum impervious
material coverage that shall be allowed upon lots upon which multiple-family
units are located shall be thirty percent (30%) of the total lot area.
(Ord. 76-15, 5-6-1976; amd. Ord. 85-27, 6-13-1985; Ord. 90-49, 9-27-1990; Ord.
93-34, 9-7-1993; Ord. 2001-35, 6-5-2001)
15-27-5: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
It is intended that the development standards and provisions, as set forth
herein, shall be required in connection with all building and construction in
the Ogden City sensitive area overlay zone.
   A.   Drainage And Erosion: The area of the watershed shall be used to
determine the amount of stormwater runoff generated before and after
construction.
      1.   The "rational method" or other method as approved by the city
engineer shall be used in computing runoff. The basic formula for the "rational
method" is:
            Q = CIA in which
            Q = Runoff in cubic feet per second (CFS)
            C = Coefficient of runoff or the portion of stormwater that runs
off a given area (the actual C value used shall be approved by the city
engineer)
            I = Average rainfall intensity during time of concentration for ten
(10) year return period in inches per hour. The "time of concentration" shall
be defined as the time required for water to flow from the most remote point of
the section under consideration
            A = Drainage area in acres
      2.   Lots shall be arranged so as to ensure adequate setbacks from
drainage channels. The 100-year storm shall be that basis for calculating
setbacks. No structures shall be allowed in the 100-year floodplain.
      3.   Facilities for the collection of stormwater runoff shall be required
to be constructed on development sites and according to the following
requirements:
         a.   Such facilities shall be the first improvement or facilities
constructed on the development site;
         b.   Such facilities shall be designed so as to detain safely and
adequately the maximum expected stormwater runoff for a 10-year storm of two
(2) hour duration, and to release it at a controlled rate equal to the runoff
rate generated by the site in its natural condition. Said natural runoff rate
shall not exceed 0.2 cubic feet per second per acre. The facilities shall be
designed to detain runoff for a sufficient length of time so as to prevent
flooding and erosion during storm runoff flow periods;
         c.   Such facilities shall be so designed as to divert surface water
away from cut faces and sloping surfaces of a fill;
         d.   The existing natural drainage system will be utilized, as much as
possible, in its unimproved state;
         e.   Where drainage channels are required, wide shallow swales lined
with appropriate vegetation shall be used instead of cutting narrow, deep
drainage ditches;
         f.   Flow retarding devices, such as detention ponds and recharge
berms, shall be used where practical to minimize increases in runoff volume and
peak flow rate due to development. Areas which have shallow or perched
groundwater or areas that are unstable must be given additional consideration.
Each facility shall have an emergency overflow system to safely carry any
overflow water to an acceptable disposal point.
      4.   Construction of the development site shall be of a nature that will
minimize the disturbance of vegetation cover, especially between October 1 and
April 15 of the following year.
      5.   Erosion control measures on the development site shall be required
to minimize the solids in runoff from such areas. The detailed design system to
control stormwater erosion during and after construction shall be contained in
the grading and drainage report described in section
15-27-8, "Appendix A", of this chapter.
   B.   Vegetation And Revegetation:
      1.   All areas on development sites cleared of natural vegetation in the
course of construction of off site improvements shall be replanted with
revegetation which has good erosion control characteristics.
      2.   New planting shall be protected with mulch material and fertilized
when in conjunction with the planting and watering schedule in subsection B5 of
this section.
      3.   The use of persons or firms having expertise in the practice of
revegetation (i.e., licensed landscape architects or nurserymen) shall
supervise the planting and installation of revegetative cover.
      4.   Vegetation shall be removed only when absolutely necessary, e.g.,
for the construction of buildings, roads and filled areas.
      5.   After the completion of off site improvements, vegetation will be
planted in all disturbed areas only during the following time periods:
         a.   March 15 through May 15; and
         b.   September 15 through October 31.
         c.   If irrigated, planting may be done during summer months.
         d.   Such vegetation shall be a mixture of plant materials, i.e.,
trees, shrubs, grass and forbs. Native plant materials will be preferred.
      6.   No vegetation shall be removed on slopes over thirty percent (30%)
except as approved by the planning commission for trail and/or open space
improvements.
      7.   Topsoil removed during construction shall be conserved for later use
on areas requiring vegetation or landscaping, i.e., cut and fill slopes.
      8.   All disturbed soil surfaces shall be established or covered prior to
November 1. If the planned impervious surfaces (i.e., road, driveways, etc.)
cannot be established prior to November 1, a temporary treatment adequate to
prevent erosion shall be installed on those surfaces.
      9.   The property owner and/or developer shall be fully responsible for
any destruction of native or applied vegetation identified as necessary for
retention and shall be responsible for such destroyed vegetation. They shall
carry the responsibility both for employees and subcontractors from the first
day of construction until the completion of off site improvements. The property
owner and developer shall replace all destroyed vegetation with varieties of
vegetation approved by the planning commission. The property owner shall assume
responsibility upon purchase of the lot.
   C.   Fire Protection:
      1.   Areas without a recognized water supply shall meet special
requirements, on an individual basis, as established by the fire department,
water utility and engineering department.
      2.   Each development site and building permit for private lots, flag
lots, and lots where the front setback is greater than fifty feet (50'), shall
be reviewed by the fire department to see that it complies with requirements
for fire apparatus.
      3.   Spark arresters shall be installed in every fireplace constructed
indoor or outdoor. Screen openings in such arresters shall not be in excess of
one-fourth inch (1/4") in diameter.
   D.   Geology:
      1.   Any development within a band one-eighth (1/8) of a mile on either
side of a mapped fault trace must submit a geologic report as part of the
development review process.
      2.   Development of all structures used for human occupancy shall take
place fifty feet (50') or farther from any active earthquake fault trace.
Active fault traces are those identified and mapped by the city or those
identified by special studies required of the developer.
      3.   Development of all structures used for critical facilities shall
take place one hundred fifty feet (150') or farther from any active earthquake
fault trace. Critical facilities shall include dams, reservoirs, fuel storage
facilities, power plants, nuclear reactors, police and fire stations, schools,
hospitals, nursing homes, and emergency communication facilities.
      4.   No structures shall be built on any zones of deformation with
respect to active faults. Off site improvement design will be approved by the
planning commission, upon recommendation of the city engineer.
      5.   No structures or off site improvements shall be allowed on any
active landslide area.
      6.   Problems associated with development on or near perched groundwater
and shallow groundwater must be mitigated in a manner as approved by the
planning commission.
      7.   No structures shall be allowed in any high hazard rockfall zone
unless mitigation measures are taken to the satisfaction of the planning
commission.
   E.   Grading, Cuts And Fill:
      1.   Exposed unstable surfaces of an excavation or fill shall not be
steeper than one vertical to two horizontal (1:2).
      2.   All permanent fill shall be located so that settlements, slidings,
or erosions shall not damage or cover streets, curb, gutter, sidewalks or
buildings.
      3.   All fill and degrees of compaction shall comply with the standards
of the building code, as adopted by title 16, chapter 2 of this code, or its
successor provisions.
      4.   The top and bottom edges of slopes caused by an excavation or fill
up to ten (10) vertical feet shall be three (3) horizontal feet from the
property line or public right of way lines.
      5.   The maximum vertical height of all cuts or fills shall be ten feet
(10'). Fills for slumps or other natural depressions may exceed ten feet (10')
if approved by the planning commission.
      6.   All structures, except retaining walls or soil stabilization
improvements, shall have a setback from the crest of the fill or base of the
cut of a minimum distance equal to in depth of the fill or the height of the
cut, unless a structurally sound retaining wall is built for the cut or fill
slope. Retaining walls may be a part of the dwelling unit.
   F.   Streets And Ways: Streets, roadways and private accessways shall follow
as nearly as possible the natural terrain. The following additional standards
shall apply:
      1.   At least two (2) ingress and egress routes shall be provided for
each subdivision or PRUD unless the number of units served is less than twenty
(20) and if the likelihood of street blockages is deemed by the planning
commission to be an acceptably low risk.
      2.   Points of access shall be provided to all developed and nondeveloped
areas for emergency and firefighting equipment. Driveways located upon each lot
extending from a public or private street shall have a maximum grade of ten
percent (10%) and shall be of a sufficient width and design to admit and
accommodate firefighting equipment.
      3.   Cul-de-sacs shall not exceed six hundred feet (600') in length,
unless "Dead-End" signs are posted at the entrance, and shall have a fifty foot
(50') radius right of way and a forty foot (40') radius improved turnaround.
Stub streets that are longer than three hundred feet (300') shall have a
temporary turnaround at the end thereof.
      4.   Centerline curvatures shall be reviewed by the city engineer for
such things as design speeds, sight distances and stopping distances.
      5.   Variations of the street design standards developed to solve special
hillside visual and functional problems may be presented to the planning
commission for consideration and approval. Examples of such variations may be
the use of split roadways to avoid deep cuts, one-way streets, modifications of
surface drainage treatments or sidewalk design.
      6.   Development sites which are located near canyon trails will provide
access to those trails. Parking areas may be required by the planning
commission at trailheads.
      7.   The maximum amount of impervious surface for streets and ways shall
be twenty percent (20%) of the entire development site. All streets or rights
of way for vehicular traffic shall be subject to the following limitations:
         a.   The maximum grade of such streets or rights of way shall be ten
percent (10%) except as hereafter provided;
         b.   The mayor, after receiving a recommendation from the fire and
engineering departments, may grant approval for a grade exceeding ten percent
(10%). Grades shall not exceed the grade recommended by the city engineer for
private streets;
         c.   The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to streets or
rights of way already constructed or which have heretofore been granted
preliminary approval by the planning commission;
         d.   Roads shall be designed to meet the city road base, asphalt and
compaction standards.
   G.   Architectural Design:
      1.   Buildings proposed for construction in hillside or canyon areas
within the Ogden City sensitive area zone shall be designed to be visually
compatible with the natural beauty of the hillsides and canyons. The use of
building materials in colors that will blend harmoniously with the natural
settings are encouraged. Such material as natural woods, brick (earth colors)
and stone are considered to be most appropriate.
      2.   The planning commission shall review the design and specified
exterior materials and colors for all structures other than single-family
dwellings. Building permits for such structures shall not be granted until
building materials and colors have been approved by the planning commission.
      3.   Innovative designs for single-family dwelling units, e.g., earth
sheltered dwellings with grass roofs, etc., may be allowed after approval by
the planning commission, provided such innovations are also allowed under the
city's building code, or that they have been granted the appropriate variances.
   H.   On Site Development: The property owner shall be fully responsible for
making all improvements in accordance with the development site approval, e.g.,
drainage, erosion and vegetation constraints.
   I.   Bond: In addition to the provisions requiring the posting of a bond as
set forth elsewhere in the ordinances of the city, the property owner/developer
may be required by the mayor to guarantee the completion of revegetation
projects, the stabilization of grading sites, cuts and fill and construction of
stormwater runoff facilities, the construction of recreation centers as
required in this section. If such additional bond is required, it shall be in
an amount equal to the cost of construction of such projects and shall continue
for one year after the completion date of such projects, improvements or
facilities.
   J.   Exceptions: Exceptions to the requirements and provisions as outlined
in this section may be approved by the mayor; provided, that the developer or
owner of such development site can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the mayor
that the requested exceptions shall not be detrimental to the general well
being of the neighborhood nor in violation of the stated purposes in this
chapter.
(Ord. 2011-39, 6-28-2011)
15-27-6: REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURE:
   A.   Conceptual Approval: All applications for a planned unit development,
subdivision or other site plan shall comply with all applicable ordinances of
the city. In addition, conceptual approval must first be granted by the
planning commission prior to application for preliminary approval.
      1.   Submittal For Concept Approval:
         a.   Vicinity Map: Covers sufficient adjoining territory to indicate
clearly nearby street patterns, property lines, other adjacent properties in
the developer's ownership, and other significant features that will have a
bearing upon the development;
         b.   Contour Map: Showing a proposed subdivision and street layout,
existing substantial buildings, significant trees, watercourses, drainage
ditches, storm or sanitary sewers with size and flow line elevation, water
lines, gas lines, power lines, permanent easements, and other features that
will have a bearing upon the design of the subdivision or on the provision of
utilities.
      2.   Planning Commission Action: The planning commission may approve,
approve with conditions, or deny the application for conceptual approval. Any
approval by the planning commission shall specify which, if any, special
studies and reports must be submitted for preliminary approval. Any concept
denial shall include the reasons for such denial. This decision of the planning
commission shall be final unless an interested party files an appeal to the
mayor within fifteen (15) days of the planning commission's decision.
   B.   Preliminary Approval: Any individual seeking preliminary approval for
development in the sensitive area overlay zone shall submit the following
information to the planning commission for review:
      1.   Written Documents:
         a.   A legal description of the total site proposed for development,
including a statement of present and proposed ownership and present and
proposed zoning;
         b.   A statement of planning objectives to be achieved by the
development through the particular approach proposed by the applicant. This
statement should include a description of the character of the proposed
development and the rationale behind the assumptions and choices made by the
applicant;
         c.   A development schedule indicating the approximate date when
construction of the project or stages of the project can be expected to begin
and be completed;
         d.   A statement of the applicant's intentions with regard to the
future selling or leasing of all or portions of the development;
         e.   Quantitative data for the following: total number and type of
dwelling units; parcel size; proposed lot coverage of buildings and structures;
approximate gross and net residential densities; total amount of open space
(including a separate figure for usable open space);
         f.   Special studies as required by the Planning Commission under
conceptual approval. These may include economic feasibility studies or market
analysis, soil characteristics report, grading or erosion control plan,
geologic report, vegetation preservation and protection report, hydrology and
storm drainage and fire protection report (see Appendix A for study
guidelines). All reports submitted herein shall be prepared by persons or firms
licensed to practice their specialty or expertise in the State of Utah, if such
license is required, or by one having demonstrable expertise in such field of
practice.
      2.   Site Plans: Site plans shall include, in addition to the above
provisions, the following:
         a.   Location of the proposed planned unit development, subdivision,
cluster subdivision, or other development, with identification of abutting
streets;
         b.   A slope map at a scale of one inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50')
for development sites of less than ten (10) acres and a scale of one inch
equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') for development sites of greater than ten
(10) acres and a determination of the average slope of the proposed
development;
         c.   The slope map referred to in subsection B2b of this Section shall
also include a designation of all areas in the proposed development having a
slope in excess of thirty percent (30%);
         d.   Topographic contours;
         e.   The total acreage, number of lots and proposed total density and
average slope for residential developments;
         f.   The location and approximate size of the proposed lots;
         g.   A general street location, width, and grade of all proposed
streets and radius of any cul-de-sacs;
         h.   Location of existing or proposed schools, churches, or parks;
         i.   Location of known hazards, (i.e., faults, drainage, rockfall,
etc.) and the boundaries of the 100-year flood plain;
         j.   Soil type and general description;
         k.   Land use data, i.e., the amount of residential land,
transportation land, etc., by acreage and percent;
         l.   Vegetative type map;
         m.   Existing and proposed utility lines (water, sanitary sewer and
storm drains), etc.;
         n.   Proposed landscape plan, including the species identification and
quantity of plants to be installed at the various locations throughout the
site;
         o.   All engineering calculations performed and acquired pursuant to
the provisions of the ordinances of the City shall be made available to the
City Engineer as part of the review and approval process.
      3.   Planning Commission Action: After weighing all the evidence, the
Planning Commission must take formal action, either approving the plan as
presented, approving it subject to certain specified modifications, or
disapproving it. A letter containing the Planning commission's recommendation
shall then be forwarded to the mayor.
      4.   Mayoral Action: The mayor shall review and approve or disapprove all
preliminary development plans in the sensitive area overlay zone.
   C.   Final Approval: Based on the establishment of compliance with the
preliminary development plan through the review of finalized site plans and
specifications, and the review of any materials required by the review
authority, the planning commission shall approve, approve with modifications or
disapprove the final site plan. Developments requiring the recording of
subdivision, condominium or dedication plats must also have approval by the
mayor.
      1.   Compliance With Preliminary Plan: The final development plan shall
be deemed in substantial compliance with the preliminary development plan,
provided modification by the applicant does not involve a change of one or more
of the following:
         a.   Violate any provision of this chapter;
         b.   Vary the lot area requirement by more than ten percent (10%);
         c.   Involve a reduction of more than ten percent (10%) of the area
reserved for common open space and/or usable open space;
         d.   Increase the floor area proposed for nonresidential use by more
than ten percent (10%);
         e.   Increase the total ground area covered by buildings by more than
five percent (5%);
         f.   Significantly alter the road system or on-site circulation
pattern; or
         g.   Eliminate any recreational or community facilities approved in
the preliminary plan.
      2.   Spot Elevations, Grading Plans: Application for final approval shall
include with the improvement drawings, spot elevations on all lot corners or
contour grading plans of all lot frontages. The scale will be the same as the
improvement drawings.
(Ord. 76-15, 5-6-1976; amd. Ord. 85-27, 6-13-1985; Ord. 91-51, 12-1-1991; 1999
Code)
15-27-7: ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMITS:
There shall be no construction, development or grading upon the development
site until final approval has been granted, as provided in this section. Before
the construction of single- family dwelling units upon lots shall be allowed, a
plot plan drawn to scale (at least 1 inch equals 10 feet) for such lots shall
be submitted to the building official, which plot plan shall show lot lines,
existing and proposed contours at two foot (2') intervals, location of proposed
single-family dwelling units, walks, driveways, patio areas. The plot plan will
also show vegetation, drainage, and erosion controls and such plot plan shall
be attached to the building permit.
(Ord. 76-15, 5-6-1976; amd. Ord. 85-27, 6-13-1985; Ord. 2001-32, 6-5-2001, eff.
6-30-2001)
15-27-8: APPENDIX A:
   A.   Soil Characteristics Report: A soils report should be prepared by a
person or firm qualified by training and experience which would furnish
specific soil data for the property to be developed and methods that would
control urban erosion. Data on the soil should include:
      1.   Soils map of the property involved, delineating the soil types;
      2.   An accurate slope map;
      3.   Major soil hazard ratings in relation to total area of development;
      4.   Percentage of area to be disturbed in relation to total area of
development.
   B.   Grading Or Erosion Control: A grading or erosion control plan should
accompany the development application showing the specific methods to be
employed to control urban erosion and sedimentation and should include as a
minimum:
      1.   The grading plan shall show present topography to include
elevations, lines and grades including the location and depth of all proposed
fills and cuts of the finished earth surfaces using a contour interval of two
feet (2') or less. Access or haul road location, treatment and maintenance
requirements shall be included;
      2.   The specific control practices to be employed on the disturbed area
where necessary (includes seed mixes, types of mulches, etc.);
      3.   All calculations and proposed details used for design and
construction (of debris basins, impoundments, diversions, dikes, waterways,
drains, culverts and other water management for soil erosion control measures)
shall be shown. Calculations shall employ predictions of soil loss from sheet
erosion. Equations should include factors of:
         a.   Rainfall intensity and energy;
         b.   Soil stability;
         c.   Land slope and length of slope or topography;
         d.   Condition of the soil surface and land management practices in
use;
         e.   Surface cover, grass, woodland, crop, pavement, etc.;
      4.   Specific dates on the length of time exposure for unprotected,
cleared and graded areas;
      5.   A schedule showing when each stage of the project will be completed,
including estimated starting and completion with reference to other stages of
the project.
   C.   Geology: A geologic investigation of the site should be prepared
containing the following information:
      1.   Location and size of subject area, and its general setting with
respect to major geographic and/or geologic features;
      2.   The individual or agency who perform the geologic mapping upon which
the report is based, and when the mapping was prepared;
      3.   Abundance, distribution, and general nature of exposure of earth
materials within the area;
      4.   Nature and source of available subsurface information;
      5.   A geologic map should accompany the report and should delineate the
following:
         a.   Rock composition and structural elements;
         b.   Surface and subsurface distribution of earth materials exposed or
inferred within both bedrock and surficial deposits;
         c.   The nature and distribution of earth materials, faults, folds,
slide masses, zones of contortion or crushing joints, fractures, shear zones,
or other significant features;
      6.   Written recommendations for construction of proposed improvements to
avoid impact of any potential geologic hazards.
   D.   Vegetation And Preservation Report: Vegetation preservation and
protection report shall include:
      1.   Location and identification (by species) of existing vegetation;
      2.   The vegetation to be removed and method of disposal;
      3.   The vegetation to be planted;
      4.   Slope stabilization measures to be installed;
      5.   Analysis of the environmental effect of such operations including
effects on slope stability, soil erosion, water quality, fish and wildlife, and
fire hazard;
      6.   Topsoil stockpile areas will be designated;
      7.   Solar orientation is recommended for review.
   E.   Hydrology And Storm Drainage: A hydrology report should be prepared by
a person or firm qualified by training and experience to have expert knowledge
of the subject and should include an adequate description of the following:
      1.   A flood analysis should be made for all stream channels that occur
on the site:
         a.   100-year storm frequency based on rain on a saturated soil mantle
or snow pack taking the results which cause the greater flood flow;
         b.   On streams with a meandering channel and relatively flat gradient
way of the standard flood plain analysis of streams may be used (i.e., U.S.
Corps of Engineers Standard Project Flood);
         c.   On mountain streams with relatively steep gradients only those
analyses based on turbulent flow conditions may be used. "Bulking", if it
occurs, must be recognized and channel cross sections increased to allow for
it. Mud flows and other debris must also be considered in the analysis;
         d.   History of prior flooding;
         e.   Investigation of effects of short duration high intensity rain
storms on the proposed storm drainage system will handle the predicted flows
including the impact on areas below.
      2.   The ability of the existing stream channels to accommodate the
estimated increase in storm flow due to the proposed development should be
defined with respect to water flow and velocity. If the stream channel or banks
are subject to erosion, measures to be taken to minimize this impact should be
specified by consideration of the following:
         a.   The proposed streamside environment zone on the site plan and
criteria for determining the zone must be delineated;
         b.   Natural flow patterns as they affect the proposed development
should be described and evaluated;
         c.   Means by which the manmade drainage systems will deliver water to
the natural channel systems should be specified.
      3.   Subsurface Hydrology:
         a.   The location and size of swamps, springs, and seeps shall be
shown on the site plan and an investigation made to determine the reasons for
the occurrence of these underground water sources. (An analysis of the
vegetative cover or other surface information may be used to show the presence
of underground water.)
         b.   Effects of the proposed development on subsurface water sources
for areas immediately downstream should be defined and evaluated;
         c.   Effects of the proposed development on subsurface water sources
for areas immediately downstream should be defined and evaluated;
         d.   If infiltration systems are proposed for handling increased flows
caused by the proposed development, their operation and failure prevention
measures should be described.
   F.   Fire Protection: A fire protection report should be prepared to assess
fire probability and potential hazards by a person or agency qualified by
training and experience. Elements of the report should include the following:
      1.   The width and approximate location of any easements required for
access of fire protection equipment;
      2.   Agreements, if any, entered into by the applicant and a fire
protection entity or other government agency that could have concerns about
fire probability (State and Federal agencies);
      3.   The approval of the subdivision design and fire protection measures
by the fire protection agency;
      4.   A letter from the chief of the fire protection entity stating:
         a.   Fire flow recommended by insurance service organizations;
         b.   The existing fire flow capability proposed to serve the project.
(Ord. 85-27, 6-13-1985; amd. 1999 Code)
CHAPTER 28
RESERVED
(Ord. 2011-14, 3-15-2011)
CHAPTER 29
CONDITIONAL OVERLAY ZONE CO
SECTION:
15-29-1: Purpose
15-29-2: Zoning Conditions
15-29-3: Combination With Other Zones
15-29-4: Designation On Zoning Map
15-29-5: Effect On Provisions Of Underlying Zone
15-29-6: Application And Consideration
15-29-7: Development Agreement
15-29-8: Amendment To Development Agreement
15-29-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the Conditional Overlay Zone (CO) is to attach specific zoning
conditions, in addition to the use regulations and site development standards
applicable to the underlying zone, to enable the City Council to consider
approval of a rezoning petition, whereas, without the conditions or
restrictions:
   A.   The timing may not be right for such a change;
   B.   The rezoning may be incompatible with surrounding property or
neighborhoods;
   C.   The existing standards in the underlying zone may be inadequate to
provide protection to surrounding property and associated property values; or
   D.   The rezoning may not otherwise be consistent with the General Plan.
(Ord. 98-33, 5-5-1998)
15-29-2: ZONING CONDITIONS:
   A.   Imposed: In mitigating the obstacles to approval of the proposed
rezoning and to provide notice to property owners of limitations and
requirements for development of property, the additional conditions or
restrictions shall be set forth in a development agreement meeting the
requirements of Section
15-29-7 of this Chapter, the provisions of which are voluntarily agreed to by
the owner(s) or prospective owner(s) of the affected property.
   B.   Specified: The conditions or restrictions may:
      1.   Provide more specific land use designations and land development
suitability by eliminating or restricting potential uses otherwise allowed in
the underlying zone;
      2.   Provide more restrictive site development standards than are
required in the underlying zone, including additional standards regarding
landscaping, fencing, density, setbacks, or the height, square footage or
number of buildings;
      3.   Provide additional protection to surrounding property and associated
property values;
      4.   Provide for the general traffic circulation needs or other required
public facilities within and for the benefit of the affected property; or
      5.   Provide for a concept plan for future development of the affected
property, which will be used as a basis for future development and site plan
reviews.
(Ord. 98-33, 5-5-1998)
15-29-3: COMBINATION WITH OTHER ZONES:
The Conditional Overlay Zone may be used in combination with any zone
classification ("underlying zone") which establishes allowable uses and imposes
minimum development standards generally applicable to property within the Zone.
Provisions of the CO Zone shall be supplementary to the provisions of the
underlying zone. The CO Zone classification shall not be applied to a land area
as an independent zone.
(Ord. 98-33, 5-5-1998)
15-29-4: DESIGNATION ON ZONING MAP:
Property designated as a Conditional Overlay Zone shall be designated with the
suffix "(CO)" after the applicable classification of the underlying zone. For
example, if the Conditional Overlay Zone were being combined with the
commercial zone, CP-2, it would be designated on the official zoning map as
"CP-2 (CO)".
(Ord. 98-33, 5-5-1998)
15-29-5: EFFECT ON PROVISIONS OF UNDERLYING ZONE:
   A.   Less Restrictive: The imposition of specific zoning conditions or
restrictions pursuant to this chapter shall not be deemed to allow the granting
of permission to comply with land use limitations or requirements which are
less restrictive than those of the underlying zone.
   B.   Conditional Uses: The attachment of conditions to any zoning map
amendment shall not prohibit or affect the applicability of the requirements of
"conditional uses", including the requirement to obtain a conditional use
permit.
(Ord. 98-33, 5-5-1998)
15-29-6: APPLICATION AND CONSIDERATION:
   A.   Conditions For Consideration: A conditional overlay zone will be
considered by the city council, only upon:
      1.   Application of the owner(s) or prospective owner(s) of property
which is the subject of a pending rezoning petition; and
      2.   The submission of a proposed development agreement meeting the
requirements of section
15-29-7 of this chapter.
   B.   Tabling Petition; Referral Back To Planning Commission: If the planning
commission or the city council determines that a pending rezoning petition may
be denied unless additional conditions or restrictions are attached to the
affected property, the pending rezoning may be tabled at the request of the
petitioner to allow the petitioner to submit an application for a conditional
overlay zone. After submission of such application and negotiation of a
proposed development agreement as described in subsection D of this section,
the tabled rezoning petition along with the application for conditional overlay
zone and the proposed development agreement shall be scheduled for further
consideration by the planning commission, including notice and public hearing
as applicable.
   C.   Initiation Of Application: Application for a conditional overlay zone
may be initiated by the property owner, the property owner's authorized agent,
a prospective property owner, or any person or entity having a legal or
equitable interest in land.
   D.   Negotiation Process:
      1.   Upon application for the CO zone, the applicant may commence
negotiations with the director with assistance of the city attorney's office.
      2.   If a development agreement is formulated between the applicant and
the department, which is approved as to form by the city attorney's office, the
development agreement, together with the application, shall be scheduled for
further consideration.
      3.   If an agreement cannot be formulated, the applicant may take either
of the following actions:
         a.   Withdraw the application for a CO zone and request that the
pending rezoning petition be scheduled for further consideration; or
         b.   Withdraw both the application and the pending rezoning petition.
   E.   Approval: If the city council determines that the rezoning with a CO
designation, together with approval of the development agreement as a condition
of such rezoning, is in the vital and best interests of the city and the
health, safety, morals, and welfare of its residents, the city council shall
approve the proffered development agreement in the ordinance approving the new
zoning designation and authorize the mayor to sign the agreement on behalf of
the city.
   F.   Execution, Recording Of Agreement: After the city council approves the
development agreement as a condition of approving the conditional overlay zone,
all owners of the subject property shall execute the agreement in a form
suitable for recording and approved by the city attorney. Upon receipt of the
duly executed and approved development agreement, the city recorder shall
submit the agreement to the mayor for execution on behalf of the city. Once
executed and upon compliance with any conditions precedent to the effectiveness
of this chapter, the city recorder shall record the development agreement in
the office of the Weber County recorder. If the development agreement is
subsequently amended, or if the city terminates the development agreement for
failure to comply with the terms or conditions of the development agreement,
the city recorder shall have notice of such action recorded with the county
recorder.
   G.   Expiration Of Approval: Once a development agreement has been approved
all owners of the subject property shall have three (3) months from the date of
approval to execute the agreement and return the executed agreement to the city
recorder's office for recording. Failure to execute and return the agreement in
the required time frame shall make the approval and development agreement null
and void.
(Ord. 98-33, 5-5-1998; amd. Ord. 2001-32, 6-5-2001, eff. 6-30-2001; Ord. 2007-
75, 11-13-2007)
15-29-7: DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT:
   A.   Content: A development agreement shall contain, at a minimum, the
following:
      1.   A legal description of the land subject to the development
agreement.
      2.   The restrictions or conditions to be attached to the property.
      3.   Any conditions, terms, restrictions, or requirements for subsequent
city actions.
      4.   The time frames for performance by the parties.
      5.   The termination date of the agreement or provisions for termination
upon failure to perform.
      6.   Such other terms as determined by the department and the city
attorney's office which is necessary to satisfy the requirements of this
chapter or other requirements of law.
   B.   Effect; Applicability: The provisions of the development agreement,
upon execution and recording, shall run with the land and shall be binding on
all successors in the ownership of the affected property.
   C.   Effective: The development agreement shall not take effect until the
city council has approved the agreement as a condition of the rezoning of the
affected property.
   D.   Police Power: The development agreement shall not limit the future
exercise of the police power by the city in enacting zoning, subdivision
development and related land use plans, policies, ordinances and regulations
after the date of the agreement.
   E.   Zoning Standards: The development agreement may not waive any existing
minimum zoning standards or restrict the ability of the city council to enact
additional standards in the future.
   F.   Vested Rights: No vested rights shall accrue based on the approval of a
development agreement, except as such rights may specifically be provided in
such development agreement.
   G.   Execution And Ownership:
      1.   The proffered agreement shall be duly executed and acknowledged by
the owner(s) or prospective owner(s), in a manner suitable for recording
purposes.
      2.   If the signatories of the agreement are not the owners of the
affected property, the agreement shall provide that the agreement shall not
take effect until the signatories acquire ownership and demonstrate that they
are the owners for the purpose of binding the owners, their successors and
assigns, to the terms of the agreement.
      3.   The applicant shall submit such documentation as is necessary to
establish ownership and the ability of the signatories to establish conditions
or restrictions which will run with the land and bind the owners, their
successors and assigns.
(Ord. 98-33, 5-5-1998; amd. Ord. 2001-32, 6-5-2001, eff. 6-30-2001)
15-29-8: AMENDMENT TO DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT:
   A.   Any substantive amendment to the terms and conditions of the
development agreement shall be applied for, reviewed and approved following the
same procedures as required for the initial approval of the conditional overlay
zone, including all notice and hearing requirements. "Substantive amendments"
include any change to the approved use restrictions, required site development
standards, or an approved concept plan. Amendments that do not propose
substantive changes to the terms and conditions of the development agreement
may be approved by the city council without notice and hearing.
   B.   Once executed and recorded, the development agreement may only be
terminated as to any portion of the property subject to the conditional overlay
zone by ordinance of the city council after following all procedures required
for the rezoning of such property.
(Ord. 98-33, 5-5-1998; amd. Ord. 2007-75, 11-13-2007)
CHAPTER 30
PLANNED COMMERCIAL RECREATION ZONE PCR
SECTION:
15-30-1: Purpose And Intent
15-30-2: Permitted Uses
15-30-3: Conditional Uses
15-30-4: Special Provisions
15-30-5: Minimum Site Development Standards
15-30-6: General Regulations
15-30-7: Review And Approval Process
15-30-8: Building Permit Issuance
15-30-9: Time Limitation
15-30-10: Enforcement
15-30-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   The intent of the Planned Commercial Recreation Zone is to permit the
establishment of a well designed complex of recreation and entertainment
businesses, to meet the recreation and entertainment needs of the City or
region, and which will best fit the general environment and land use pattern of
the area to be served.
   B.   Further, it is the intent of this Zone to encourage multi- purpose
centers of unified design and site layout, in order to avoid hodge-podge or
strip commercial recreation developments, particularly when located in or near
residential neighborhoods.
   C.   Even though the Zone is commercial in concept, it is distinctly limited
commercial and shall be limited, primarily, to uses which, by their nature, do
not ordinarily compete for space in the Central Business District. It is
recognized, however, that a certain amount of support activities such as
restaurants and snack bars may be appropriate and even necessary for the
success of these centers.
(Ord. 84-4, 1-26-1984; amd. 1999 Code)
15-30-2: PERMITTED USES:
   A.   Aquarium.
   B.   Art gallery.
   C.   Athletic clubs and spas.
   D.   Ice cream parlor.
   E.   Ice skating rink.
   F.   Movie theater, indoor.
   G.   Nature exhibit.
   H.   Parks and playground.
   I.   Restaurant.
   J.   Swimming pools, indoor.
   K.   Tennis court.
(Ord. 84-4, 1-26-1984)
15-30-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following uses shall be permitted only when authorized by a conditional use
permit as provided in Chapter 7 of this Title. Any unique conditions of
approval listed with each use are in addition to the general development
standards for this Zone, and in addition to the general standards for
compatibility listed in Chapter 7 of this Title:
   A.   Drive-in restaurant.
   B.   Waterslide, indoor.
   C.   Bowling alley.
   D.   Miniature golf; provided, that all outdoor lighting shall be controlled
so as not to reflect on any property beyond the site and that no amplifiers or
loud speakers be installed outside any buildings.
   E.   Waterslide, outdoor, provided slide is oriented away from adjacent
properties, one hundred feet (100') from nearest residential property line,
with minimum six foot (6') screening fence, that all outdoor lighting be
controlled so as not to reflect on any area beyond the property and that no
amplifiers or loud speakers be installed outside any building.
   F.   Golf driving range; range should be designed to allow drives up to
three hundred fifty (350) yards; range should be placed so that flying balls
will be diverted toward the interior of the site; that the driving tees be
located no closer than one hundred feet (100') to any boundary of the site.
   G.   Arcade, provided it is not within six hundred feet (600') of any public
elementary or secondary school, nor within six hundred feet (600') of another
arcade in the same center.
   H.   Swimming pool, outdoor, provided the pool is located not less than
fifty feet (50') from any residential property line; and is enclosed by a fence
or wall not less than six feet (6') in height; and provided that any lights
used to illuminate said pool or its accessories shall be controlled so as not
to reflect on any area beyond the property, and that no amplifiers or loud
speakers be installed outside any building except as necessary for safety and
control.
   I.   Roller skating rink.
(Ord. 84-4, 1-26-1984; amd. Ord. 84-15, 5-31-1984)
15-30-4: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Parking: Off-street parking and loading facilities shall not occupy any
required front yard area.
   B.   Loading Areas: All loading areas are to be screened from view from
adjoining roads on adjacent properties.
   C.   Storage: All storage shall be in an enclosed building.
   D.   Utility Lines: All utility lines, connections and installations must be
underground and rise within the building. Transformers, meters and similar
apparatus must be at ground level or below, with approved screening for ground
level installations. Special exceptions will be made for major power lines
serving the needs of the larger region.
   E.   Objectionable Conditions: All uses shall be free from objectional or
excessive odor, dust, smoke, noise, glare, radiation or vibrations.
(Ord. 84-4, 1-26-1984)
15-30-5: MINIMUM SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
(Note: By minimum standards, the actual requirements may vary upward as an
individual site demands. As part of the site plan review process, the Planning
Commission or Mayor may impose requirements beyond the minimum here listed if
they find it necessary in order to integrate the use into its environment.)
   A.   Minimum Area: The minimum area for a Planned Commercial Recreation Zone
is five (5) acres.
   B.   Minimum Lot Width: Minimum lot width, two hundred feet (200').
   C.   Minimum Yard Setbacks:
      1.   Front, twenty feet (20'); if property fronts more than one dedicated
street, a twenty foot (20') setback is required on all street frontages.
      2.   Side, twenty feet (20'); except forty feet (40') when adjacent to a
residential property or when individual requirements for specific uses mandate
larger setbacks. (See conditional uses, Chapter of this Title.)
      3.   Rear, twenty feet (20'); except forty feet (40') when abutting a
residential property, or greater setbacks when individual conditional uses
require it. (See conditional uses, Chapter 7 of this Title.)
   D.   Building Height:
      1.   Minimum, one story.
      2.   Maximum, three (3) stories or forty feet (40').
   E.   Minimum Landscaping: Ten percent (10%) of the site shall be landscaped
and shall meet the following: all portions of the required front yard except
the pedestrian walks and necessary vehicular driveways shall be landscaped and
provided with adequate sprinkling or irrigation systems. Street trees shall be
provided. Any parking visible from the street or adjoining residential property
shall be screened with an appropriate planting screen or decorative wall. All
landscaped areas required or shown on the approved plan shall be properly
maintained at all times. The planning commission may recommend a reasonable
amount to be provided by the developer by cash deposit to ensure the completion
of landscaping 1 .
   F.   Off-Street Parking: The number of parking spaces provided shall comply
with the requirements listed in chapter 12 of this title. For uses not listed
in chapter 12 of this title, the planning commission shall establish an
appropriate number of spaces after hearing the recommendations of the developer
and staff.
   G.   Distance Between Buildings: The distance between main buildings in the
planned commercial recreation zone shall be not less than twenty feet (20').
The minimum distance between any main building and an accessory building shall
be not less than ten feet (10').
   H.   Other Requirements: Other requirements as deemed appropriate by the
planning commission or mayor.
(Ord. 84-4, 1-26-1984; amd. 1999 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  15-13-16 of this title, landscaping required.
15-30-6: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Single Ownership: A development plan in a PCR zone may be approved only
upon land held in single ownership or under unified control.
   B.   Nonconforming Uses: A PCR zone shall not be established upon a tract of
land which would contain a nonconforming use after the passage of such
amendment to the zoning ordinance or map unless the development planned for the
tract includes the elimination of the nonconforming use or its integration into
planned development. No development plan shall be approved after approval of
the PCR zone which does not eliminate the nonconforming use or integrate the
nonconforming use into the development.
   C.   Location: The location of the PCR zone shall have an acceptable
relationship to and further the purposes of the general plan for the city as
determined by the planning commission.
(Ord. 84-4, 1-26-1984; amd. Ord. 91-51, 12-19-1991)
15-30-7: REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCESS:
   A.   Review Process Required: In a PCR zone, a development plan shall be
approved in accordance with the provisions of this chapter prior to the
construction of any new building, the exterior remodeling or alteration of any
existing building, or the alteration of an existing site for parking, fencing
or landscaping. No person or entity shall commence such construction,
remodeling or alteration without submitting development plans to the planning
commission for review.
   B.   Submission Of Plans: The submitted development plan shall show a
unified and organized arrangement of building and structures and their proposed
uses, off-street parking, internal and external traffic circulation, and
service facilities, and schematic architectural drawing, landscaping plans and
sketches demonstrating the design and character of the proposed development.
   C.   Planning Commission Review: The planning commission shall recommend
approval or denial of the development plan to the mayor. The recommendation of
the planning commission may contain conditions, limitations or amendments to
the development plan to ensure that the development meets the purpose, intent
and requirements of this chapter and the ordinances of the city. The planning
commission may also recommend a reasonable amount to be provided by the
developer by cash deposit or bond, to ensure the completion of the landscaping
and public improvements for the entire plan or any phase thereof.
   D.   Mayoral Action: The mayor may approve or disapprove the development
plan, the amount required to ensure completion of the landscaping or public
improvements, together with whatever amendments, conditions or requirements as
the mayor may determine is necessary to secure the purpose and intent of this
chapter.
(Ord. 84-4, 1-26-1984; amd. Ord. 91-51, 12-19-1991)
15-30-8: BUILDING PERMIT ISSUANCE:
The building official shall not issue any permit for the proposed building,
alteration or remodeling unless such building, remodeling or alteration is in
accordance with the approved development plan and any conditions imposed,
including the posting of any deposit or bond required by the mayor or this
code. The final development plan shall show in detail the proposed areas and
locations of building, off-street parking, internal and external traffic
circulation, improvements, signs and service facilities, and landscaping plans.
No changes shall be made in the final development plan pursuant thereto without
first obtaining prior approval. Copies of the approved development plan shall
be filed with the department, engineering division, and building official and
only changes which may be subsequently approved shall be added thereto.
(Ord. 84-4, 1-26-1984; amd. Ord. 91-51, 12-19-1991; 1999 Code; Ord. 2001-32, 6-
5-2001, eff. 6-30-2001)
15-30-9: TIME LIMITATION:
   A.   Building Permit; Construction: A building permit shall be secured and
construction begun in accordance with the approved final development plan
within twelve (12) months from the date of the mayor's approval of the
development plan. Application may be made for not more than six (6) months'
extension of the time limit for commencement of construction. Plan approval
will expire if no building permits are issued within the time limits specified
above.
   B.   Automatic Review Of Zoning: Any rezoning of property to a PCR zone, by
petition, occurring after January 6, 1992, unless waived by the city council at
the time of the rezoning, shall be subject to automatic review of the zoning
classification of the property by the planning commission in the event of the
following occurrences:
      1.   No development plan has been approved within eighteen (18) months
from the effective date of the ordinance establishing the zone; or
      2.   Three (3) years have lapsed since passage of the ordinance
establishing the zone and no approved development plan is currently is effect.
   C.   Change Of Zone Classification: In the event of the above, the planning
commission shall review the classification of the zone and the progress which
has taken place, and if necessary, initiate proceedings to rezone said property
to its prior classification or to a zone consistent with the general plan.
(Ord. 84-4, 1-26-1984; amd. Ord. 91-51, 12-19-1991)
15-30-10: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Violation: All construction and site improvements authorized in the
approved development plan shall be completed in strict compliance with the
plan. Failure to comply with the conditions of the approved site plan shall
constitute a violation of the provisions of this title and shall constitute a
misdemeanor as set forth in section
15-1-11 of this title.
   B.   Nuisance: Any violation of this chapter is a public nuisance and may be
abated by appropriate proceedings.
   C.   Revocation; Appeal: Noncompliance with the conditions of the approved
site development plan shall be sufficient cause for the building official to
withhold or revoke a certificate of occupancy; provided however, that the
holder of the certificate shall first be afforded an opportunity to be heard
before the building official and show cause as to why the permit should not be
revoked. An appeal from the decision of the building official revoking the
certificate may be made, in writing, to the mayor within fifteen (15) days of
the date of the decision.
(Ord. 84-4, 1-26-1984; amd. Ord. 91-51, 12-19-1991)
CHAPTER 31
TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE R-2A
SECTION:
15-31-1: Purpose And Intent
15-31-2: Permitted Uses
15-31-3: Conditional Uses
15-31-4: Site Development Standards
15-31-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of the R-2A Zone classification is to provide areas for moderate
density residential districts incorporating both single-family and two-family
dwelling units in the West Ogden (bordered on the north by the Oregon Short
Line north of 24th Street, to the west by the Oregon Short Line and I-15, to
the south by the Oregon Short Line, and to the east by the Weber River) and the
Jefferson (between 27th and 36th Street and between Washington Boulevard and
Wall Avenue) areas.
(Ord. 84-28, 10-12-1984)
15-31-2: PERMITTED USES:
   A.   Single-family dwellings.
   B.   Two-family dwellings.
   C.   Residential care facility for persons with a disability, in accordance
with Section
15-13-15 of this Title.
   D.   Home occupation.
   E.   Household pets.
   F.   Accessory building and use customarily incidental to any permitted use.
   G.   Parking lot accessory to uses permitted in this Zone.
   H.   Agriculture.
   I.   Residential garage sales or yard sales.
   J.   Residential facilities for elderly persons (see Section
15-13-25 of this Title for facility requirements).
(Ord. 84-28, 10-12-1984; amd. Ord. 93-32, 8-17-1993; 1999 Code; Ord. 2000-2, 1-
4-2000)
15-31-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
   A.   Church, synagogue or similar permanent building used for regular
religious worship.
   B.   Educational institution.
   C.   Greenhouse, noncommercial only.
   D.   Group dwellings, in accordance with Chapter 10 of this Title.
   E.   Privately operated concession or amusement business in a public park.
   F.   Private park, playground or recreation area, but not including
privately owned commercial business.
   G.   Public building, public park, recreation grounds and associated
buildings.
   H.   Public utility substation or water storage reservoir developed by a
public agency.
   I.   Temporary building and use incidental to construction work. Such
building shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of the
construction work.
   J.   Zero lot line dwelling in existing subdivision, in accordance with
Section
15-13-14 of this Title.
   K.   Planned residential unit development (PRUD), in accordance with Chapter
8 of this Title.
(Ord. 84-28, 10-12-1984; amd. Ord. 93-32, 8-17-1993)
15-31-4: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Minimum Lot Area:
      1.   Single-family dwelling, five thousand (5,000) square feet.
      2.   Two-family dwelling or other main building, seven thousand five
hundred (7,500) square feet.
      3.   Zero lot line dwelling with common wall, four thousand (4,000)
square feet.
      4.   Government subsidized housing with minimum forty (40) year contract,
seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet for each building plus three
thousand (3,000) square feet for each dwelling unit in excess of two (2) in
each building.
      5.   Government subsidized elderly and/or handicapped housing with a
minimum forty (40) year contract, seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square
feet for each building plus one thousand (1,000) square feet for each building
in excess of two (2) in each building.
   B.   Minimum Lot Width: Minimum lot width, sixty feet (60'); corner lots,
seventy five feet (75').
   C.   Minimum Yard Setbacks:
      1.   Front: Front, twenty five feet (25'), except average where fifty
percent (50%) frontage is developed, but no less than twenty feet (20'); corner
lots shall have two (2) front yard setbacks.
      2.   Side:
         a.   Main building, six feet (6') with total width of two (2) side
yards of no less than sixteen feet (16') for single-family dwelling or two-
family dwelling, and twenty feet (20') for each side for other main building,
plus an additional three feet (3') on each side yard for each foot dwelling or
other main building is over twenty five feet (25') in height.
         b.   Accessory building, six feet (6') except one foot (1') if located
at least six feet (6') in rear of main building but no closer than six feet
(6') to dwelling on adjacent lot.
      3.   Rear:
         a.   Main building, thirty feet (30').
         b.   Accessory, one foot (1'), except six feet (6') where accessory
building rear on side yard of adjacent corner lot.
   D.   Building Height:
      1.   Minimum, one story.
      2.   Maximum, thirty five feet (35').
   E.   Lot Coverage: No accessory building or group of accessory buildings
shall cover more than twenty five percent (25%) of the rear yard area.
(Ord. 84-28, 10-12-1984; amd. Ord. 88-3, 1-7-1988; Ord. 88-25, 6-16-1988; 1999
Code)
CHAPTER 32
RESERVED
(Ord. 2016-2, 1-12-2016)
CHAPTER 33
PROFESSIONAL/INSTITUTIONAL ZONE PI
SECTION:
15-33-1: Purpose And Intent
15-33-2: Allowed Uses In Each PI Zone
15-33-3: Dimensional Requirements
15-33-4: Landscaping Setbacks And Coverages
15-33-5: Special Regulations
15-33-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The professional and institutional zone (PI) is established to provide
locations beyond the central business district of Ogden City along arterial or
major collector streets that will accommodate offices for professional services
and other related uses. The intent is to establish new development patterns on
the property and not conversions of existing residential homes into office
space. The intent is to create a campus theme that will buffer residential from
more intense traffic impacts at appropriate locations.
(Ord. 2003-15, 4-15-2003)
15-33-2: ALLOWED USES IN EACH PI ZONE:
Of the following list of possible uses, those designated in any district as a
"P" are permitted uses; uses designated as a "C" will be allowed only when
authorized by a conditional use permit obtained as provided in chapter 7 of
this title; uses designated as "N" are not allowed in that district. Uses which
are designated with an asterisk (*) indicate special requirements exist for the
design or location of the use, which requirements can be found in section
15-33-5 of this chapter. Accessory uses to the permitted or conditional uses
are allowed. Uses that are not listed are not allowed.
 
   UsPI
Entertainment and recreational:                                                 
 Cabarets when associated with a drinking establishment.                      N
 Drinking establishment.                                                      C*
  Indoor entertainment business which provides entertainment or activities by
 means of film, performance, or other similar entertainment activities, e.g., N
  theaters, indoor sports, bowling alleys.
 Indoor recreation business that provides athletic, exercise or other similar C
  health related activities for patrons of all ages, e.g., gyms, spas.
  Outdoor entertainment or recreation business which provides activities for
 patrons of all ages by means of film, performance or other recreation        N
  activities, e.g., drive-ins, outdoor sports, go-cart tracks, stadiums.
 Sexually oriented businesses:                                                 
    Adult live entertainment businesses or adult movie theaters.           N
    Outcall services and adult entertainment dancing agencies.             P
Institutional:                                                                  
 Churches or houses of worship.                                               P
 Educational institution, e.g., elementary, middle school, high school.       P
 Post-high school educational institution.                                    P
 Post-high school educational institution with housing.                       P
 Public buildings which are limited to only indoor office use.                P
 Public facilities or private nonprofit facilities which provide correctional N
  services, e.g., jails, halfway houses, rehabilitation housing.
Manufacturing:                                                                  
 Establishment engaged in the assembly, processing or any type of             N
  manufacturing use.
Residential:                                                                    
 Group dwelling.                                                              C*
 Nursing home, assisted living facility or retirement homes.                  C*
 Single-family dwelling unit, detached.                                       N/
                                                                               P*
 Single-family, two-family or multiple-family dwellings provided they are     P
  located on the floors above professional and business offices.
 Two-family dwelling units, detached.                                         N/
                                                                               P*
Sales:                                                                          
  A retail sales establishment located in a limited portion of an enclosed
  building where a service use is the primary purpose of such building and the
 retail sales is to provide accessory services for the convenience of the     C*
  other occupants of the building and not directed to the general public,
  although service to the general public is not prohibited, e.g., retail
  sales, restaurants, drinking establishment, flower shops, gift shops.
    Flower shops, gift shops, or restaurants located inside a portion of a P*
  hospital approved as a conditional use.
  An establishment located in an enclosed building engaged in the selling of
 goods or merchandise to the general public, for personal business or         N
  household use.
 Prescription pharmacies.                                                     P*
 Retail sales establishment.                                                  N
Services:                                                                       
  A business located in an enclosed building engaged in providing financial
 services directly to individuals, business or agencies, e.g., banks,         P
  consumer credit services.
  An establishment in an enclosed building with or without an outside area for
 activity which provides less than 24 hour a day care for children or adults, P
  e.g., daycare, nursery, adult daycare.
  An establishment located in an enclosed building, which provides personal,
 professional and public services, e.g., barbershop, architects, doctors,     P
  real estate, etc.
 Fraternal and beneficial societies, order and social clubs of a nonprofit    C
  nature.
 Hospital.                                                                    C
 Indoor studio for the creation or teaching of the fine arts, e.g., dance     P*
  studios, art studios.
 Wedding chapels.                                                             C
Transportation, utilities, communication uses:                                  
 Freestanding communication tower.                                            N
 Hospital owned off site parking facility, constructed prior to March 15,     P
  2006, with more than 1 level for hospital campus.
 Public utility substation.                                                   C
 
(Ord. 2016-51, 9-20-2016; amd. Ord. 2020-24, 6-23-2020)
15-33-3: DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
The following dimensional and design requirements shall apply in each PI zone
to building and parking setbacks:
 
                      1 acre developed as 1 lot (except properties zoned or
Minimum lot area      combined with properties zoned PI prior to April 15,
                      2003, may be developed with a minimum 1/2 acre of lot
                      area).
Minimum lot width     100 feet.
                      Building: 15 feet.
                      Parking located to the side of building: 20 feet.
                      Parking located in front of building: 30 feet.
Front yard setbacks   Where development of such parking may be difficult
                      because of topographical features or in order to provide
                      more buffering of adjacent residential uses, the planning
                      commission may reduce a portion of the front yard
                      setback, to a minimum of 20 feet.
                      Lots less than 10 acres:
                      Building: 20 feet.
                      Surface parking: 8 feet.
                      Public utility substation: 20 feet for equipment or
                      aboveground poles. The planning commission may reduce the
                      setback to a minimum of 8 feet if it can be determined
Side yard setbacks    that there would be no impact on adjoining residences.
                       
                      Lots 10 acres or greater:
                      Building: 20 feet plus an additional 2 feet on each side
                      yard for each additional foot in height the building or
                      structure is over 35 feet in height.
                      Surface parking: 8 feet.
                      Lots less than 10 acres:
                      Main building: 25 feet.
                      Parking and accessory structures up to 1 story: 8 feet.
                      Accessory structures taller than 1 story: 25 feet.
                       
Rear yard regulations Lots 10 acres or greater:
                      Main building: 25 feet plus an additional 2 feet for each
                      additional foot in height the building is over 35 feet in
                      height.
                      Accessory building 1 story or less: 8 feet.
                      Accessory building greater than 1 story: 25 feet.
                      Lots less than 10 acres: Maximum 35 feet or 3 stories for
Building height       main building or structure.
                       
                      Lots 10 acres or greater: None.
Lot coverage          The aggregate area of all enclosed buildings shall not
                      exceed 50 percent of the entire lot.
Open area             30 percent of the lot shall be left in open green space.
 
(Ord. 2003-15, 4-15-2003; amd. Ord. 2008-32, 6-24-2008)
15-33-4: LANDSCAPING SETBACKS AND COVERAGES:
Notwithstanding the required landscaping for those setbacks and area
requirements which are specified in the table above, there may be additional
landscaping required based on other provisions of this title. Additional
requirements include, but are not limited to, installation of landscaping in
public right of way (subsection
15-4-5E3a of this title), preserving existing trees (subsections
15-4-5E7a and E7b of this title), setbacks when next to residential zones
(subsection
15-4-5F of this title), screening of service and storage areas (subsection
15-4-5G of this title) and parking lot landscaping (subsections
15-12-9B and C of this title).
(Ord. 2003-15, 4-15-2003)
15-33-5: SPECIAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   General Regulations: In addition to any other requirements of this
code, development in the PI zone shall also be subject to the following
standards:
      1.   Building Materials: Any building erected on the property shall have
an exterior wall finish of brick, stone, stucco, or other stucco appearing
material. If the roof is pitched, then shakes, architectural shingles or
roofing tiles shall be used but under no circumstance shall metal be used.
      2.   Minimum Design Details: The buildings in the development shall be
designed to provide architectural relief that creates variety, interest and
unity in the theme of the development. This may be achieved with various
combinations of the following methods: windows along the front of the building,
awnings, varying roof planes, covered entryways, colonnades, quoins, etc.
Conversions of single-family homes into any of the other permitted or
unconditional uses shall not be allowed, except conversions for wedding chapels
or daycare centers are allowed if the entire project takes on a residential
style theme that ties the existing architecture to the other buildings in the
development.
      3.   Colors: The colors used throughout the development shall add to the
theme of the project and shall not bring undue attention to the development as
compared to existing development in the area.
      4.   Shared Accessways And Parking: All development with multiple
buildings are to have a shared access from the public street and shared on site
parking. The shared parking is to be designed to create a unified circulation
system.
      5.   Signage: Only one freestanding sign is allowed per lot and shall be
a freestanding monument sign to identify the project. The freestanding monument
sign shall not be taller than eight feet (8'), shall be set back ten feet (10')
from the property line abutting a public street and shall not exceed fifty (50)
square feet in size. If the monument sign is located near an accessway to the
development it shall not be located within a thirty foot (30') sight triangle
distance which will be measured from the curb. The monument sign shall be
constructed out of the predominant material of the development and tie in with
the theme of the development.
      6.   Separate Parcels Combined Into One Lot: All separate parcels or lots
in the development are to be combined into one lot. A development in a PI zone
shall be maintained as one lot, except that building pads may be subdivided as
units or lots, to be held in separate ownership, pursuant to a condominium
project or a planned residential unit development subdivision.
      7.   Utility Line Connections And Installations: All utility line
connections and installations must be underground and rise within the building.
Transformers, meters and similar apparatus must be at ground level or below
with approved screening for ground level installation. Screening at ground
level shall consist of plant material or architectural materials used in the
development.
      8.   Outside Storage Is Not Permitted: All storage must be in an enclosed
building.
   B.   Prescription Pharmacies: Prescription pharmacies are allowed only in a
portion of a hospital or medical office complex. This use cannot occupy more
than fifteen percent (15%) of the total floor area of the building in which it
is located and shall not have a separate exterior entrance.
   C.   Studio For Professional Work: Studios used for the creation or teaching
of the fine arts are allowed to have performances and exhibitions as long as
the work is limited to the display of the works produced in the studio.
   D.   Single-Family And Two-Family Detached Dwellings: Only existing single-
family and two-family detached dwellings legally established prior to April 15,
2003, are allowed to continue as a permitted use. No new single-family dwelling
and two-family dwelling shall be allowed to be constructed in the PI zone,
except as otherwise specifically allowed in section
15-33-2 of this chapter.
   E.   Retail Sales As Accessory Services: Sales uses that provide accessory
services for the other occupants in a building may only be allowed if the
cumulative retail uses do not occupy more than twenty five percent (25%) of the
total building floor area. The building is to have no exterior evidence of such
retail uses except for the use of an identification sign.
   F.   Group Dwelling: Group dwelling development in the PI zone shall conform
to the requirements of chapter 10 of this title. If uses other than a group
dwelling are being included with a group dwelling in the same development, the
portions of the development applicable to group dwellings and all other uses,
respectively, shall be reviewed independently for compliance with development
standards.
   G.   Nursing Homes, Assisted Living Facilities Or Retirement Homes: The
amount of lot area needed for this type of facility is seven thousand (7,000)
square feet, plus five hundred (500) square feet for each bedroom space in
excess of four (4). This square footage shall be devoted exclusively to this
use and its associated open space and no other PI use can use this space.
Assisted living facilities are subject to the separation requirements imposed
in subsection
15-13-26C of this title.
   H.   Drinking Establishment: A drinking establishment may be allowed as
retail sales established as an accessory use.
   I.   Removal Of Structure: A structure is required to be removed from an
existing PI zoned property to develop a permitted PI use with a minimum of one-
half (1/2) acre lot size according to section
15-33-3 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2015-58, 12-1-2015; amd. Ord. 2020-24, 6-23-2020)
CHAPTER 34
CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT ZONE CBD
SECTION:
15-34-1: Purposes
15-34-2: Uses
15-34-3: Site Development Standards
15-34-4: Parking And Loading
15-34-5: Demolition Of Existing Buildings
15-34-6: 25th Street Historic District; Standards And Guidelines
15-34-7: Design Guidelines; Purpose And Intent
15-34-8: Review And Approval Process
15-34-1: PURPOSES:
   A.   To recognize the existence of areas with unique development needs or
opportunities requiring special development standards;
   B.   To foster orderly growth and redevelopment of the CBD;
   C.   To provide for a mixture of land uses in the CBD;
   D.   To promote a CBD which attracts and supports a vigorous business
community;
   E.   To promote a human scale streetscape which is inviting to pedestrians,
to promote quality landscape and open space development; and
   F.   To promote architectural compatibility and protect important
architectural qualities.
(Ord. 89-28, 11-9-1989)
15-34-2: USES:
In the following list of possible uses, those designated in any district as "P"
will be a permitted use. Uses designated as "C" will be allowed only when
authorized by a conditional use permit obtained as provided in chapter 7 of
this title. Uses designated as "N" will not be allowed in that district.
 
   Intensive District CBD
A.  Sales:                                                                   
   A sales establishment classified as   N                                  N
    retail tobacco specialty business.
    A sales establishment classified as
   sexually oriented business (see       N                                  N
    section 15-13-13 of this title for
    applicable conditions), including:
     Adult bookstores or adult video                                       
       stores.
    A sales establishment classified as a
   medical cannabis pharmacy, with the   P                                  P
    following conditions:
       Unless waived by the Utah
       Department of Health, the medical
       cannabis pharmacy shall be located
       no closer than 600 feet from any
       primarily residential zone and 200
   1. feet from any community location,                                     
       measured from the nearest entrance
       to the pharmacy following the
       shortest route of ordinary
       pedestrian travel to the boundary
       of the community location or
       residential zone.
       Only one public access is
   2. permitted which shall be located                                      
       on the street face of the
       building.
       No portion of the exterior brick
   3. visible to the public shall be                                        
       painted.
       No windows shall be darkened or
   4. covered to prohibit view into the                                     
       interior of the sales space from
       the street.
   5. Hours of operation are from 8:00                                      
       A.M. to 8:00 P.M.
    A sales establishment with no drive-
    up window or pick up window doing
    business in an enclosed permanent
    structure engaged in selling goods or
    merchandise to the general public for
   personal, household, or business use                                     
    (excluding retail tobacco specialty
    business) and rendering services
    incidental to the sale of such goods,
    e.g., grocery, clothing, supplies,
    office products, jewelry, toys, home
    furnishings.
   1. With no on site outdoor display.   P                                  P
       With accessory outdoor on site
   2. display of plants and assembled    P                                  P
       outdoor yard furnishingsprovided
       display area:
       a. Is maintained in a clean and
     litter free condition, with no                                        
       broken merchandise;
       b. Does not occupy or obstruct
     required parking, pedestrian and                                      
       vehicle accessways, or public
       right of way;
       c. Is located behind the main
     building and is accessed by                                           
       customers through the building;
       and
       d. Is not larger in square footage
     footprint than the associated main                                    
       building.
       Reuse of service station or
       convenience store for sales of
   3. products with an outdoor on site                                     NC
       display of plants and unpacked and
       assembled outdoor yard furnishings
       or amenities provided:
                                       (1) Display is located only on an   
                                          improved landscaped area;
                                       (2) Display is in scale with        
                                          surrounding uses;
                                          (3) Outdoor display area cannot
                                       exceed the square footage of the    
                                          ground level of the main building.
   4. Outdoor tire displays.                                               NN
    An establishment engaged in preparing, serving and selling food and
   drink for human consumption on or off premises; provided that the        PP
    establishment has no drive-up window or pick up window, e.g.,
    restaurants, cafes, etc.
    Mobile food truck, except that operation is not allowed in The Junction
   (the area from the west side of Washington to the east side of Grant and PP
    from the south side of 22nd to the north side of 24th), or the 25th
    Street historic district.
    Restaurant with cabaret: In addition to the requirements of the
    conditional use process, the planning commission shall consider the
   potential effects of the type of proposed cabaret operations on adjacent CC
    uses, including, but not limited to, any residential dwellings in the
    vicinity, considering hours of operation, noise, parking and traffic
    conflicts, and possible activities of patrons on and around the site.
   Sales establishments engaging in the sale of building materials as a     CC
    principal use within a completely enclosed building.
    Sales establishments which engage in
   the sale of motorized vehicles, e.g., N                                  P
    automobile sales, boat sales,
    motorcycle sales.
    Sales establishments which engage
    mainly in selling alcoholic
    beverages, e.g., drinking
   establishment, liquor stores. In      C                                  C
    addition to the requirements of the
    conditional use process, the
    following conditions shall apply to
    drinking establishment:
       Maximum Number: No more than 2
   1. drinking establishment per linear                                     
       block;
       Parking: Parking shall be
       conveniently located to the
   2. entrance of the building. In                                          
       determining conveniently located
       parking, the planning commission
       shall consider:
     a. The visibility of the parking                                      
       area from the building;
       b. The lighting, existing physical
       development, and types of uses
     adjacent to the parking lot and                                       
       between the parking lot and
       drinking establishment;
       c. The potential for parking
     conflicts with the parking lots of                                    
       adjacent uses;
       d. The potential for customer
     usage of on street parking in                                         
       front of residential uses.
       Operational Hours: Operational
   3. hours shall be considered to                                          
       assure compatibility with the
       surrounding uses.
       Drinking Establishment: In
       addition to the requirements
       applicable generally to drinking
       establishment, the planning
       commission shall consider the
       potential effects of cabaret
   4. operations on adjacent uses,                                          
       including, but not limited to, any
       residential dwellings in the
       vicinity, considering hours of
       operation, noise, parking and
       traffic conflicts, and possible
       activities of patrons on and
       around the site.
    Sales establishments which utilize
   outdoor storage of materials, e.g.,   N                                  N
    lumber, plumbing and heating
    supplies, garden supplies.
   Seasonal sale of produce subject to   P                                  P
    the following:
       Although listed as a permitted
       use, seasonal sale of produce will
       be allowed only within the area
   1. described as being between the                                        
       2300 and 2700 blocks of Wall
       Avenue, and the 100 and 200 blocks
       of 25th Street;
       All stands or trucks and displayed
   2. produce must be located on private                                    
       property;
       Such stands or displays shall be
   3. set back at least 20 feet from                                        
       adjoining street right of way
       lines;
       Off street parking must be
   4. available on site or within 500                                       
       feet of the site;
   5. No portable, flashing, or banner                                      
       signs shall be permitted; and
       Such use shall either locate in a
       temporary building under 400
   6. square feet for a period not to                                       
       exceed 6 months in 1 calendar
       year, or in a permanent building
       year round.
    Seasonal sales in conjunction with a
   holiday market subject to the         P                                  N
    following:
   1. Shall be located only in the Union                                    
       Station plaza area;
   2. Shall be for crafts, food and                                         
       beverages;
       Shall be allowed from the day
   3. after Thanksgiving through the                                        
       month of December;
   4. Structures shall be a unified                                         
       design.
    Seasonal sales of Christmas trees and
   fireworks. Temporary buildings        N                                  P
    incidental to sales of these items
    permitted only for length of sales.
   Service station, drive-in restaurant, N                                  N
    gas pumps, convenience stores.
    Sidewalk vendor: Sales conducted as a
    sidewalk vendor only in such
   locations set forth in the approved   P                                  P
    vendor location map referenced in
    title 5, chapter 13, article B of
    this code.
    Swap meet, provided all displays,
   sales and storage are contained       N                                  C
    within an enclosed building.
B.  Services:                                                                
    Service businesses located in a
    permanent building which provide
    health and grooming services to
    household pets, but not boarding,
   provided business is conducted        P                                  P
    completely within an enclosed
    building and keeping of pets is
    limited to hours between 7:00 A.M.
    and 7:00 P.M., e.g., veterinary, pet
    grooming.
    Service businesses located in a
    permanent building which provide
    storage for individuals or
    businesses, provided such storage is
    located on floors above the main
   ground floor level, the entire ground N                                  P
    floor level, except for necessary
    loading elevators, is used for retail
    or office use, and the building is
    not on Washington Boulevard, e.g.,
    warehousing, personal storage units,
    refrigerated storage.
    Service businesses located within a
    permanent building, and requiring
   outside storage on site, e.g.,        N                                  N
    general contractors, roofing,
    plumbing, heating contractors.
    Service businesses located within a
    permanent building primarily engaged
    in providing rental of equipment for
    individuals, businesses, or agencies
   with outdoor display of equipment for N                                  P
    rent, e.g., equipment rental
    business, trailer rental, car and
    truck rental. Outdoor storage of
    items to be repaired and repair areas
    shall be screened from public view.
    Service businesses located within a
    permanent building primarily engaged
    in providing services for
    individuals, businesses, or agencies.
    Personal, professional, retail,
    financial, and business services, but
   not including short term loan         P                                  P
    businesses, e.g., beauty and barber
    shops, laundry, dry cleaning, funeral
    homes, architects, doctors, hotels,
    banking, insurance, real estate,
    advertising, employment agencies,
    daycare.
    Service businesses primarily engaged
    in automotive repair services,
    provided work is done completely
   within an enclosed building, e.g.,    N                                  P
    brake, muffler, painting, bodywork,
    transmission, washing. Outdoor
    storage of vehicles shall be screened
    from public view.
   Short term loan businesses.           N                                  N
C.  Institutional:                                                           
   Educational/post-high school          P                                  P
    educational institution with housing
   Halfway houses, prisons.              N                                  N
    Institutional uses which are public,
    religious or educational and used for
   instruction, education or worship,    P                                  P
    e.g., daycare, schools, libraries,
    government buildings, courts, plazas,
    churches.
   Jails.                                C                                  C
   Post-high school educational          P                                  P
    institution
   Soup kitchens, shelters for the       N                                  N
    homeless, missions.
   Transitional housing, assisted living N                                  C
    facilities.
D.  Residential:                                                             
    1 or more dwelling units, provided
    they are located above first floor
   commercial uses and 1 additional on   P                                  P
    site parking space is provided for
    each unit.
    3 or more dwelling units used for the
   purpose of providing living quarters  P                                  P
    for families, e.g., apartments,
    condominiums, retirement homes.
   Lodging houses, boarding houses,      N                                  N
    single room occupancies.
   Single- or two-family dwelling units  N                                  N
    only.
E.  Cultural, entertainment and                                              
    recreation:
    Activities which require the use of
    motorized vehicles or which are
   conducted outside a building such as  N                                  N
    miniature golf, driving ranges,
    batting cages, go-carts, racetracks.
    Cabarets (see main use categories
   applicable to restaurants, or                                            
    drinking establishments).
    Cultural, entertainment and
    recreation uses and businesses which
    provide as a main use activities for
    patrons by means of performance,
   film, or action, e.g., movie          P                                  P
    theaters, live theater, dance halls,
    sporting events, but not including
    sexually oriented businesses or
    cabarets. Arcades are permitted under
    the following conditions:
       That no arcade be located within
       600 feet of any public elementary
   1. or secondary school, measured                                         
       linearly between closest property
       lines.
       That no 2 arcades shall be closer
   2. than 600 feet apart, measured                                         
       linearly between closest property
       lines.
   Indoor or outdoor public events or    P                                  P
    civic activities.
    Sexually oriented businesses (see
   section                                                                  
    15-13-13 of this title for applicable
    conditions).
     Adult businesses and adult live    N                                  N
       entertainment businesses.
     Outcall services and adult         P                                  P
       entertainment dancing agencies.
   Spook alleys, haunted houses.         N                                  N
F.  Transportation, utilities,                                               
    communications:
    Businesses and/or land uses which are
    primarily engaged in furnishing land
   for uses incidental to                C                                  P
    transportation, e.g., parking lots,
    parking terraces, bus terminals.
    Utility and communication uses which
    are primarily engaged in furnishing
   the delivery of utility or            C                                  C
    communication services, e.g.,
    substations, relay towers.
G.  Manufacturing:                                                           
    Manufacturing establishments solely
    engaged in the assembly of already
    processed materials or the substances
    into new products, provided the
    activity is conducted and all
    materials are stored within a
    completely enclosed building.
   Manufacturing in this chapter is      N                                  C
    limited only to food products for
    human consumption, clothing,
    textiles, printing, and publishing,
    and plastic consumer products, e.g.,
    bakery, beverage, dairy products,
    apparel, textiles, newspaper
    publishing, book publishing, toys,
    cases, helmets.
    Manufacturing of food products for
    human consumption as an accessory use
    to an allowed sales use; provided,
    that not more than 15 percent of the
   floor area is used for the            C                                  C
    manufacturing process, the street
    frontage is used for permitted sales
    uses, and no deliveries of the
    produced product by delivery truck
    are allowed.
    Manufacturing which involves the
    processing, collecting or storage of
  raw materials or scrap, e.g.,         N                                  N
    junkyard, metal salvage, metal
    collection.
    Manufacturing which involves the
    processing or collecting of raw
   materials, animals, or animal         N                                  N
    byproducts or plants, e.g., meat
    packaging, poultry processing, grain
    and cereal mills, pharmaceuticals.
   Cannabis production establishment     N                                  N
H.  Temporary buildings:                                                     
    Temporary buildings for uses
    incidental to construction work. Such
   buildings shall be removed upon       P                                  P
    completion or abandonment of
    construction work.
 
(Ord. 2015-13, 4-7-2015; amd. Ord. 2015-47, 10-20-2015; Ord. 2019-46, 10-22-
2019; Ord. 2019-52, 11-19-19; Ord. 2020-24, 6-23-2020)
15-34-3: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Commercial Uses And Residential Uses Located In Above First Floor
Commercial Establishments:
 
         Intensive     25th Street
Standard District  CBD Historical
                       District1
1. Area,
Width And
Coverage:
Minimum lot   None          None                                      None
area, lot
width,
coverage.
2. Yard
Setbacks:
 a. Front and               Either 10' or 0' setback for up to 50
 side facing                percent of the lot frontage, provided
 street main                that the remaining front setback be
 building and               developed as a plaza equal in area to
 accessory    None          that defined by the 10' setback (lot      None
 building                   width by 10').
 excluding                  [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
 parking                    8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
 structure or               IMAGES/0-0-0-4313.png]
 parking lot.
 Parking
 structure    15'           15'                                       15'
 and parking
 lot.
              None, except
              10' adjacent  None, except 10' adjacent to residential
 b. Side:     to            zone boundary                             None
              residential
              zone boundary
              None, except
              10' adjacent  None, except 10' adjacent to residential
 c. Rear:     to            zone boundary                             None
              residential
              zone boundary
3. Building
Height:
 a. Minimum:  1 story       1 story                                   2 stories
 b. Maximum:  None          None                                      55'
 
   Note:
      1.    As designated on the Ogden City register of historic resources.
      4.   Landscaping: The public right of way shall be landscaped to conform
to the streetscape plan. In addition, a minimum of ten percent (10%) of the
entire site shall be landscaped. The planning commission may revise the
landscaping plan even if the ten percent (10%) minimum requirement is met, to
ensure the landscaping purposes stated below are substantively met.
         a.   Purposes Of Minimum Landscaping Requirements:
            (1)   To promote an environment which creates interest and a human
scale environment for the pedestrian;
            (2)   To create a diverse yet complementary landscaping theme for
the central business district; and
            (3)   To promote a central business district which attracts and
supports a vigorous business community.
         b.   Location: The majority of the landscaping shall be located along
the street frontage and be visible to public view.
         c.   Materials: On site landscaping shall consist of living plant
materials (e.g., lawn, ground cover, annual and perennial flowering plants,
vines, shrubs and trees) planted directly on the property and kept free from
all hard surfaces. Use of water (e.g., pools, foundations, falls and streams)
and sculptures are also included as landscape design materials. Paving
materials (e.g., bricks, pavers, flagstones, textured concrete) may be included
upon approval of the planning commission if they create a useful open space,
and color or texture to the design, and create visual interest. Landscaping
rocks, gravel or wood chips may be used, provided such area does not cover more
than ten percent (10%) of the area required to be landscaped. If more than ten
percent (10%) is desired, approval must be given by the planning commission.
All landscaping must substantively conform to the landscaping purposes listed
above.
         d.   Parking Structures And Lots:
            (1)   As a part of, or in addition to, the minimum ten percent
(10%) landscaping, where a parking lot or parking structure fronts on a street,
the required setback shall be landscaped. The landscaped portion of the public
right of way shall preserve adequate sightlines to permit safe ingress and
egress.
            (2)   In parking lots, visual variety should be the aim of
landscaping treatment. Landscaping should be used to break up large expanses of
pavement.
         e.   Reduction Or Waiver Of The Minimum Landscaping Requirement: The
planning commission may reduce or waive the required minimum landscaping
requirement only when they determine the following conditions are met:
            (1)   Existing Building: The entire site or a portion of the site
is occupied by the building and/or required parking.
            (2)   New Construction: The planning commission may reduce the
required landscaping if doing so substantively meets the objectives of
landscaping listed above; and
            (3)   Streetscape Plan: The public right of way is landscaped in
such a manner that it substantively conforms to the streetscape plan.
      5.   Reduction Or Waiver Of The Setback Requirement For Parking
Structures And Lots: Because of the historic development patterns which have
occasionally resulted in intense land usage, inadequate lot sizes or unusual
lot shapes in the CBD zone, the planning commission may reduce or waive parking
structure and lot setback requirements. The planning commission shall first
consider granting a parking reduction as authorized in subsection 15-34-4B of
this chapter. If a reduction is not granted, or, if a reduction is granted yet
it still does not permit the efficient design of a parking structure, the
planning commission may consider a reduction or waiver of the required setback,
if the following conditions are met:
         a.   The reduction or waiver substantially meets the purposes of this
chapter, as listed in section
15-34-1 of this chapter;
         b.   The parcel has unusual site characteristics which create
substantial problems for the design of efficient parking;
         c.   It is impossible to provide the required number of parking spaces
while maintaining the setback provision found in subsection A2 of this section;
and
         d.   At each entrance and exit to the structure, a minimum fifteen
foot (15') sight triangle shall be maintained from the wall of the structure to
the inside edge of the sidewalk, in order to permit ingress and egress.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4233.png]
 
   B.   Minimum Site Development Standards For Three Or More Dwelling Units
Within The CBD:
      1.   Reserved.
      2.   Minimum Lot Width: Minimum lot width, fifty feet (50'); corner lot,
sixty feet (60').
      3.   Yard Setbacks:
         a.   Front: Zero feet (0') maximum, except the Planning Commission may
permit or require a setback of not more than twenty feet (20') if consistent
with setbacks of neighboring properties and not out of character with the
existing development along the block where the street frontage occurs. At least
fifty percent (50%) of the building frontage shall be built on the approved
setback line.
         b.   Side:
            (1)   Main building: Zero feet (0') maximum, except the Planning
Commission may permit or require a setback based on a finding that the setback
does not impact the character of the street face when considering existing
conditions, design of other buildings on the block, and future planning for the
area. When adjacent to a residential zone, setback shall be no less than ten
feet (10') plus an additional one foot (1') for each two feet (2') of main
building over thirty five feet (35') high.
            (2)   Accessory buildings: Eight feet (8'), except one foot (1') if
located at least six feet (6') from rear or main building, but not closer than
eight feet (8') to dwelling on adjacent lot.
         c.   Side, facing street on corner lot: Zero feet (0') maximum, except
the Planning Commission may permit or require a setback of not more than
fifteen feet (15') if a plaza or open space is thereby provided or if the
setback is consistent with setbacks of neighboring properties and is not out of
character with the existing development along the block where the street
frontage occurs. At least fifty percent (50%) of the building frontage shall be
built on the approved setback line.
         d.   Rear:
            (1)   Main building: None required, except thirty feet (30') when
adjacent to a residential zone.
            (2)   Accessory building: One foot (1'), except six feet (6') where
accessory building rears on side yard of adjacent corner lot.
      4.   Building Height:
         a.   Minimum: One story.
         b.   Maximum: None.
      5.   Lot Coverage: No building or group of buildings with their accessory
buildings shall cover more than sixty percent (60%) of the lot area.
      6.   Open Space: Twenty percent (20%) of the lot area shall be left in
"open green space", as defined in section
15-2-16 of this title.
(Ord. 89-28, 11-9-1989; amd. Ord. 90-13, 3-1-1990; Ord. 90-39, 7-26-1990; Ord.
97-35, 5-27-1997; Ord. 2009-51, 8-4-2009; Ord. 2010-40, 12-7-2010; Ord. 2018-6,
3-13-2018)
15-34-4: PARKING AND LOADING:
   A.   Requirements: Parking and loading requirements shall be in accordance
with the regulations set forth in chapter 12 of this title.
   B.   Parking Reduction: Notwithstanding chapter 12 of this title, the
planning commission may grant a parking reduction for uses which share a
parking lot or structure if it can be established:
      1.   The uses characteristically result in peak accumulations of parked
vehicles at different hours, days, or seasons;
      2.   A reduction in parking will not cause a shortage of parking for the
participating uses or other uses located in the vicinity; and
      3.   A reduction in parking requirements will contribute to the vitality
and overall well being of the central business district.
(Ord. 89-28, 11-9-1989)
15-34-5: DEMOLITION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS:
   A.   Vacant Lot Landscaping: Vacant lot landscaping shall be installed on
any vacant lot with frontage on a public street in the CBD or intensive
districts within one month after completion of a demolition of any main
building, unless:
      1.   The mayor has granted an extension of time due to the season or
inclement weather, or a site plan has been approved for the immediate reuse of
the property.
      2.   The demolition will remove a building or structure which was
originally constructed as a single-family dwelling.
   B.   Demolition Permit Issuance: Prior to obtaining a demolition permit for
the demolition of any main building, the applicant must either receive site
plan approval for the immediate reuse of the lot or submit a vacant lot
landscaping plan in accordance with subsection C of this section. Both
submissions must be accompanied with a cost escrow or performance bond to
assure timely and proper installation of the vacant lot landscaping. This bond
shall be in addition to the bond required under section
16-9-4 of this code, demolition or moving of buildings or structures code. The
bond required under this subsection may be included as part of other required
bonding for installation of landscaping or public improvements as an
alternative method of performance.
   C.   Definition Of Vacant Lot Landscaping: "Vacant lot landscaping" shall
mean installation of public improvements, including streetscape design in
accordance with the general plan, if not already installed or if deteriorated;
sprinkler system or irrigation plan; and ten feet (10') of landscaping along
the frontage of the lot.
   D.   Waiver Of Landscaping Requirements: Where fire or natural disaster has
caused widespread and major damage to properties, and/or where immediate
demolition and clearing of the land is necessary to remove hazardous
conditions, the building official may waive the landscaping requirement and
order immediate demolition.
(Ord. 89-28, 11-9-1989; amd. Ord. 91-51, 12-19-1991; Ord. 92-3, 1-2-1991; 1999
Code; Ord. 2001-32, 6-5-2001)
15-34-6: 25TH STREET HISTORIC DISTRICT; STANDARDS AND GUIDELINES:
   A.   Landmarks Commission Review Required: External alterations or additions
to any structures within the 25th Street historic district must be reviewed by
the Ogden City landmarks commission. These changes include, but are not limited
to, new construction, additions to buildings, signs, awnings, and facade
renovation. The proposed changes will be reviewed on the basis of the standards
and guidelines of the Ogden City landmarks preservation code.
   B.   Additions To Existing Buildings: Existing buildings located in the 25th
Street historic district may not be increased in height through rooftop
additions or the construction of additional stories unless:
      1.   Additional floors were removed in the past and the new construction
is based on physical and pictorial historical documentation establishing that
the new addition is within the limits of size, scale and design of the original
historic construction of the building; or
      2.   The following criteria are met:
         a.   The addition is set back from the front face of the existing
building;
         b.   The addition is not visible from the pedestrian level when viewed
from the front of the building or from the sidewalk directly across the street
from the center of the building where the addition is proposed; and
         c.   The addition is not visible from the pedestrian level of the
sidewalk on the same side of the street as the building where the addition is
proposed from a distance of three hundred feet (300') in either direction from
the building. If a lot on the same side of the street as the building is
vacant, it shall be assumed that a twenty five foot (25') tall building would
be placed in the space to make the analysis of visibility of the addition.
(Ord. 2010-40, 12-7-2010)
15-34-7: DESIGN GUIDELINES; PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of the CBD zone is to promote the orderly growth and redevelopment
of the central business district in a manner harmonious with the themes as
established by the Ogden mall, the 25th Street revitalization and the union
depot restoration. Further, it is the intent of this zone to promote the
aesthetics of quality development in the central business district. This will
be accomplished through increased attention to the landscaping purposes listed
in subsection 15-34-3A4 of this chapter and the use of compatible building
materials and building design which will provide an atmosphere attractive to
downtown shoppers and which will result in a healthy, viable, quality central
business district. Particular attention will be directed at, but not be limited
to, such things as:
   A.   Material Compatibility: Building material compatibility with
surrounding, existing buildings;
   B.   Landscaping: On site and off site landscaping and sidewalk treatment;
   C.   Traffic Circulation: Traffic circulation, both on site and off site;
   D.   Architectural Lines: Building architectural lines and their
relationship to surrounding buildings; and
   E.   Screening: The screening of utility boxes, refuse containers, delivery
bays and loading docks from the public view and adjacent properties.
(Ord. 89-28, 11-9-1989)
15-34-8: REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCESS:
   A.   Activity Initiating The Review Process: Any person, persons, groups,
agencies, partnership or corporations who propose to remodel, alter or
otherwise change the exterior of an existing building, or construct a new
building or alter an existing site for parking or landscaping in the intensive
or CBD zones, must submit development plans to the planning commission for
review.
   B.   Planning Commission Approval: The planning commission shall recommend
approval or denial of the development plan to the mayor. The recommendation of
the planning commission may contain conditions, limitations or amendments to
the development plan to ensure that the development meets the purpose, intent,
and requirements of this chapter. The planning commission may also recommend a
reasonable amount to be provided by the developer by cash deposit or bond, to
ensure the completion of the landscaping and public improvements for the entire
plan or phase thereof.
   C.   Administrative Action: The mayor may approve or disapprove the
development plan, the amount required to ensure completion of the landscaping
together with whatever amendments, conditions, or requirements as it may deem
necessary to secure the purpose of this chapter.
   D.   Development Agreement: After mayoral approval of the site plans and/or
building design, five (5) copies of the final site plans reflecting all
conditions of approval must be submitted to the department. Plans will be
stamped "final" and a development agreement must be signed by the owner and
appropriate city departments. Approved final site plans will be forwarded to
the building official for issuance of building permits.
   E.   Building Permit Issuance: The building official shall not issue any
permit for the proposed building or use within the project unless such building
or use is in accordance with the approved development plan and any conditions
imposed, including the posting of any bond required by the planning commission,
mayor or this code. Approved development plans shall be filed with the
department, engineering division and building official.
(Ord. 89-28, 11-9-1989; amd. Ord. 91-51, 12-19-1991; Ord. 2001-32, 6-5-2001)
CHAPTER 35
TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE - EAST CENTRAL R-2EC
SECTION:
15-35-1: Purpose And Intent
15-35-2: Permitted Uses
15-35-3: Conditional Uses
15-35-4: Site Development Standards
15-35-5: Building Design Standards
15-35-6: Front Yard And Side Yard Facing A Street On A Corner Lot Fencing
Material
15-35-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of the R-2EC zone classification is to accommodate a need for
moderate density residential districts within the East Central Community
(Central Bench national historic district) which reflects its unique historical
development in terms of lot configuration, lot size, building architectural
features, building and fencing materials, building size, and incorporating both
single-family and two-family dwelling units.
(Ord. 2011-4, 1-18-2011)
15-35-2: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any permitted use.
Accessory dwelling unit (see section
15-13-39 of this title for ADU requirements).
Agriculture.
Church, synagogue or similar permanent building used for regular religious
worship.
Cluster subdivision, in accordance with chapter 9 of this title.
Educational institution.
Greenhouse, noncommercial only.
Home occupation.
Household pets.
Pigeon loft for the housing of racing pigeons (only allowed on single-family
residential lots), in accordance with the standards contained in section
15-13-19 of this title.
Public building, public parks, recreation grounds and associated buildings.
Residential facilities for elderly persons (see section
15-13-25 of this title for facility requirements).
Residential facility for persons with a disability (see section
15-13-15 of this title for facility requirements).
Residential garage sales or yard sales.
Residential vacation rental (see section
15-13-38 of this title for requirements).
Single-family dwelling.
Temporary building for use incidental to construction work. Such building shall
be removed upon the completion or abandonment of the construction work.
Two-family dwelling, in accordance with the requirements of section
15-13-27 of this title.
(Ord. 2016-63, 12-20-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)
15-35-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following uses shall be permitted only when authorized by a conditional use
permit as provided in chapter 7 of this title:
Cemetery with customary incidental uses, including, but not limited to,
mortuary, mausoleum, crematory, staff housing, service shops and chapel.
Group dwellings in accordance with chapter 10 of this title.
Infill developments.
Planned residential unit development (PRUD), in accordance with chapter 8 of
this title.
Private park, playground, or recreation area, but not including privately owned
commercial amusement business.
Privately operated concession or amusement business in a public park.
Public school bus terminal, subject to the following:
   A.   School buses are owned and operated by the school district;
   B.   Facility is located in conjunction with school administrative office;
   C.   Accessory maintenance and fuel operations must be specifically applied
for and approved.
Public utility substation or water storage reservoir developed by a public
agency.
(Ord. 2012-10, 2-28-2012)
15-35-4: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Minimum Lot Area:
      1.   Single-family dwelling: Five thousand (5,000) square feet.
      2.   Two-family dwelling or other main building: Ten thousand (10,000)
square feet. For lots subdivided prior to January 18, 2001: Seven thousand five
hundred (7,500) square feet provided that seventy five percent (75%) of the
linear block is developed as duplexes.
      3.   Corner lot: Six thousand (6,000) square feet.
   B.   Lot Width: Minimum lot width: Forty feet (40'); corner lot, sixty feet
(60'); all lots with a maximum width of seventy five feet (75'), except that
the depth of a corner lot may exceed seventy five feet (75').
   C.   Yard Setbacks:
      1.   Front: Front, minimum setback: Twenty feet (20'), except average
where fifty percent (50%) frontage is developed, but not less than fifteen feet
(15'). Maximum setback: Thirty five feet (35').
      2.   Side:
         a.   Main building:
            (1)   Minimum setback: Five feet (5'), with a total width of two
(2) side yards of not less than fifteen feet (15') for single- family dwelling
or two-family dwelling, and sixteen feet (16') each side for other main
building plus one foot (1') each side for each two feet (2') main building is
over thirty five feet (35') high.
            (2)   Maximum setback for single-family or two-family dwelling: Ten
feet (10') on one side and twenty four feet (24') on the other side.
         b.   Accessory building: Five feet (5'), except one foot (1') if
located at least four feet (4') in rear of main building, but not closer than
six feet (6') to dwelling on adjacent lot.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4235.png]
 
      3.   Corner Lot: Side facing street on corner lot, fifteen feet (15'),
except average where fifty percent (50%) frontage is developed, but not less
than ten feet (10').
      4.   Rear:
         a.   Main building: Thirty feet (30').
         b.   Accessory building: One foot (1'), except eight feet (8') where
accessory building rears on side yard of adjacent corner lot.
   D.   Building Height:
      1.   Minimum: One story.
      2.   Maximum: Two and one-half (21/2) stories or thirty five feet (35').
   E.   Lot Coverage: No accessory building or group of accessory buildings
shall cover more than twenty five percent (25%) of the rear yard area; except
if the only accessory building is a garage, it may exceed the twenty five
percent (25%) coverage provided it is no larger than five hundred twenty eight
(528) square feet.
   F.   Landscaping: For single dwellings, all yard areas are required to be
landscaped and maintained. For new single-family construction the landscaping
shall be installed within eighteen (18) months of the time of the first
occupancy of the dwelling. For duplex requirements see subsection 15-13-16F of
this title.
(Ord. 2011-4, 1-18-2011)
15-35-5: BUILDING DESIGN STANDARDS:
   A.   Dwelling Sizes For Units Constructed After July 31, 2010:
      1.   Minimum Size: For a single-family dwelling or a dwelling unit in a
duplex the minimum square footage (excluding any basement) is one thousand one
hundred (1,100) square feet for a single- story building or, for a two-story
building, eight hundred (800) square feet on the main level with a total
minimum of one thousand three hundred (1,300) square feet for the two (2)
stories.
      2.   Maximum Size: For a single-family dwelling or a dwelling unit in a
duplex the maximum square footage (excluding a basement) is two thousand four
hundred (2,400) square feet for a single-story building or, for a two-story
building, one thousand four hundred (1,400) square feet on the main level and
two thousand eight hundred (2,800) square feet for the total of two (2)
stories. If more than fifty percent (50%) of the same side of the block has
dwellings larger than these maximums for either single-story or two-story
respectively, then the new construction can exceed these maximums but cannot be
larger than the largest home on that block in square footage.
   B.   Exterior Building Materials And Design: In order to protect the
historic integrity established by the existing buildings in this zone, the
building design and exterior finishes of all new dwellings, including new
additions or exterior remodeling of existing buildings or accessory structures
after July 31, 2010, shall comply with the following design requirements and
materials. Covering of existing exterior brick with any other type of material
or paint is prohibited. Properties which are on the local historic register are
subject to the requirements of the local landmarks commission and are exempt
from these standards if a certificate of historic appropriateness grants
approval contrary to these standards.
      1.   Exterior Solid Wall Surface Materials:
         a.   Face brick (maximum brick size 25/8 inches by 95/8 inches);
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4237.png]
 
         b.   Wood lap or tongue and groove wood siding that creates horizontal
lines;
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4239.png]
 
         c.   Hardiplank or similar nonvinyl or nonmetal siding material that
creates a horizontal wood lap appearance; or
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4241.png]
 
         d.   Stucco or stucco appearing material so long as there are breaks
in the wall plane with brick or stone relief areas.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4243.png]
 
         e.   A combination of brick as the base ground level material around
all four (4) sides of the building and stucco appearing material, wood or
hardiplank type materials above the brick; provided that on single-story
buildings the brick extends at a minimum to the bottom of the windowsills and
for two-story structures the brick extends at a minimum to the beginning of the
second story, and the transition between the two (2) types of exterior
materials is defined by a projection of the upper floor beyond the main wall or
a break in the wall surface due to a porch roofline.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4245.png]
 
      2.   Exterior Solid Wall Accent Surface Materials: There are portions of
a wall surface that can be designed as either areas of decoration to a building
or provide a continuity of design depending on the design concept of the
building. Materials used on gable ends of a building, dormers, bay projections,
chimneys, quoins, pillars and other ornamental features have a wider variety of
design patterns and materials and are not limited to materials with horizontal
lines. Materials that are allowable for these features are:
         a.   The same brick, wood, stucco, or hardiplank or similar nonvinyl
or nonmetal siding material that creates a horizontal wood lap appearance used
on the main walls of the building.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4247.png]
 
         b.   Stucco, wood, or synthetic materials that have a wood or stucco
appearance and create a variation of patterns that accent the architectural
feature.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4249.png]
      c.   Brick, stone or synthetic stone in patterns different from the major
wall material.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4251.png]
 
      3.   Windows On Wall Surfaces Facing A Public Street: The minimum amount
of glass for the ground floor level of a dwelling facing the street is fifteen
percent (15%) of the wall surface and, for dwellings on a corner lot, ten
percent (10%) of the wall surface facing the side street. For two-story
dwellings, the minimum amount of glass for the second story is ten percent
(10%) of the wall surface facing the street and, for the second story of a
dwelling on a corner lot, seven and one-half percent (7.5%) of the second story
wall facing the side street.
      4.   Roof Design And Materials: Only roof designs that either are gabled,
gambrel, or hip design are permitted. The minimum roof slope is three to twelve
(3:12) (3 rise to 12 length). The roof exterior surface is limited to asphalt
shingles, wood shake or wood shingle, tile or tile appearing material or
composite materials that have the same visual appearance as the permitted
materials.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4256.png]
 
      5.   Entry Porches: All new single-family dwellings and at least one
dwelling unit in a new duplex are required to have a main entrance facing the
street with a porch and associated roof over that porch. The roof covering over
the porch shall be an extension of the house in design and building materials
and shall have a minimum projection over the front door of four feet (4') and a
maximum of eight feet (8'). The porch shall be a minimum of five feet (5') wide
along the front face of the building and may extend the full length of the
front of the dwelling. It must remain open on two (2) sides (except for insect
see through screens) and cannot have glass or walls taller than forty inches
(40") around the sides that are open. Existing porches, as of July 31, 2010,
that are open on three (3) sides shall not be enclosed on one side but shall
remain open on three (3) sides. New porches which are open on three (3) sides
and designed to follow the architectural lines and the material of the existing
home as provided in these standards can extend the deck, roof and columns or
posts into the required front yard setback a maximum of eight feet (8') and the
eave overhang a maximum of ten feet (10').
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4253.png]
 
 
      6.   Garage Requirement, Design, Exterior Material, Locations And Other
Parking Regulations:
         a.   Any new single-family dwelling or two-family dwelling constructed
after July 31, 2010, is required to include, at a minimum, a one car garage as
part of the construction.
         b.   New attached garages shall have the same exterior wall treatment
as the dwelling to which the garage is attached.
         c.   Detached new or remodeled garages located behind the home on an
interior lot may have either the same exterior wall treatment as the dwelling
or may use one of the solid wall surface materials listed under subsection B1
of this section.
         d.   A garage constructed after July 31, 2010, shall have the same
roof slope as the dwelling, shall use the same material used in the gable ends
of the roof of the dwelling if such roof treatment exists on the dwelling, and
the eave line of the garage roof facing the street shall have the same detail/
ornamentation that is present on the exterior of the dwelling facing the
street. If no ornamentation exists on the dwelling, none is required on the
garage. Roofing material for the garage shall be the same roofing material as
the home.
         e.   A new garage constructed on an interior lot may be freestanding
and set back behind the back line of the home or attached to the rear of the
home with either a side or rear garage door for vehicle entry into the garage.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4258.png]
 
         f.   A garage constructed on a corner lot may be:
            (1)   Freestanding in the rear yard if located a minimum of twenty
feet (20') behind the side line of the home on the side facing a street on a
corner lot and if it can meet the other required yard setbacks. If the garage
cannot meet the required minimum setbacks it may be less than twenty feet (20')
from the side line of the home, but in no case shall it be less than five feet
(5') behind the side line of the home on the side facing a street on a corner
lot (see figure i of this section);
            (2)   Behind the home on the opposite side of the lot from the
street corner and not facing the street (see figure ii of this section); or
            (3)   Attached to the home with an entrance into the garage on the
side of the house facing the street (see figure iii of this section).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4260.png]
 
         g.   Notwithstanding other general regulations, no recreational
vehicle or accessory vehicle parking slab is permitted in the side yard setback
or at the side of a dwelling in this zone and no front yard parking slab is
permitted, even if no parking is available on the site in this zone.
         h.   Driveways leading to legal parking shall be a maximum of twelve
feet (12') in width along the side of the home and then shall flare to a width
necessary to provide access to the garage and the maneuvering room needed to
access the garage, except access from a side street to a garage on a corner lot
may have a maximum width of twenty four feet (24').
   C.   Exceptions:
      1.   Additions, repairs or maintenance of an existing dwelling may vary
from either the exterior wall materials or the roof design and materials
required by subsection B of this section if the building exterior material or
the roof design and materials, as of July 31, 2010, do not meet the material
types or roof shape specified in this section and the addition or repair will
match the existing building in exterior materials and roof shape.
      2.   If the exterior material of an existing dwelling is impossible to
match because the material is no longer available, the exterior wall material
may be any of the allowed exterior materials permitted in this section.
      3.   If an addition is to the rear of a dwelling on an interior lot and
does not face a street, the exterior wall material may be any of the allowed
exterior materials permitted in this section.
(Ord. 2011-67, 12-13-2011)
15-35-6: FRONT YARD AND SIDE YARD FACING A STREET ON A CORNER LOT FENCING
MATERIAL:
Fences in the front yard setback or in the side yard facing a street on a
corner lot are limited to wood, decorative metal, vinyl and plant material that
may form a hedge. Brick or stone may be used as columns in the fence design.
Chainlink fencing is not permitted in the front yard setback or in the side
yard facing a street on a corner lot. All fencing designs other than hedges
shall be open in their design with a minimum spacing between the solid members
of the fence being equal to or greater than the width of the solid members of
the fence. Owners of property with existing chainlink, as of July 31, 2010,
shall not expand the use of chainlink fencing. If a chainlink fence is replaced
it may only be replaced with a fence made with material permitted by this
section.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4262.png]
 
(Ord. 2011-67, 12-13-2011)
CHAPTER 36
MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE - EAST CENTRAL R-3EC
SECTION:
15-36-1: Purpose And Intent
15-36-2: Permitted Uses
15-36-3: Conditional Uses
15-36-4: Site Development Standards
15-36-5: Building Design Standards
15-36-6: Front Yard And Side Yard Facing A Street On A Corner Lot Fencing
Material
15-36-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of the R-3EC zone is to provide residential areas within the East
Central Community (Central Bench national historic district) which reflect its
unique historical development in terms of lot configuration, lot size, building
architectural features, building and fencing materials, and building size. It
will accommodate the development of dwelling type from single-family through
multiple-family units with their associated necessary public services and
activities, and to encourage government subsidized housing for the elderly at
higher densities and in a wider range of residential areas. It is also to
provide an orderly transition from less intensive, lower density uses to more
intensive, higher density uses.
(Ord. 2011-4, 1-18-2011)
15-36-2: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any permitted use.
Accessory dwelling unit (see section
15-13-39 of this title for ADU requirements).
Agriculture.
Boarding and lodging house; provided that no boarding or lodging house shall be
located within one thousand feet (1,000'), measured in a straight line between
the closest property lines of the lots or parcels of any of the following
similar facilities:
   A.   Any other boarding or lodging house,
   B.   A protective housing facility,
   C.   A transitional housing or rehabilitation/treatment facility,
   D.   A residential facility for persons with disability or residential
facility for the elderly of more than five (5) people, or
   E.   An assisted living facility.
Church, synagogue or similar permanent building used for regular religious
worship.
Educational institution.
Greenhouse, noncommercial only.
Group dwelling with eight (8) or less dwelling units in accordance with chapter
10 of this title.
Home occupation.
Household pets.
Library or museum, public or nonprofit.
Multiple-family dwelling with eight (8) or less dwelling units, in accordance
with the requirements of section
15-13-27 of this title.
Pigeon loft for the housing of racing pigeons (only allowed on single-family
residential lots), in accordance with the standards contained in section
15-13-19 of this title.
Public building, public park, recreation grounds and associated buildings.
Rehabilitation/treatment facility (see section
15-13-26 of this title for facility requirements).
Residential facilities for elderly persons (see section
15-13-25 of this title for facility requirements).
Residential facility for persons with a disability (see section
15-13-15 of this title for facility requirements).
Residential garage sales or yard sales.
Residential vacation rental (see section
15-13-38 of this title for requirements).
Retirement home.
Single-family dwelling.
Temporary building for use incidental to construction work. Such building shall
be removed upon the completion or abandonment of the construction work.
Transitional housing facility (see section
15-13-26 of this title for facility requirements).
Two-family dwelling, in accordance with the requirements of section
15-13-27 of this title.
(Ord. 2016-63, 12-20-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)
15-36-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following uses shall be permitted only when authorized by a conditional use
permit as provided in chapter 7 of this title:
Adult daycare.
Assisted living facility (see section
15-13-26 of this title for facility requirements).
Bed and breakfast inn, subject to the following standards:
   A.   Two (2) parking spaces shall be provided for the host family plus one
space for each guestroom;
   B.   Proprietor or owner must occupy the property;
   C.   Meals may only be served to overnight guests;
   D.   Signs are limited to nameplate signs not exceeding two (2) square feet
in residential zones. In addition, a freestanding identification sign not to
exceed four (4) square feet is permitted. If illuminated, only indirect
spotlighting is allowed, thus prohibiting backlighted signs.
Cemetery with customary incidental uses, including, but not limited to,
mortuary, mausoleum, crematory, staff housing, service shops and chapel.
Daycare center.
Educational institution with housing.
Fraternal and beneficial societies, orders and social clubs of a nonprofit
nature.
Group dwellings with nine (9) or more dwelling units in accordance with chapter
10 of this title.
Infill developments.
Multiple-family dwelling with nine (9) or more dwelling units, in accordance
with the requirements of section
15-13-27 of this title.
Nursing home.
Planned residential unit development (PRUD), in accordance with chapter 8 of
this title.
Private park, playground or recreation area.
Privately operated concession or amusement business in a public park.
Public utility substation or water storage reservoir developed by a public
agency.
(Ord. 2015-58, 12-1-2015)
15-36-4: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Minimum Lot Area:
      1.   One building dwelling: Five thousand (5,000) square feet for single-
family, seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet for two-family. For
multiple-family: Seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet plus two
thousand (2,000) square feet for each dwelling unit in excess of two (2) in
each building.
      2.   Other main building: Seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square
feet. For nursing home or retirement home: An additional seven hundred fifty
(750) square feet for each guest or patient accommodation in excess of four
(4). For transitional housing, rehabilitation/treatment facility, or assisted
living facilities: An additional one thousand (1,000) square feet for each
resident in excess of four (4).
      3.   Government subsidized elderly housing with a minimum forty (40) year
contract: Seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet for each building
plus one thousand (1,000) square feet for each dwelling unit in excess of two
(2) in each building.
      4.   Corner lot: Six thousand (6,000) square feet.
   B.   Lot Width: Minimum lot width: Forty feet (40'); corner lot, sixty feet
(60'). For single-family or two-family dwellings, maximum width of any lot:
Seventy five feet (75'), except that the depth of a corner lot may exceed
seventy five feet (75').
   C.   Yard Setbacks:
      1.   Front: Front, minimum setback: Twenty feet (20') except average
where fifty percent (50%) frontage is developed, but not less than fifteen feet
(15'). Maximum setback: Thirty five feet (35').
      2.   Side:
         a.   Main Building:
            (1)   One building dwelling and group dwelling: Minimum five feet
(5') with total width of two (2) required side yards of not less than fifteen
feet (15') plus one foot (1') each side for each two feet (2') main building is
over thirty five feet (35') high.
            (2)   Other main building: Minimum twenty feet (20') each side plus
one foot (1') each side for each two feet (2') main building is over thirty
five feet (35') high.
            (3)   Maximum setback for single-family dwelling or two-family
dwelling: Ten feet (10') on one side and twenty four feet (24') on the other
side.
         b.   Accessory Building: Five feet (5'), except one foot (1') if
located at least six feet (6') from rear of main building, but not closer than
eight feet (8') to dwelling on adjacent lot.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4266.png]
 
      3.   Corner Lot: Side facing street on corner lot, fifteen feet (15'),
except average where fifty percent (50%) frontage is developed, but not less
than ten feet (10').
      4.   Rear:
         a.   Main building: Thirty feet (30').
         b.   Accessory building: One foot (1'), except six feet (6') where
accessory building rears on side yard of adjacent corner lot.
   D.   Building Height:
      1.   Minimum: One story.
      2.   Maximum: Two and one-half (21/2) stories or thirty five feet (35')
for single-family and two-family dwellings. Multiple-family dwellings shall
have a maximum of four (4) stories.
   E.   Lot Coverage: No building or group of buildings with their accessory
building shall cover more than sixty percent (60%) of the lot area.
   F.   Open Space: At least twenty percent (20%) of the lot area shall be left
in open space.
   G.   Special Regulations: In no case shall the ratio of total floor area in
the building to the total lot area exceed one to one (1:1).
   H.   Landscaping: For single-family dwellings, all yard areas are required
to be landscaped and maintained. For new single-family construction the
landscaping shall be installed within eighteen (18) months of the time of the
first occupancy of the dwelling. For duplex and multiple-family requirements
see subsection 15-13-16F of this title.
(Ord. 2011-4, 1-18-2011)
15-36-5: BUILDING DESIGN STANDARDS:
   A.   Dwelling Sizes For Units Constructed After July 31, 2010:
      1.   Minimum Size: For a single-family dwelling or a dwelling unit in a
duplex the minimum square footage (excluding any basement) is one thousand one
hundred (1,100) square feet for a single- story building or, for a two-story
building, eight hundred (800) square feet on the main level with a total
minimum of one thousand three hundred (1,300) square feet for the two (2)
stories. For a multiple-family dwelling, the average of all units in the
building shall be at least a minimum of one thousand one hundred (1,100) square
feet.
      2.   Maximum Size: For a single-family dwelling or a dwelling unit in a
duplex the maximum square footage (excluding any basement) is two thousand four
hundred (2,400) square feet for a single- story building or, for a two-story
building, one thousand four hundred (1,400) square feet on the main level and
two thousand eight hundred (2,800) square feet for the total of two (2)
stories. If more than fifty percent (50%) of the same side of the block has
dwellings larger than these maximums for either single- story or two-story
respectively, then the new construction can exceed these maximums but cannot be
larger than the largest home on that block in square footage.
   B.   Exterior Building Design And Materials: In order to protect the
historic integrity established by the existing buildings in this zone, the
building design and exterior finishes of all dwellings, including multiple-
family dwellings and new additions or exterior remodeling of existing buildings
or accessory structures after July 31, 2010, shall comply with the following
design requirements and materials. Covering of existing exterior brick with any
other type of material or paint is prohibited. Properties which are on the
local historic register are subject to the requirements of the local landmarks
commission and are exempt from these standards if a certificate of historic
appropriateness grants approval contrary to these standards.
      1.   Exterior Solid Wall Surface Materials:
         a.   Face brick (maximum brick size 25/8 inches by 95/8 inches).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4276.png]
 
         b.   Wood lap or tongue and groove wood siding that creates horizontal
lines, except that this material is not allowed as the main material for a
multiple-family dwelling.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4278.png]
 
         c.   Hardiplank or similar nonvinyl or nonmetal siding material that
creates a horizontal wood lap appearance, except that this material is not
allowed as the main exterior material for multiple-family dwellings over two
(2) stories in height.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4241.png]
 
         d.   Stucco or stucco appearing material so long as there are breaks
in the wall plane with brick or stone relief areas, except that this material
is not allowed as the main material for a multiple-family dwelling.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4243.png]
 
         e.   A combination of brick as the base level material around all four
(4) sides of a single-family or two-family dwelling and stucco appearing
material, wood or hardiplank type materials above the brick; provided that on
single-story buildings the brick extends at a minimum to the bottom of the
windowsills and for two-story structures the brick extends at a minimum to the
beginning of the second story, and the transition between the two (2) types of
exterior materials is defined by a projection of the upper floor beyond the
main wall or a break in the wall surface due to a porch roofline.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4245.png]
 
      2.   Exterior Solid Wall Accent Surface Materials: There are portions of
a wall surface that can be designed as either areas of decoration to a building
or provide a continuity of design depending on the design concept of the
building. Materials used on gable ends of a building, dormers, bay projections,
chimneys, quoins, pillars and other ornamental features have a wider variety of
design patterns and materials and are not limited to materials with horizontal
lines. Materials that are allowable for these features are:
         a.   The same brick, wood, stucco, or hardiplank or similar nonvinyl
or nonmetal siding material that creates a horizontal wood lap appearance used
on the main walls of the building.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4274.png]
 
         b.   Stucco, wood, or synthetic materials that have a wood or stucco
appearance and create a variation of patterns that accent the architectural
feature.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4249.png]
 
         c.   Brick, stone or synthetic stone in patterns different from the
major wall material.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4251.png]
 
      3.   Windows On Wall Surfaces Facing A Public Street: The minimum amount
of glass for the ground floor level of a single-family or two-family dwelling
facing the street is fifteen percent (15%) of the wall surface and, for single-
family or two-family dwellings on a corner lot, ten percent (10%) of the wall
surface facing the side street. For two-story single-family or two-family
dwellings, the minimum amount of glass for the second story is ten percent
(10%) of the wall surface facing the street and, for the second story of a
single-family or two-family dwelling on a corner lot, seven and one-half
percent (7.5%) of the second story wall facing the side street. A multiple-
family dwelling shall have, at a minimum, the same amount of glass on all
levels of the building as the main level.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4283.png]
 
      4.   Roof Design And Materials: Only roof designs that either are gabled,
gambrel, or hip design are permitted for single-family or two-family dwellings;
except that multiple-family dwellings may have a flat roof. The minimum roof
slope is three to twelve (3:12) (3 rise to 12 length) for pitched roofs. The
roof exterior surface for pitched roofs is limited to asphalt shingles, wood
shake or shingle, tile or tile appearing material or composite materials that
have the same visual appearance as the permitted materials.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4285.png]
            Gabled
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4287.png]
 
      5.   Entry Porches:
         a.   All new single-family dwellings and at least one dwelling unit in
a new two-family dwelling are required to have a main entrance facing the
street with a porch and associated roof over that porch.
         b.   The main entrance into a new multiple-family dwelling shall have
a covered porch that faces the street.
         c.   The roof covering over the porch shall be an extension of the
building design and building materials and shall have a minimum projection over
the front door of four feet (4') and a maximum of eight feet (8').
         d.   Any new porch:
            (1)   Shall be a minimum of five feet (5') wide along the front
face of the building and, for single-family dwellings and two- family
dwellings: may extend the full length of the front of the dwelling;
            (2)   Shall remain open on two (2) sides (except for insect see
through screens); and
            (3)   May not have glass or walls taller than forty inches (40")
around the sides that are open.
         e.   Existing porches that are open on three (3) sides cannot be
enclosed on one side but shall remain open on three (3) sides.
         f.   New porches attached to single-family dwellings, two-family
dwellings or multi-family dwellings designed to appear as a single-family
dwelling, and which are open on three (3) sides and designed to follow the
architectural lines and the material of the existing home or new structure as
provided in these standards, may extend the deck and columns or posts into the
required front yard setback a maximum of eight feet (8') and the eave overhang
a maximum of ten feet (10').
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4289.png]
 
      6.   Garage Requirement, Design, Exterior Material, Locations And Other
Parking Regulations:
         a.   Any new single-family dwelling or two-family dwelling constructed
after July 31, 2010, is required to include, at a minimum, a one car garage as
part of the construction.
         b.   New attached garages shall have the same exterior wall treatment
as the dwelling to which the garage is attached.
         c.   Detached new or remodeled garages located behind the home on an
interior lot may have either the same exterior wall treatment as the dwelling
or may use one of the solid wall surface materials listed under subsection B1
of this section.
         d.   A garage constructed after July 31, 2010, shall have the same
roof slope as the dwelling, shall use the same material used in the gable ends
of the roof of the dwelling if such roof treatment exists on the dwelling, and
the eave line of the garage roof facing the street shall have the same detail/
ornamentation that is present on the exterior of the dwelling facing the
street. If no ornamentation exists on the dwelling, none is required on the
garage. Roofing material for the garage shall be the same roofing material as
the home.
         e.   A new garage constructed on an interior lot may be freestanding
and set back behind the back line of the home or attached to the rear of the
home with either a side or rear garage door for vehicle entry into the garage.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4264.png]
 
         f.   A garage constructed on a corner lot may be:
            (1)   Freestanding in the rear yard if located a minimum of twenty
feet (20') behind the side line of the home on the side facing a street on a
corner lot and if it can meet the other required yard setbacks. If the garage
cannot meet the required minimum setbacks it may be less than twenty feet (20')
from the side line of the home, but in no case shall it be less than five feet
(5') behind the side line of the home on the side facing a street on a corner
lot (see figure I of this section);
            (2)   Behind the home on the opposite side of the lot from the
street corner and not facing the street (see figure II of this section); or
            (3)   Attached to the home with an entrance into the garage on the
side of the house facing the street (see figure III of this section).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4268.png]
 
         g.   Notwithstanding other general regulations, no recreational
vehicle or accessory vehicle parking slab is permitted in the side yard setback
or at the side of a dwelling in this zone and no front yard parking slab is
permitted, even if no parking is available on the site in this zone.
         h.   Driveways leading to legal parking for a single-family or two-
family dwelling shall be a maximum of twelve feet (12') in width along the side
of the home and then shall flare to a width necessary to provide access to the
garage and the maneuvering space needed to access the garage; except access to
a garage on a corner lot may have a maximum width of twenty four feet (24').
         i.   Any garage, carport, or surface parking as part of a multiple-
family dwelling shall be located only in the rear yard.
   C.   Exceptions:
      1.   Additions, repairs or maintenance of an existing dwelling may vary
from either the exterior wall materials or the roof design and materials
required by subsection B of this section if the building exterior material or
the roof design and materials, as of July 31, 2010, do not meet the material
types or roof shape specified in this section and the addition or repair will
match the existing building in exterior materials and roof shape.
      2.   If the exterior material of an existing dwelling is impossible to
match because the material is no longer available, the exterior wall material
may be any of the allowed exterior materials permitted in this section.
      3.   If an addition is to the rear of a dwelling on an interior lot and
does not face a street, the exterior wall material may be any of the allowed
exterior materials permitted in this section.
(Ord. 2011-67, 12-13-2011; amd. Ord. 2012-45, 9-25-2012)
15-36-6: FRONT YARD AND SIDE YARD FACING A STREET ON A CORNER LOT FENCING
MATERIAL:
Fences in the front yard setback or a side yard facing a street on a corner lot
are limited to wood, decorative metal, vinyl and plant material that may form a
hedge. Brick or stone may be used as columns in the fence design. Chainlink
fencing is not permitted in the front yard setback or in the side yard facing a
street on a corner lot. All fencing designs other than hedges shall be open in
their design with a minimum spacing between the solid members of the fence
being equal to or greater than the width of the solid members of the fence.
Owners of property with existing chainlink, as of July 31, 2010, shall not
expand the use of chainlink fencing. If a chainlink fence is replaced it may
only be replaced with a fence made with material permitted by this section.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4272.png]
 
(Ord. 2011-67, 12-13-2011)
CHAPTER 37
RESERVED
(Ord. 2011-8, 2-15-2011)
CHAPTER 38
COMMERCIAL ZONES C-1/CP-1, C-2/CP-2, C-3/CP-3
SECTION:
15-38-1: Purpose
15-38-2: Site Development Standards
15-38-3: Protection Of Adjoining Residential Properties
15-38-4: Special Regulations
15-38-5: Uses
15-38-6: Time Limitation
15-38-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of each zoning category within the commercial district is described
below:
   A.   Neighborhood Commercial (C-1, CP-1):
      1.   District Characteristics: The neighborhood commercial zone (C-1 and
CP-1) is intended to be located on corner properties of areas, which are
generally residential in character. The site area is large enough to contain
all the parking and other needs of the commercial without impacting the
surrounding residential areas.
      2.   Purpose Of District: The neighborhood commercial zone provides for
the sale and supply of daily living needs for the people in the neighborhood.
It also provides areas for small development which is compatible to the
surrounding residential neighborhood.
   B.   Community Commercial (C-2, CP-2):
      1.   District Characteristics: The community commercial zone may be
established in those areas that are appropriate for general retail sales. This
district should be created in areas having access to major streets and a low
likelihood of conflict with other uses as generally it will be an edge to
residential development. The properties are large enough to have a low
potential for adverse impacts on the overall visual image of key areas such as
major streets and including entryways into the community.
      2.   Purpose Of District: The community commercial zone provides, in
addition to the sale of goods for neighborhoods, a wider range of facilities
for the sale of retail goods and personal services for the major segments of
the community.
   C.   Regional Commercial (C-3, CP-3):
      1.   District Characteristics: The regional commercial zone is
established on larger parcels of property which have access to major roads. The
zone would be located along streets which are capable of handling traffic
generated by these types of uses.
      2.   Purpose Of District: The regional commercial zone provides for the
sale and supply of the complete range of retail and wholesale goods,
entertainment and personal services for the metropolitan area and, also, a
center for recreational entertainment and cultural activities for the entire
region.
(Ord. 72-13, 7-6-1972; amd. Ord. 99-38, 10-19-1999; Ord. 2000-56, 11-7-2000;
Ord. 2001-56, 9-25-2001, eff. 10-18-2001)
15-38-2: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Dimensional Requirements: The following dimensional requirements shall
apply in each commercial zone to building and parking setbacks:
 
 C-1 And CP-1 C-2 And CP-2 C-3 And CP-3
                                      None for commercial  None for commercial
                                      buildings.           buildings and
                                      Multi-family         accessory apartment.
                                      dwelling, 6,000      Multi-family
Minimum lot area   None               square feet for the  dwelling, 5,000
                                      first unit plus      square feet for the
                                      1,500 square feet    first unit plus 750
                                      for each additional  square feet for each
                                      unit                 additional unit
Maximum lot area   5 acres            None                 None
Minimum lot width  60 foot width      None                 None
Maximum building   50 percent         50 percent           60 percent
coverage
Maximum building   35 feet            50 feet              None
height
                                                           None for building,
Front yard setback 20 feet            20 feet              15 feet for parking
                                                           lot or display area
Side yard setback                                          None for building,
facing a street    20 feet            20 feet              15 feet for parking
                                                           lot or display area
                                      None, except 10 feet None, except 10 feet
                                      adjacent to a        adjacent to a
                                      residential or O-    residential or O-
                                      1 zone. For          1 zone. For
                   None, except 10    buildings over 35    buildings over 35
                   feet adjacent to a feet in height next  feet in height next
Side yard setback  residential or O-  to a residential or  to a residential or
                   1 zone             O-1 zone an          O-1 zone an
                                      additional 1 foot    additional 1 foot
                                      setback is required  setback is required
                                      for every foot the   for every foot the
                                      building is over 35  building is over 35
                                      feet in height       feet in height
                                      None, except 10 feet None, except 10 feet
                                      adjacent to a        adjacent to a
                                      residential or O-    residential or O-
                                      1 zone. For          1 zone. For
                   None, except 10    buildings over 35    buildings over 35
                   feet adjacent to a feet in height next  feet in height next
Rear year setback  residential or O-  to a residential or  to a residential or
                   1 zone             O-1 zone an          O-1 zone an
                                      additional 1 foot    additional 1 foot
                                      setback is required  setback is required
                                      for every foot the   for every foot the
                                      building is over 35  building is over 35
                                      feet in height       feet in height
 
   B.   Landscaping Setbacks And Coverage:
      1.   Notwithstanding the required landscaping for those setbacks which
are listed in subsection A of this section, there may be additional landscaping
required based on other provisions of this title. Additional requirements
include, but are not limited to, installation of landscaping in public right of
way (subsection 15-4-5E3a of this title), preserving existing trees
(subsections 15-4-5E7a and E7b of this title), setbacks when next to
residential zones (subsection 15-4-5F of this title), screening of service and
storage areas (subsection 15-4-5G of this title), and parking lot landscaping
(subsections 15-12-9B and C of this title).
      2.   For commercial and mixed commercial residential developments, a
minimum ten percent (10%) of the total site shall be landscaped. The planning
commission, however, may approve a lesser amount if it finds the objectives
listed in section
15-13-16 of this title are substantively met in the landscape design.
      3.   Multi-family dwellings in the C-2/CP-2 zones shall have a minimum of
thirty percent (30%) of the lot area developed in open green space. Multi-
family dwellings in the C-3/CP-3 zones shall have a minimum of twenty percent
(20%) of the lot area developed in open green space.
(Ord. 72-13, 7-6-1972; amd. Ord. 80-26, 6-5-1980; Ord. 81-50, 12-10-1981; Ord.
87-24, 5-28-1987; Ord. 96-5, 1-23-1996; Ord. 97-35, 5-27-1995; Ord. 99-9, 1-26-
1999; Ord. 99-38, 10-19-1999; Ord. 2000-56, 11-7-2000)
15-38-3: PROTECTION OF ADJOINING RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES:
   A.   Purpose Of Screening: The intent of the screening requirements provided
herein is to protect residential zones from the potential impacts commonly
associated with commercial uses, such as lights, noise, increased pedestrian
and automobile traffic, invasions of privacy and physical intrusions on
property.
   B.   Screening Requirement: Whenever development abuts property in a
residential zone, screening is required to protect residential properties from
the potential impacts of lights, noise, increased pedestrian traffic, invasions
of privacy and physical intrusions on property. Based on the applicant's site
plan, the community development department will determine the potential impacts
resulting from location, site design and layout as they relate to the areas of
concern identified in table A of this section. The applicant may then choose
from among those screening options in table A of this section that will
mitigate all of the identified impacts. The specific standard for each option
is identified in table B of this section. Determinations may be appealed to the
planning commission. If there are no potential impacts, screening is not
required.
   TABLE A: SCREENING OPTIONS
 
   Impacts On Adjacent Residentially Zoned Property
Areas Of Concern Lights Noise Privacy ObjectionableViews Access Restriction
Parking     A,B,D,E,C1 or D,E,C1 or H1 D,E,C1 or H1 A,B,D,E,C1 or D,E,F,G,H or
            H1                                      H1            I
Service     D,E,C1 or H1  D,E,C1 or H1 D,E,C1 or H1 D,E,G,C1 or   D,E,F,G,H or
entrance                                            H1            I
Dumpster    D,E,C1 or H1  D,E,C1 or H1 D,E,C1 or H1 D,E,G,C1 or   D,E,F,G,H or
                                                    H1            I
Outdoor     D,E,C1 or H1  D,E,C1 or H1 D,E,C1 or H1 D,E,G,C1 or   D,E,F,G,H or
storage                                             H1            I
Outdoor                                             D,E,G,C1 or   D,E,F,G,H or
activity    D,E,C1 or H1  D,E,C1 or H1 D,E,C1 or H1 H1            I
areas
Distance of
building
from        E or H1                   E or H1      E or H1        
residential
property
line
1.   This is an option only when abutting residentially zoned property is
vacant or has substantial existing vegetation. In either instance the time
needed for growth of vegetation will not be detrimental to the buffering
needs.
 
   TABLE B: SCREENING OPTION DESCRIPTIONS
 
Option Screening Type Purpose And Standards
               Screens vehicles in parking lot and decreases asphalt appearance, except
               when difference in topography offsets screening. Any berm shall have a
               minimum height of 4' and a stabilized side slope of no greater than 3 to 1
               ratio of run to rise. Berms shall be a minimum width of 12'.   BBerm with
               shrub landscaping sufficient to achieve a 4' high screenScreens parking lot
A 4' berm      and buffers building. Evergreen shrubs shall be of a locally adapted species
               such as pyracantha, yew, juniper or evergreen euonymus. Shrubs shall be a
               minimum of 5 gallons when planted and shall be expected to reach a height of
               at least 4' within 5 years of planting. Shrubs shall be planted at a maximum
               of 5' on center. The berm shall have a stabilized side slope no greater than
               3 to 1 ratio of run to rise.
               Screens parking lot except when difference in topography offsets screening
  Evergreen    and buffers building which is close to property line. Shrubs shall be of a
  hedge with   locally adapted evergreen species such as arborvitae (Thuja occidentalis or
C an ultimate  orientalis), juniper (Juniperus virginiana or chinensis), pyracantha, yew
  height of at (Taxus media), or evergreen euonymus (Euonymus japonica), with a 5 gallon
  least 5'     minimum planted size, and shall be expected to reach a height of at least 5'
               within 5 years of planting. Shrubs shall be planted at a maximum of 5' on
               center.
  6' solid
  fence of
  either wood,
  vinyl or
  chainlink
  with         Screens ground level lights, noise, objectionable views, provides privacy
  interlocking and access restriction, and texturing provides aesthetic relief, "Decorative
  opaque vinyl masonry" shall include split-face block or brick, brick, fluted block, or
D or a         masonry wall with stucco finish, but shall not include openings in the wall
  decorative   surface below a height of 6'. Bumper guards set back a minimum of 21/2' from
  masonry wall the fence shall be required when fence abuts parking.
  with
  textured
  surface
  facing
  residential
  use
  A minimum 6'
  wide
  landscaped
  strip with
  trees and
  either a 6'
  solid fence
  of either
  wood, vinyl
  or chainlink Screens ground level lights, higher level lights, noise, objectionable
E with         views; provides privacy, access restriction and additional noise mitigation.
  interlocking Trees shall be a minimum of 2" caliper in size, spaced at a minimum of 20'
  opaque vinyl on center.
  or a
  decorative
  masonry wall
  with
  textured
  surface
  facing
  residential
  use
  6' chainlink Provides security and access restriction. Used only when these are the major
F fence        impacts. Bumper guards, set back a minimum of 21/2' from the fence, shall be
               required when fence abuts parking.
  6' chainlink Provides security and access restriction. Inserts help screen objectionable
  fence with   views. Inserts shall be of a durable opaque material and shall be kept in
G inserts in   good repair. Bumper guards, set back a minimum of 21/2' from the fence,
  the fence    shall be required when fence abuts parking.
  fabric
               Screens ground level and higher level lights, provides security and access
               restriction. Vegetative screen provides additional noise mitigation and
  6' open      screens objectionable views. Trees and shrubs shall be of a locally adapted
H fence with   evergreen species such as arborvitae, juniper, pyracantha, evergreen
  evergreen    euonymus, pines or spruces, with a planted size of at least 15 gallons for
  shrubs       trees and 5 gallons for shrubs, and shall be expected to reach a height of
               at least 5' within 5 years of planting. Trees shall be planted at 20' on
               center and shrubs at 5' on center.
  Ornamental
  wrought iron
  fence or     Provides some access restriction. Used when this is the only impact from the
I other        proposed development. Bumper guards set back a minimum of 21/2' from the
  decorative   fence, shall be required when fence abuts parking.
  see- through
  fencing
 
   C.   Waivers: The Planning Commission may waive the screening fence
requirement in full or in part or may require a see-through rather than a solid
fence, if the purpose of this Section is achieved, and it is determined that
one or more of the following conditions applies:
      1.   Topography: Immediate grade differences exist between the
development and residential zone to such an extent that no additional buffering
or protection of the residential zone would be provided by the fence.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4291.png]
 
      2.   Visual Screening: Existing vegetation along the zone boundary
provides adequate visual screening; provided, that the adjacent residentially
zoned property is fully developed with other than a dwelling or dwelling units.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4293.png]
 
      3.   Substitution Of Building For Fence: The wall of a commercial
building facing a side or rear yard adequately serves as a screening fence;
provided, that the yard setback area between the building and the property line
shall be entirely landscaped. It shall be unlawful to use any part of such area
for storage, dumping, garbage receptacle, loading and unloading, delivery,
other service access, or parking.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4295.png]
 
(Ord. 91-11, 5-23-1991; amd. Ord. 97-44, 6-17-1997; Ord. 99-14, 3-16-1999; Ord.
99-38, 10-19-1999)
15-38-4: SPECIAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Permitted And Conditional Uses; Conditions: Hereinafter specified
permitted and conditional uses shall be permitted only when the following
conditions are complied with:
      1.   All manufacturing shall be done within a completely enclosed
building.
      2.   All uses shall be free from objection because of odor, dust, smoke
or noise.
      3.   In the C-1 neighborhood commercial zone, no entertainment, except
recorded music, shall be permitted in cafes, cafeterias, ice cream parlors or
restaurants.
      4.   All sales activities shall be conducted within a building, except
the following shall not be prohibited under this section when operated as
directed by law:
         a.   Mobile food trucks;
         b.   Seasonal sales of produce and beverage may be allowed by the
building official in temporary buildings under four hundred (400) square feet,
for a period not to exceed six (6) months in one calendar year;
         c.   Outdoor sales or displays which are customarily incidental to a
permitted use conducted within a building; or
         d.   Christmas tree sales, fireworks stands, charitable fundraising
events lasting no longer than forty eight (48) hours, and city approved special
events.
   B.   Car Wash; Restrictions: A car wash shall be permitted subject to the
following restrictions:
      1.   Operation or use is forbidden between the hours of ten o'clock (10:
00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on the following morning in C-1 zones
only.
      2.   There shall not be more than four (4) washing bays for a manual
spray car wash in the C-1 zones only.
      3.   Off street vehicle storage required as follows:
         a.   One bay car wash: Four (4) spaces in the approach lane;
         b.   Two (2) bay car wash: Three (3) spaces in the approach lane for
each wash bay;
         c.   Three (3) or more bay car wash: Two (2) spaces in the approach
lane for each wash bay.
   C.   Landscaped Setbacks Required For Certain Streets: A forty foot (40')
wide landscaped setback is required for all uses along the frontage of 1200
West from Harrisville Road to 1200 South and along the frontage of 1200 South
from 1200 West to 500 West which is the west side of the main railroad line and
known as the former defense depot Ogden site. Landscaping in this setback shall
be in accordance with the landscaping and buffering requirements defined in
chapter 4 of this title.
   D.   Towing Or Impound Lot Restrictions:
      1.   A towing or impound lot is only allowed as an accessory use to an
auto repair or body shop or a state or federally chartered bank/financial
institution;
      2.   The towing or impound lot shall not occupy more than thirty percent
(30%) of the entire property;
      3.   Vehicle storage areas, required screening fencing, and unloading
areas shall be located behind the main building and set back thirty feet (30')
from all public streets along any side or rear areas facing a street. All
outdoor storage, parking lots, and access driveway areas shall be paved with
either asphalt or concrete. All setback areas shall be completely landscaped
(excluding those areas used for parking, accesses and buildings). All
landscaping shall be according to an approved landscape plan which meets the
objectives of this section. All landscaped areas shall be properly maintained;
      4.   All towing or impound lots adjacent to any residential use or zone
shall have a minimum ten foot (10') wide landscaped setback from the
residential properties, with appropriate trees and shrubs planted to provide an
adequate buffer from the adjacent residential use;
      5.   All towing or impound lots shall be enclosed by a screening fence at
least seven feet (7') high. The screening fence shall be located behind any
required landscaped setbacks. The screening fence shall be a unified design and
may be constructed of any of the following fencing materials:
         a.   Chainlink with vertical plastic or vinyl slats spaced no farther
than three-eighths inch (3/8") apart, provided no storage of vehicles within
two feet (2') of the fence;
         b.   Solid wood fence of one inch by four inch (1" x 4") to one inch
by eight inch (1" x 8") horizontal members spaced no farther than one-eighth
inch (1/8") apart;
         c.   Decorative masonry; or
         d.   Other fence materials approved by the planning commission if it
is determined that the material and design is opaque, is not easily damaged by
weather or objects placed against it, does not detract from the appearance of
the finished site development, and the colors of the required screening wall
are subdued and nonreflective;
      6.   Loading and/or unloading of towed or impounded vehicles shall be
prohibited between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. for lots that are located adjacent to residential use or zone;
      7.   Loading and/or unloading of vehicles shall not be permitted within
the public right of way or required setback areas. Facilities shall be designed
so that all loading and unloading takes place on the site behind the required
screening fence without having to move vehicles in and out of the screened
storage area;
      8.   Interior access lanes shall be maintained and kept open and free
from storage as required by the fire department to provide adequate access for
fire protection;
      9.   All towing or impound lots shall comply with Utah state tax
commission standards for impound yards and shall provide the city with their
state issued identification number. All tow trucks and operators accessing the
yard shall obtain and meet all necessary state certification and licensing
requirements;
      10.   No dismantling or salvaging is to occur on the property;
      11.   Vehicle storage time is limited to ninety (90) days.
   E.   Medical Cannabis Pharmacy:  A medical cannabis pharmacy shall be
permitted subject to the following restrictions:
      1.   Unless waived by the Utah Department of Health, the medical cannabis
pharmacy shall be located no closer than six hundred feet (600’) from any
primarily residential zone and two hundred feet (200’) from any community
location, measured from the nearest entrance to the pharmacy following the
shortest route of ordinary pedestrian travel to the boundary of the community
location or residential zone;
      2.   No portion of the exterior brick visible to the public shall be
painted;
      3.   No windows shall be darkened or covered to prohibit view into the
interior of the sales space from the public view;
      4.   Only one public access is permitted which shall be located on the
street face of the building; and
      5.   Hours of operation are from 8:00 A.M. to 8:00 P.M.
(Ord. 2011-7, 1-25-2011; amd. Ord. 2014-34, 8-12-2014; Ord. 2019-46, 10-22-
2019)
15-38-5: USES:
In the following list of possible uses, those designated in any zone as "P"
will be a permitted use. Uses designated as "C" will be allowed only when
authorized by a conditional use permit obtained as provided in chapter 7 of
this title. Uses designated as "N" will not be allowed in that zone.
 
    C-1 And CP-1 C-2 And CP-2 C-3 And CP-3
A. Accessory apartment, 1 unit.                                         P P   P
   Accessory apartment, 2 or more units (only allowed in C-3/CBD and
  provided 1 additional parking space is provided on site for each     N N   N
   unit in excess of 1).
  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to a permitted   P P   P
   use.
  Adult daycare with hours of operation between 6:00 A.M. and 6:00     P N   N
   P.M. on weekdays.
  Air conditioning, sales and service.                                 N N   P
  Altering, pressing and repairing of wearing apparel.                 P P   P
  Ambulance base stations.                                             N C   P
  Amusement park.                                                      N N   C
  Animal hospital, small animals only, and provided all animals are    N P   P
   maintained and kept within completely enclosed building.
   Animal hospital, small animals only, and provided conducted within
  completely enclosed building. Outdoor kenneling of animals, patients N C   C
   provided.
  Apartment, multi-family.                                             N P   P
  Arcade (on the following conditions):                                N P   P
     1. That in C-2 zones, arcades be located in planned shopping
   centers or malls; and that such mall or shopping center be on at        
     least a 4 acre site;
     2. That in both C-2 and C-3 zones, no arcade be located within 600
   feet of any public elementary or secondary school, measured             
     linearly between closest property lines;
   3. That in C-3 zones, no 2 arcades shall be closer than 600 feet        
     apart, measured linearly between closest property lines.
  Archery shop and range, provided conducted within completely         N P   P
   enclosed building.
  Athletic club.                                                       N P   P
  Auction establishment.                                               N N   P
  Automobile lube and oil center.                                      N P   P
  Automobile, new or used, sales and service.                          N N   P
  Automobile part sales.                                               N P   P
   Automobile repair, including paint, body and fender, brake, muffler,
  upholstery or transmission work, provided conducted within           N N   P
   completely enclosed building.
   Automobile service station; provided, that service bays are part of
   the main building and limited to a maximum of 1 bay in a C-1 and 2
  bays in a C-2. No outside display of accessory items to be sold nor  P P   P
   outside storage shall be permitted. 1 freestanding single bay,
   rotating brush car wash shall be permitted as an accessory use.
  Awning sales and service.                                            N P   P
B. Baby formula service.                                                P P   P
  Bakery goods manufacturing.                                          N N   P
  Bakery manufacture limited to goods retailed on premises.            P P   P
  Bank or financial institution.                                       P P   P
  Barbershop.                                                          P P   P
  Bath and massage establishment.                                      N P   P
  Beauty culture school.                                               N N   P
  Beauty shop.                                                         P P   P
  Bed and breakfast inn, subject to the following standards:           N P   P
   1. 2 parking spaces shall be provided for the host family, plus 1       
     space for each guestroom;
   2. Proprietor or owner must occupy the property;                        
   3. Meals may only be served to overnight guests;                        
     4. Signs are limited to nameplate signs, not exceeding 2 square
     feet in residential zones. In addition, a freestanding
   identification sign not to exceed 4 square feet is permitted. If        
     illuminated, only indirect spotlighting is allowed, thus
     prohibiting backlighted signs.
  Beer parlor, sale or draft beer.                                     N N   C
  Billiard parlor.                                                     N N   P
  Blueprinting and photostating.                                       N P   P
  Boarding house.                                                      N P   P
  Boat sales and service.                                              N C   P
  Bookbinding.                                                         N N   P
  Bottling and distribution plant.                                     N N   P
  Bowling alley.                                                       N P   P
  Boxing arena.                                                        N N   P
  Bus terminal.                                                        N P   P
  Business or professional office.                                     P P   P
C. Cafe or cafeteria.                                                   P P   P
  Candy manufacture.                                                   N N   P
  Cannabis production establishment.                                   N N   N
  Car wash, laundry type.                                              N C   P
  Car wash, manual spray.                                              C P   P
  Carbonated water sales.                                              N P   P
  Carpenter and cabinet shop.                                          N N   P
  Carpet and rug cleaning.                                             N N   P
  Carpet, rug and linoleum service.                                    N P   P
  Cash register sales and service.                                     N P   P
  Catering establishment.                                              N P   P
  Charitable soup kitchen, provided the following conditions are       C C   C
   complied with:
   1. Minimum lot size shall be 1 acre;                                    
   2. Minimum building size shall be 3,500 square feet of floor            
     space;
   3. 1 parking space shall be provided per employee or volunteer on       
     the highest shift;
   4. At least 1 accessible restroom or "port- a-john" shall be            
     provided on the site and kept open to patrons during off hours;
   5. All yard areas not used for parking and associated accessways        
     shall be landscaped;
   6. The site shall be fenced with a minimum 5 foot high fence along      
     adjoining properties;
   7. The planning commission may allow the installation of open           
     space improvements to occur in phases.
  Christmas tree sales.                                                P P   P
  Church.                                                              N P   P
  Church, temporary revival.                                           N C   C
  Circus, carnival or other transient amusement.                       N N   C
  Coal and fuel sales office.                                          N N   P
  Communication equipment building.                                    N P   P
  Contractor shop, provided work conducted within a completely         N N   P
   enclosed building.
  Convenience store.                                                   P P   P
  Convenience store, 1 freestanding single bay rotating brush car wash P P   P
   shall be permitted as accessory use.
  Costume rental.                                                      N P   P
D. Dance hall.                                                          N N   C
  Data processing service and supplies.                                N P   P
  Delicatessen.                                                        P P   P
  Detective agency.                                                    P P   P
  Diaper service, including cleaning.                                  N P   P
  Drapery and curtain store.                                           N P   P
  Drinking establishment. In addition to the requirements of the       N N/C C
   conditional use process,  the following conditions shall apply:
   1. No more than 2 drinking establishments per linear block;             
     2. Parking shall be located on the same lot with the building and
   conveniently located to the entrance of the building. In                
     determining conveniently located parking, the planning commission
     shall consider:
    a. The visibility of the parking area from the building;              
    b. The lighting, existing physical development, and types of          
       uses adjacent to the parking lot and drinking establishment;
    c. The potential for parking conflicts with the parking lots of       
       adjacent uses;
    d. The potential for customer usage of on street parking in           
       front of residential uses.
   3. Operational hours shall be considered to assure compatibility        
     with the surrounding uses.
   4. In addition, the following conditions shall apply to the CP-         
     2 zone:
    a. Must be located in a multi- tenant retail or office center of      
       at least 3 separate uses in the building;
    b. The drinking establishment shall not be located on the ground      
       floor;
       c. The drinking establishment shall be no closer than 200 feet
    to any residential use, measured by a direct pedestrian route         
       from the main entrance of the establishment to the property line
       of the residential use.
   Drinking establishment with cabaret license. In addition to the
   requirements applicable generally to drinking establishments, the
   planning commission shall consider the potential effects of cabaret
  operations on adjacent uses, including, but not limited to, any      N N   C
   residential dwellings in the vicinity, considering hours of
   operation, noise, parking and traffic conflicts, and possible
   activities of patrons on and around the site.
  Drive-it-yourself agency or business.                                N P   P
  Driving range.                                                       N N   C
  Dry cleaning establishment:                                               
   Industrial.                                                        N N   P
   Personal service.                                                  N P   P
  Dry cleaning pick up station.                                        P P   P
  Dwelling, two-family.                                                N N   P
E. Educational institution/post-high school educational institution.    N P   P
  Educational institution/post-high school educational institution     N P   P
   with housing.
  Electrical and heating appliances and fixtures, sales and service.   N P   P
  Electronic equipment sales and service.                              N P   P
  Employment agency.                                                   N P   P
  Express and transfer service.                                        N N   C
F. Farm implement sales.                                                N N   P
  Film exchange establishment.                                         P P   P
  Fireworks stands and sales.                                          N P   P
  Frozen food lockers, incidental to a grocery store or food business. P P   P
  Fruit store or stand.                                                P P   P
G. Garden supplies and plant material sales.                            P P   P
  Glass sales and service.                                             N P   P
  Go-cart track, indoor.                                               N N   C
  Government buildings or uses, nonindustrial.                         P P   P
  Greenhouse and nursery.                                              N P   P
  Gunsmith.                                                            N P   P
  Gymnasium.                                                           N P   P
H. Health club.                                                         N P   P
  Heliport.                                                            N C   C
  Hospital supplies.                                                   N P   P
  Hotel.                                                               N P   P
  House cleaning and repair.                                           N P   P
  House equipment display.                                             N P   P
  Household pets, dwelling units only.                                 P P   P
I. Ice cream manufacture.                                               N N   P
  Ice cream parlor.                                                    P P   P
  Ice manufacture and storage.                                         N N   P
  Ice store and vending station.                                       P P   P
  Indoor batting ranges.                                               N P   P
  Insulation sales.                                                    N P   P
  Interior decorating and design establishment.                        N P   P
J. Janitor service and supply.                                          N P   P
K. Kenneling (indoor) with outdoor exercise area.                       N N   C
  Knitting mills.                                                      N N   P
L. Laboratory, dental or medical.                                       N P   P
  Launderette or laundromat.                                           P P   P
  Laundry or dry cleaning establishment, industrial.                   N N   P
  Library.                                                             P P   P
  Linen supply service.                                                N N   P
  Liquor store.                                                        N C   C
  Locksmith.                                                           P P   P
  Lodge.                                                               P P   P
  Lodging house.                                                       N C   P
  Luggage store.                                                       N P   P
  Lumberyard.                                                          N N   C
M. Machine shop operations incidental to any use permitted in C-3 zone. N N   P
  Manufacture of goods subject to the following conditions:            N P   P
   1. All uses and storage shall be inside a building;                     
   2. Manufacturing uses are limited to assembly of products only;         
   3. A portion of the building shall be used as office or retail          
     area;
   4. Maximum total building size is 15,000 square feet.                   
  Medical cannabis pharmacy.                                           P P   P
  Millinery.                                                           N P   P
  Miniature golf.                                                      N N   C
  Mobile food truck.                                                   N P   P
  Mobile home sales lot and service.                                   N N   P
  Monument works and sales.                                            N P   P
  Mortuary.                                                            N P   P
  Motel.                                                               N P   P
  Motorboat sales and service.                                         N C   P
  Museum.                                                              N P   P
N. Newsstand.                                                           P P   P
  Nursery school.                                                      P P   P
O. Office in which goods or merchandise are not commercially created,   N P   P
   exchanged or sold.
  Office supply.                                                       N P   P
  Ornamental iron sales or repair.                                     N C   P
  Outdoor batting cages.                                               N C   C
P. Paperhanger shop.                                                    N P   P
  Park and playground.                                                 P P   P
  Parking lot or garage for passenger automobiles.                     C C   C
  Pawnshop.                                                            N N   P
  Pest control and extermination.                                      N P   P
  Pet grooming.                                                        C P   P
  Pet store.                                                           N P   P
  Photo studio.                                                        P P   P
  Photocopying and printing services, with floor area of 1,200 square  P P   P
   feet or less.
  Pie manufacture.                                                     N P   P
  Plumbing shop.                                                       N C   P
  Pony ring, without stables.                                          N N   C
  Pool hall.                                                           N N   P
  Post office.                                                         P P   P
  Precious metal purchasing provided it is an accessory use to a use   P P   P
   permitted in the zone.
  Printing, lithographing, publishing or reproductions sales and       N P   P
   service.
  Privately operated concession or amusement business in a public      C C   C
   park.
  Propane retail sales as an accessory use:                            N P   P
   1. An aboveground bulk propane storage tank shall:                      
    a. Be located outside of any required setback;                        
    b. Not exceed 16 feet in length if tank is horizontal;                
    c. Not exceed the primary building height or 10 feet, whichever       
       is lower, if tank is vertical;
    d. Not exceed a volume of 1,100 gallons;                              
    e. Be limited to 1 tank per site.                                     
  Public utilities substation.                                         C C   C
Q. Reserved.                                                                 
R. Racquet club.                                                        N P   P
  Radio and television sales and service.                              C P   P
  Radio, television or FM broadcasting station.                        N P   P
  Real estate agency.                                                  N P   P
  Reception center or wedding chapel.                                  N C   P
  Recreational vehicle storage.                                        C C   P
  Rental agency for home and garden equipment.                         N P   P
  Restaurant.                                                          P P   P
  Restaurant, drive-in.                                                P P   P
   Drive-in restaurants in the C-1 zone shall comply with the              
     following conditions of approval:
    1. Shall be located only on arterial roads.                           
    2. Hours of business be from 7:00 A.M. to 11:30 P.M.                  
    3. The minimum square footage of the building shall be 2,600          
       square feet and the maximum 4,000 square feet.
    4. Exterior speakers shall be designed and installed to minimize      
       the audible impact to the adjacent residences.
    5. Drive-up windows shall face either the street or                   
       nonresidential uses.
    6. Business signs shall be only monument signs and they shall         
       not exceed 8 feet in height.
    7. At least 60 percent of the building square footage shall be        
       designed and devoted for sit down dining.
   Restaurant with cabaret. In addition to the requirements of the
   conditional use process, the planning commission shall consider the
   potential effects of the type of proposed cabaret operations on
  adjacent uses, including, but not limited to, any residential        N N   C
   dwellings in the vicinity, considering hours of operation, noise,
   parking and traffic conflicts, and possible activities of patrons on
   and around the site.
   Retail sales establishment doing business and having displays inside
   an enclosed building whose main use is the selling of goods or
  merchandise to the general public for personal, household or              
   business use and rendering services incidental to the sale of such
   goods:
   Total building size 3,000 square feet or less.                     P P   P
   Total building size 3,001 to 10,000 square feet.                   C P   P
   Total building size 10,001 to 40,000 square feet.                  N P   P
   Total building size 40,001 to 60,000 square feet.                  N C   P
   Total building size 60,001 or greater.                             N C   C
   Retail sales establishment doing business whose main use is the
   selling of goods or merchandise to the general public for personal,
  household or business use and rendering services incidental to the        
   sale of such goods, including outdoor displays or storage of such
   things as building materials, garden supplies, but not tires,
   vehicles or vehicle parts:
   Total building size less than 10,000 square feet.                  N N   C
   Total building size 10,000 square feet or greater.                 N C   C
   Retail tobacco specialty business provided it meets the requirements
  of section                                                           N N   P
   15-13-35 of this title.
   Rollerskating rink. Rollerskating rinks in the C-1 and C-2 zones, as
  well as CP-1 and CP-2 zones, shall comply with the following         P P   P
   conditions of approval:
   1. Shall be located in a commercial center or site of at least 1        
     acre in size;
     2. Such establishment shall not be open for business later than
   10:00 P.M. Sunday through Thursday, and not later than 11:30 P.M.       
     on Fridays and Saturdays;
   3. No alcoholic beverages shall be sold or consumed on the              
     premises of the skating rink;
     4. Minimum of 5 foot high screening fence shall be required along
   all property lines abutting residential property except that no         
     fence shall be higher than 31/2 feet in a front yard setback or
     side yard facing a street on a corner lot;
     5. No musical instruments, phonograph, sound amplifier or similar
     device shall be operated in such a manner as to create a noise
     disturbance across a real property boundary. If such a device is
   plainly audible on the property of another or within a building         
     other than that within which the device is located, and if a
     complaint is made to the police department and verified by them
     that a noise disturbance exists, this shall serve as prima facie
     evidence of a violation of this condition of approval.
  Roofing sales or shop.                                               N P   P
S. Seasonal sales of produce and beverage, subject to the following     P P   P
   standards:
   1. All stands or trucks and displayed produce must be located on        
     private property and not in the public right of way;
   2. Such stands or displays shall be set back at least 20 feet from      
     adjoining street right of way lines;
   3. Off street parking must be available on site or within 500 feet      
     of the site;
   4. No portable, flashing or banner signs shall be permitted;            
     5. Such use shall either locate in a temporary building under 400
     square feet for a period not to exceed 6 months in 1 calendar
   year, or in a permanent building year round. (The requirement to        
     locate in a permanent or temporary building shall not apply in the
     M-1 and M-2 zones.)
  Service station automobile, excluding painting, body and fender and  P P   P
   upholstery work.
  Sexually oriented businesses (see section                                 
   15-13-13 of this title for applicable conditions):
   Adult business and adult live entertainment businesses.            N N   P
   Outcall services and adult entertainment dancing agencies.         N P   P
  Sheet metal shop and retinning, provided all operations are          N N   C
   conducted within completely enclosed building.
  Shelter for the homeless.                                            N N   C
  Sheltered workshop, provided the activities and processes are        N N   P
   allowed as uses in the zone.
  Shoe repair or shoeshine shop.                                       P P   P
  Shooting gallery.                                                    N N   P
  Short term loan business (see section                                N P   P
   15-13-34 of this title for applicable regulations).
  Sidewalk vendor.                                                     N N   N
  Sign manufacture or sign painting.                                   N N   P
  Signs (see title 18, chapter 5, "Appendix A", of this code).              
  Single room occupancy.                                               N N   N
  Social hall, subject to the following minimum standards which may be N C   C
   further restricted or added to by the planning commission:
   1. The social hall has a maximum size of 4,000 square feet.             
     2. The facility is open for business at least 5 days per week with
     a maximum of 2 days per week allowed for events where individual
   paid entry is linked to: dancing to live music; or an event or          
     performance by an individual or group, such as live music or live
     entertainment.
   3. Hours of operation to be determined based on site location and       
     characteristics.
   4. No alcohol is permitted in the building or the property unless       
     a special event license is issued for a private function.
     5. The use has games, social areas, programs or other activities
   available for use during the hours of operation but not a               
     sufficient number of devices to be an arcade or pool hall.
     6. The use for private functions does not allow for ticket sales
   to the function or for participating in events associated with the      
     function.
  Studio for professional work, teaching, performance or exhibitions   P P   P
   of fine arts.
   Swap meet, subject to the following conditions: Must be operated in
   a completely enclosed building, except for incidental outdoor
   displays, and accessory fenced areas for storage of such things as
  living plant materials or items that because of fire code            N N   C
   regulations may not be stored inside of building, i.e., gas lawn
   mowers, rototillers, compressors, or other machinery producing fumes
   or exhaust.
  Swimming pools.                                                      N C   P
T. Tailor shop.                                                         N P   P
  Taxicab stand.                                                       P P   P
  Taxidermist.                                                         N P   P
  Telegraph office.                                                    P P   P
  Temporary automotive summer sales in commercial parking lots.        N P   P
  Temporary building for uses incidental to construction work. Such    P P   P
   buildings shall be removed upon completion of the construction work.
  Temporary business.                                                  N N   N
  Theater, indoor.                                                     N P   P
  Theater, outdoor.                                                    N N   C
  Tire stores, sales and service, subject to the following standards:  N P*  P
   1. No outside tire storage is permitted;                                
     2. Incidental repair work is permitted such as alignments,
   inspections, minor tune ups, but no muffler, transmission,              
     bodywork, or major engine repair shall be permitted.
   *3. Stores in the C-2 Zone shall be subject to the following            
     additional standards:
    a. The store shall be located in a minimum 10 acre shopping           
       center and only as a portion of a main building;
    b. The building design shall not be altered contrary to the           
       established theme of the shopping center;
    c. No freestanding accessory structures shall be allowed;             
    d. Vehicle access doors to the building shall not be visible          
       from any public street or residential zoned property;
    e. No customer cars shall be kept overnight outside the               
       building.
  Tool design (precision) repair and manufacture.                      N N   C
  Towing or impound lot.                                               N N   C
  Trade or industrial school.                                          N C   P
  Trailer sales and service.                                           N N   P
   Transitional housing. Subject to the site development standards
  meeting section                                                      N C   C
   15-38-2 of this chapter for the C-2 Zone and section
   15-38-2 of this chapter for the C-3 Zone.
  Travel agency.                                                       P P   P
  Truck terminal.                                                      N N   N
U. Upholstery shop.                                                     P P   P
  Used car lot.                                                        N N   C
V. Ventilating equipment, sales and service.                            N C   P
   Warehouse storage, except storage of goods listed as a conditional
W. use in section                                                       N N   P
   15-21-2 of this title in M-2 Zone; no outside storage permitted.
  Waterslide.                                                          N C   C
  Weather stripping shop.                                              N P   P
  Welding shop.                                                        N N   C
  Wholesale business.                                                  N N   P
  Window washing establishment.                                        N P   P
 
(Ord. 2013-50, 12-3-2013; amd. Ord. 2014-34, 8-12-2014; Ord. 2015-47, 10-20-
2015; Ord. 2016-32, 6-7-2016; Ord. 2019-46, 10-22-2019; Ord. 2020-24, 6-23-
2020)
15-38-6: TIME LIMITATION:
A building permit shall be secured and construction begun in accordance with
the approved site plan within twelve (12) months from the date of the site plan
approval. Plan approval will expire if no building permits are issued within
the time limits specified above.
(Ord. 95-46, 6-27-1995; amd. Ord. 99-38, 10-19-1999)
CHAPTER 39
MIXED USE ZONE MU
SECTION:
15-39-1: Purpose And Intent
15-39-2: Application Of Mixed Use Zone
15-39-3: Uses Within A Mixed Use (MU) Zone
15-39-4: General Development Standards
15-39-5: Project Master Plan Requirements
15-39-6: Development Agreement Requirements
15-39-7: Mixed Use (MU) Application And Review Procedure
15-39-8: Uses And Standards Allowed For Mixed Use Zone Projects
15-39-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of the mixed use (MU) zone is to establish a zoning district to
allow the development or redevelopment of land in a manner that requires
projects to be designed and planned to provide a mix of uses created by various
commercial, entertainment, recreation, open space and a variety of higher
density residential styles that creates a quality design and urban community or
village feel. The mixed use development standards help to encourage vibrant,
active centers by a variety of uses in a pedestrian friendly environment and
promote architectural quality in building designs. The scale and intensity of a
mixed use development may vary depending on location, types of mixed uses and
development theme.
(Ord. 2011-23, 5-3-2011)
15-39-2: APPLICATION OF MIXED USE ZONE:
   A.   The mixed use zone with its regulations is intended to be applied to
two (2) types of locations:
      1.   The downtown area of Ogden typically being designed for use as a
transit oriented development project; or
      2.   An approved redevelopment district.
   B.   The MU zone shall only be applied to create and maintain mixed use
projects that are mixed use in a vertical or horizontal manner. Vertical mixed
use projects incorporate different land use types within the same building
(e.g., residential, office or retail). Horizontal mixed use projects
incorporate different land uses within adjacent buildings on the same site.
Both types of mixed use styles in a project are encouraged.
(Ord. 2011-23, 5-3-2011)
15-39-3: USES WITHIN A MIXED USE (MU) ZONE:
   A.   The variety of uses allowed in an MU zone are intended to create a mix
of commercial, entertainment, office, personal services, and a variety of
residential dwelling land use types that can be developed in a compact design
that encourages compatibility of uses. Each mixed use zone application may have
a different theme that is identified in the approval process that establishes
the type of mixed uses proposed. For redevelopment districts this is identified
in the redevelopment plan. A key component is that a mix of land use types
(i.e., commercial, office, personal services, entertainment or recreational,
and residential) is required either vertically or horizontally in the
development. A mixed use development is required to have at least three (3)
different land use types with one type being residential. If the mixed use
development theme is residential, no one specific residential building type may
exceed more than sixty percent (60%) of the residential building types proposed
for the project master plan. If the mixed use theme is transit oriented
development or commercial, no more than sixty percent (60%) of the total square
footage of the buildings may be commercial. The permitted uses of a mixed use
zone and design standards shall be those uses and standards specified in the
approval process and shall be included in section
15-39-8 of this chapter as permitted uses and standards for the specified
development.
   B.   To ensure compatibility of uses, the following uses shall not be
permitted in any MU zone:
         Any business with outdoor storage.
         Business with drive-through window service.
         Car wash.
         Convenience store/service station/auto lube and oil centers.
         Drinking establishment/cabaret below or above residential dwellings or
within one hundred (100) linear feet of residential dwellings.
         Manufacturing uses.
         Motor vehicle or motor recreational vehicle sales and display.
         Motor vehicle repair and service.
         Recycling centers/recycling collection areas.
         Rehabilitation/treatment, protective housing, transitional housing, or
boarding house.
         Sexually oriented businesses.
         Short term loan businesses.
         Single-family detached dwelling on lots over three thousand (3,000)
square feet.
         Single retail unit space over forty thousand (40,000) square feet.
         Warehousing as the main use.
   C.   The MU zone is a mixture of uses with no one land use type being a
constant dominant or prevailing use. Since the land uses allowed are determined
by the project master plan and development agreement with mixtures of land use
types dependent upon location and type of project being developed, the MU zone
shall not be considered as a commercial or a manufacturing zone for the purpose
of consideration of off premises signage location under state law.
(Ord. 2011-23, 5-3-2011; amd. Ord. 2020-24, 6-23-2020)
15-39-4: GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   The mixed use zone is intended to be applied in various locations in
the downtown area or redevelopment districts. To create a true mixed use, the
master plan and actual development of each location shall be in a manner that
the design of the buildings, parking, land uses and landscaping create a
compact development and quality design of building and spaces. Attention to the
design is required to create a vibrant, interactive and connected development
both internally and to its surroundings. The approved project master plan shall
demonstrate that the project is developed paying attention to these standards
as well as the development theme being proposed. The development agreement and,
in redevelopment areas, approval of each phase of the development will
determine site specific details, setbacks and building placements and use
locations following the concepts of the approved project master plan which
incorporates these standards. In order to guide the development of the project
master plan each project approval will be guided by the compliance to the
following mixed use general development standards.
      1.   Site Design:
         a.   Downtown area:
            (1)   Setbacks: Buildings with ground level commercial uses should
be located next to street property lines in order to create a street edge and
give visual preference to pedestrian related access to the structures. Some
variation for a portion of the building setback may be considered when outdoor
spaces for the ground level use are developed such as outdoor dining or
entrance features. Buildings with ground level residential use shall have a
landscaped transition space from the street property line to the building of
not greater than fifteen feet (15') which allows porches, stairways, or a
common building entrance to create a transition area from the public sidewalk
to the building. All other side and rear setbacks will be determined based on
potential impacts of noise, service areas, and objectionable views created by
the service areas or use impacts. Other setbacks may be required by the
planning commission when the design and the appropriate distance mitigation is
needed along the perimeter of the development to transition from the mixed use
to the surrounding developments.
            (2)   Compact Design: Buildings in a mixed use design need to be
clustered so that they are easily accessible for pedestrians and to shared
parking areas. Clustering occurs by having the buildings tightly grouped along
the street frontage or pedestrian access.
            (3)   Building Orientation: Buildings shall be designed so that the
front of the buildings are oriented to the street. Development projects with
deep parcel depths that have buildings going into the property away from main
streets shall also have the buildings placed on either side of a central plaza,
green space, natural feature or walkway with the buildings fronting that
walkway or plaza. When space is limited it may be necessary to create a
secondary entrance from the parking area to the building which faces the
street.
            (4)   Parking/Access/Service Areas: Parking lots shall be located
in the central portions of the development and not along streets so that they
can service a variety of buildings. Access to the parking areas should be
directed to come from secondary streets when possible in order to create a
continuity of buildings along the main street frontage. Surface parking lots
shall be landscaped with islands which include trees to help unify the parking
lot as a visual amenity to the development. The separation of pedestrian access
from vehicular traffic is an important design consideration. Service areas for
buildings should be away from pedestrian accesses and public streets. The use
of alleys for service of residential parking access is encouraged.
         b.   Redevelopment districts outside downtown area:
            (1)   Setbacks: The appropriate setback from the street will be
determined based on the uses on either side of the development on the same side
of the street. The important consideration is maintaining the character of the
existing streetscape massing and having building setbacks that respond
appropriately to those characteristics. All other side and rear setbacks will
be determined based on potential impacts of noise, height of structures,
service areas, objectionable views created by the types of uses and the design
and the appropriate mitigation needed along the perimeter of the development to
transition from the mixed use to the surrounding developments.
            (2)   Compact Design: Buildings in a mixed use design need to be
clustered so that they are easily accessible for pedestrians and for easy
access to shared parking areas. Compact designs create walking connections
between buildings. Clustering occurs by grouping the buildings so that several
buildings can be accessed from one parking area and from common pedestrian
accessways.
            (3)   Building Orientation: Buildings shall be designed so that the
front of the buildings are to the street. When central plazas or walkways are
part of the design those central buildings shall front the central plaza, green
space, natural features or walkway. When space is limited it may be necessary
to create a secondary entrance from the parking area to the building which
faces the street.
            (4)   Parking/Access/Service Areas: Parking lots shall be located
to the side of buildings that front on a street or to the rear of the building
areas so that they can service a variety of buildings in a clustered design
concept rather than creating one large central parking area. Access to the
parking areas should be directed to come from secondary streets when possible
in order to create a continuity of the streetscape along the main street
frontage. When parking is to the side of a building it shall be set back from
the face of the building a minimum of one-third (1/3) the depth of the building
and the area in front of the parking shall be landscaped. Surface parking lots
shall be landscaped with islands which include trees to help unify the parking
lot as a visual amenity to the development. The separation of pedestrian access
from vehicle traffic is an important design consideration. Service areas for
buildings should be away from pedestrian accesses, and public streets. The use
of alleys for service access should be encouraged.
      2.   Parking Requirements:
         a.   Downtown area: The parking requirements for the land uses shall
be based on the requirements of section
15-12-3 of this title and these shall be considered as maximum parking
requirements. Shared parking reductions according to section
15-12-7 of this title are encouraged with the exception of shared parking for
residential dwelling units. A minimum of one stall per dwelling unit is
required. Unless a different standard is adopted in an architectural design
book, residential parking shall be designed into the dwelling unit if the
design is townhomes, detached dwellings or row houses. Multi-story apartments
or condos are encouraged to design the parking into the building as much as
possible. Exceptions to reduce the residential parking requirement below the
minimum requirement through means such as shared vehicles, mass transit system
connections or other means can be considered. Nonresidential parking may also
consider parking on the public street as meeting the development's parking
requirement.
         b.   Redevelopment districts outside downtown area: The parking
requirements for the land uses shall be based on the requirements of section
15-12-3 of this title and these shall be considered as the maximum parking
requirements. Shared parking reductions according to section
15-12-7 of this title are encouraged with the exception of shared parking for
residential dwelling units. A minimum of one and one-half (11/2) stalls per
dwelling unit is required. Unless a different standard is adopted in an
architectural design book, residential parking shall be designed into the
dwelling unit if the design is townhomes, detached dwellings or row houses.
Multi-story apartments or condos are encouraged to design the parking into the
building as much as possible. Exceptions to reduce the residential parking
requirement below the minimum requirement through means such as shared
vehicles, mass transit system connections or other means can be considered.
      3.   Building Design:
         a.   Multilevel mixed use buildings are encouraged to promote
architectural quality in building design that a mixed use development needs.
Visual interest is an important requirement in the building designs. Visual
interest is created by, but not limited to, the following features:
            (1)   The building design has a visually distinct base, body and
cap. These are generally achieved by means of the ground level being the base,
the body being the middle portion of the building and the cap being the
cornice.
            (2)   Upper story elements (balconies, windows, terraces) that
overlook the street, plaza, and other pedestrian walkways.
            (3)   The perceived height and bulk of the building is relieved by
variation in massing and articulation of facades to reduce the visual length of
long walls. Variation of rooflines may also be used to reduce the apparent size
of mixed use buildings and provide visual interest.
            (4)   Building heights vary in the development to create visual
relief and the building height transitions from taller buildings to lower
heights to achieve compatibility with adjacent properties when the adjacent
properties have a one- or two-story maximum height limitation. If the adjacent
zone does not have a height limit the taller buildings of the mixed use project
shall be located on street corners, major street frontages or as focal points
in the development.
         b.   Quality of the development is related to the choice of exterior
materials used in a mixed use project. Brick, atlas brick or stone shall be the
main exterior solid surface building materials on the first level of a building
as a minimum and preferably as the main solid surface material for all the
building exterior. Simulated materials that provide a similar visual appearance
may also be considered above the first floor. Trims and accent materials may be
stucco, architectural metals, wood or wood appearing materials. If the mixed
use project has an architectural design book for architectural styles, building
types, design details and material approved with the master plan that design
book will determine the design, materials and all other specified requirements
for buildings acceptable for the project.
         c.   Uses which are nonresidential at the ground level shall:
            (1)   Have the primary frontages of the building either face a
street, plaza or pedestrian accessway depending where the primary building
frontage is located.
            (2)   Have the primary frontage designed with a minimum of seventy
percent (70%) in transparent glass to create storefront appearances and a
transparency between the building and the pedestrian traffic.
            (3)   Have a floor to ceiling height on the ground level between
twelve feet (12') and sixteen feet (16').
         d.   All sides of the buildings shall receive equal design
consideration when they are visible to the pedestrian access areas and the
general street system or the building rises above other buildings and is
visible from all sides.
      4.   Open Space: The project master plan shall include an open space
element that defines the objectives desired with open space and how open space
will be established throughout the development. In approving the open space
element of the master plan, the planning commission shall consider how the
usable open space shall be provided within the mixed use development with the
amount and type of open space depending upon size, scale, and nature of the
development. Approved open space may include, but is not limited to, commons,
pocket parks, plazas, courtyards, landscape features, water fountains and
features, greenbelts, and trail connections. The design shall encourage
comfortable and safe pedestrian use, including landscaping, seating areas, and
lighting as appropriate as well as connections to public access such as
connections to trail systems, and water features. Unless otherwise specified
through special agreement or understanding with the city, all open space areas
shall be maintained by property owners or homeowners' associations.
      5.   Signage: Proper signage design in a mixed use development is
important to the overall theme of the development and sign locations need to be
part of the design of the project.
         a.   Business signs are limited to flat wall mounted signs and
projecting signs designed at a pedestrian scale (between 10 feet and 14 feet
above the sidewalk) placed on the storefronts and are the typical sign method
that will be considered as appropriate, except that building names, development
names and directional signage are also permitted if they integrate into the
building or theme design of the development.
         b.   Developments outside of the downtown area may be allowed one
freestanding monument tenant sign not to exceed eight feet (8') in height for
each street frontage, provided the monument sign is constructed of the same
materials as the adjacent buildings in the development and that the sign fits
in context with the development.
         c.   Other sign types may be used when allowed by a section of this
chapter governing a particular mixed use zone.
      6.   Application To Existing Buildings:
         a.   When a mixed use zone is applied on property outside of a
redevelopment district plan area the project master plan may include the use of
all or portions of existing buildings provided there is also new construction
on the site in connection with the existing building which create a compact
mixed use development following the general development standards. If existing
buildings comply with the mixed use building design standards, the new
construction shall be designed to integrate its design and materials with the
existing buildings. When existing buildings do not meet the standards outlined
in this section then revisions to the exterior of the existing buildings to
create an integrated mixed use development are required as part of the MU
zoning consideration.
         b.   When the mixed use zoning is applied to a redevelopment district
plan area the existing buildings may not be reused if they are deemed a blight
by the redevelopment plan or if such reuse of the building hinders the
attainment of the overall project master plan by noncompliance with the general
development standards and the redevelopment plan.
(Ord. 2013-33, 6-25-2013)
15-39-5: PROJECT MASTER PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   One of the key requirements in consideration of a request for the mixed
use zone is a project master plan. The project master plan establishes the
project concept, the general design, proposed mixture of uses and spatial
relationships within the project and with adjacent properties outside of the
proposed zone. A proposed project master plan for a mixed use (MU) zone shall
consist of the following:
      1.   A map or maps showing the proposed configuration of the project,
including all buildings, parking, landscaping improvements, the general
location of necessary public and/or private roads, development areas, open
space areas (including both improved open space and natural open space), public
and/or private trails, public and/or private parks and recreational facilities,
public building sites, any major stormwater drainageways, any planned
waterways, and the anticipated location of any other major public facilities
required to serve the residents and property owners within the project area.
      2.   A description of the proposed uses for each development area shown
on the project master plan map, phasing of development, if any, and shall also
include a description of the residential densities or commercial intensities of
development that are proposed within each development area or phase.
      3.   Proposed building elevations showing design, materials and colors
being proposed for the buildings. For redevelopment district projects that are
being considered for mixed use zoning this will be required only at final
approval of each phase of the redevelopment project.
      4.   A written description of any specific elements of the proposed
project that are required to explain the project master plan map and the uses,
densities, and intensities of development. Such descriptions shall include
descriptions of any specific public facilities, open space elements, parks,
trails, recreational facilities, roads or other improvements, alternative
development options, phasing requirements, and any limitations to development
due to environmental site conditions or potential impacts on adjacent uses.
   B.   The proposed project master plan, if the development is outside a
redevelopment district, shall be reviewed at the same time as the proposed
development agreement. The project master plan shall be modified to incorporate
any changes required by the city, any conditions or limitations to the
development of the land required by the city and any agreements, approvals or
other matters anticipated or required by the city as necessary to develop the
subject land. The project master plan, with these corrections, shall be deemed
approved upon incorporation into a final development agreement that is adopted
by an ordinance in connection with the reclassification of the subject land to
mixed use conditional (MU) zoning in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
   C.   An approved master plan for the complete area within a redevelopment
district that has MU zoning, approved by resolution of the redevelopment agency
board, is required before new development is permitted for construction. The
master plan shall meet the requirements of this section, the standards of this
chapter and also the purposes of the redevelopment district that has been
established for the specific redevelopment district.
(Ord. 2011-23, 5-3-2011)
15-39-6: DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   The development agreement sets the specific standards and requirements
that are attached to a specific mixed use project. The conditions and
limitations are based on the approval process and compliance with the general
standards and specific requirements established during the approval process for
rezoning and the associated master plan. For a development in a redevelopment
district plan area the development agreement requirements apply to only the
area being considered for final approval to allow construction of a phase of
the development, which may or may not include the full development. A proposed
and final project development agreement shall include the following minimum
requirements:
      1.   A legal description for the land covered by the proposed project and
the names of all persons holding legal title to any portion of such land;
      2.   The configuration of the project as shown on a project master plan;
      3.   Development standards covering all proposed regulations governing
the design, form, location, placement or configuration of any improvement to
real property, whether privately or publicly owned, including, without
limitation, standards for lot sizes, setbacks, height limitations, landscaping
and parking requirements, lighting, signage, fencing, wall and buffer
standards, and architectural design guidelines and specifications;
      4.   Development standards that may vary from development standards and
regulations generally applicable to development in the city, regardless of
zoning classification but that are consistent with the general development
standards of this chapter;
      5.   Development widths for public and private rights of way that may
vary from existing city standards and specifications;
      6.   A description of the public facilities, services and utilities to be
provided and a mechanism to assure that such facilities and services will be
provided in connection with any development of the land;
      7.   A description of recreational or open space facilities and amenities
to be provided and a mechanism to assure that such facilities and amenities
will be provided in connection with any development of the land;
      8.   A description of the timing and phasing of development;
      9.   A description of the various city approvals required before the
commencement of construction and other procedures that will be required after
approval of the development agreement;
      10.   A description of such agreements, conditions or restrictions
necessary to cause the project to achieve compliance with the general plan or
redevelopment plan, or otherwise necessary to make a finding required for
approval of the project;
      11.   A requirement that the project be subject to periodic reviews to
ascertain compliance with the requirements of the development agreement;
      12.   The terms and conditions under which the rights and benefits
derived under the development agreement will expire or terminate based on the
applicant's failure to meet the conditions of approval or commence development
within a reasonable period of time, as well as any other terms and conditions
affecting the duration of the agreement;
      13.   Provisions for enforcement of the terms and conditions of the
development agreement;
      14.   Provisions for making amendments to the development agreement;
      15.   Such other terms as may be proposed and agreed to between the city
and developer; and
      16.   Signed by all owners of the property subject to the development
agreement, and consented to by any holders of equitable interests in the
property.
   B.   The development agreement shall:
      1.   Be reviewed at the same time as the proposed project master plan for
a rezoning or, in the case of a redevelopment district, at the time of the
final approval to allow construction of a phase of the development.
      2.   Be modified to incorporate any changes required in the final
approval by the city either for the rezoning or to allow development to
proceed. The modifications shall include any conditions or limitations to the
development of the land required in the final approval by the city and any
agreements, approvals or other matters anticipated or required by the city as
necessary ultimately to develop the subject land.
      3.   For projects not included in a redevelopment district, be adopted
and approved as part of an ordinance approving the reclassification of the
subject land to the mixed use (MU) zone classification, after review and
recommendation of the planning commission and compliance with all notice and
hearing requirements.
      4.   For projects included in a redevelopment district, be adopted and
approved after review and recommendation of the planning commission and
compliance with all notice and hearing requirements. If the property to be
developed includes land owned by the redevelopment agency, the development
agreement shall be approved or denied by the redevelopment agency. If the
property to be developed is privately owned, the development agreement shall be
approved or denied by the mayor. A development agreement may not be approved or
adopted under this subsection B4 if it proposes to make a major change to the
approved master plan unless an amendment to the master plan is first approved
by the redevelopment agency. Major changes are those changes which would:
         a.   Relocate or remove a street, but not including relocation of
parking areas, alleyways or paved surfaces designed for access to individual
units or buildings which still comply with the standards of this chapter;
         b.   Relocate, reduce or remove areas of open space, including
improved open space or natural open space, designated in the open space element
of the master plan as public open space or as publicly accessible green space
that is privately maintained;
         c.   Relocate, reduce or remove any public building or public
facility;
         d.   Result in a change of use for more than ten percent (10%) of the
buildings as designated in the master plan for the phase or development area
included in the development agreement;
         e.   Result in an increase or decrease of more than ten percent (10%)
of the total number of buildings as designated in the master plan for the phase
or development area included in the development agreement;
         f.   Result in a decrease in the density of residential units of more
than ten percent (10%) as designated in the master plan for the phase or
development area included in the development agreement;
         g.   Result in an increase or decrease in the square footage of
nonresidential uses of more than ten percent (10%) as designated in the master
plan for the phase or development area included in the development agreement;
or
         h.   Result in any one land use type violating the percentage
restrictions contained in section
15-39-3 of this chapter.
   C.   The development agreement may contain uses, densities and site
development standards that may vary from uses, densities and site development
standards applicable in different zoning districts, in different MU zones and
with respect to different projects. Development regulations and standards of
general application, including all applicable requirements of the sensitive
area overlay zone, shall apply to the MU zone, unless specifically waived or
varied in the development agreement.
   D.   The development standards required and allowed in an MU zone adopted
pursuant to this chapter shall be those development standards specified in an
approved development agreement for the subject project and such other
development standards and regulations as are contained in the zoning,
subdivision and other land use and development laws and regulations of the city
that are not specifically waived or varied in the approved development
agreement. The development agreement may provide that the provisions of the
development agreement shall control over any inconsistent development standard
contained in this title.
   E.   The development approval processes and procedures that apply to
projects governed by a development agreement, including, without limitation,
subdivision, site plan, and other land use approvals, shall be those processes
and procedures contained in the city's zoning, subdivision and other land use
and development laws and regulations in existence and effective on the date of
the application for the applicable land use approval.
   F.   Except as set forth in the following sentence, a development agreement
and a project master plan for a project covered by a development agreement may
be amended on such terms and following such processes as is provided in the
final development agreement. Notwithstanding the provisions of the development
agreement, any amendment to a development agreement that alters or modifies the
duration of the development agreement, modifies the allowed uses, increases the
maximum density or intensity of use, deletes any major public amenity described
therein, or modifies provisions for reservation and dedication of land,
including open space dedications, shall be deemed a substantial amendment and
shall require the review and recommendation of the planning commission and a
decision by the city council, after complying with all noticing and public
hearing requirements for the rezoning of property.
   G.   A development agreement may vest the right of the developer to develop
the property that is the subject of the development agreement in accordance
with the uses, densities, intensities, general configuration of development and
any other development standards described and incorporated into the approved
development agreement. Any such vested right shall be subject to the following
reserved legislative powers: No provision of a development agreement shall
limit the future exercise of the police power of the city in enacting generally
applicable land use laws after the date of the approval of a development
agreement and to apply such land use laws to modify the vested rights
established by an approved development agreement provided that the policies,
facts and circumstances applicable to the new land use laws meet the
compelling, countervailing public interest exception to the vested rights
doctrine in the state of Utah.
   H.   Contiguous parcels of land under separate ownership (or proposed to be
developed by separate developers) may be included in a single MU zone on the
condition that each parcel is covered by the development agreement, the
development agreement is signed by all owners and, where applicable, any
separate proposed developer. A single development agreement may address the
joint or separate obligations of two (2) or more owners or two (2) or more
developers of parcels within the property covered by the development agreement.
Alternatively, the city may elect to require separate applications and/or
separate development agreements under circumstances where property within a
single MU zone is or will be owned and/or developed by two (2) or more owners
or developers. The city may elect to process related applications for
development agreements separately or together. Notwithstanding the above, the
city may impose additional conditions and requirements deemed necessary to
ensure the implementation of the project master plan considering existing and
future ownership scenarios and the likelihood that more than one developer may
be involved.
   I.   The terms of a development agreement shall be binding on the city and
all successors in the ownership and occupancy of any portion of the project
property covered by the development agreement. A development agreement may
require that the land that is the subject of a development agreement be
encumbered and regulated by private covenants, conditions and restrictions
consistent with the requirements of the development agreement. The form and
content of the covenants, conditions and restrictions shall be determined by
the project owner, but the city shall review the instrument prior to recording
and may require the inclusion or revision of provisions necessary to implement
the approved development agreement.
   J.   The development agreement shall be in a form approved by the city
attorney. For purposes of final execution, the applicant shall demonstrate to
the satisfaction of the city attorney that the agreement will be executed by
the owners of all of the property subject to the development agreement, by
delivering to the city attorney a copy of a title policy or other documentation
acceptable to the city attorney verifying such ownership.
(Ord. 2011-23, 5-3-2011)
15-39-7: MIXED USE (MU) APPLICATION AND REVIEW PROCEDURE:
   A.   General Requirements: Applications for the reclassification of property
to an MU zone and for a project development agreement approval shall be
considered together and recommended approved or denied at the same time by the
planning commission with the city council taking final action on the
recommendation. Other related, project specific applications requiring approval
of the city council, including, without limitation, any necessary general plan
text or map amendments shall be considered together and approved or denied at
the same time as the application for the MU zone and the development agreement.
For rezoning requests other than those in redevelopment districts where the MU
zone may be applied, all contiguous property under one ownership shall be
planned in a unified and comprehensive fashion and shall be included in an
application for MU zone and project development agreement consideration and
approval.
   B.   Nonredevelopment Project Area Initial Rezoning Application
Requirements: The initial application for projects not included in a
redevelopment district shall include the following information:
      1.   Proposed Project Master Plan: A proposed project master plan
containing the information required by subsection
15-39-5A of this chapter;
      2.   Proposed Development Agreement: The key provisions proposed to be
contained in a proposed development agreement, addressing all of the
information required by subsection
15-39-6A of this chapter;
      3.   Findings: A statement addressing each of the findings required for
the approval and adoption of an MU zone, accompanied by such information as may
be necessary or appropriate to allow the city to assess the project in light of
the required findings;
      4.   Description: A description of the existing ownership of the
property, any property transactions necessary to implement the project master
plan, and a description of how development responsibilities are intended to be
handled in light of such ownership;
      5.   Fees: Any fee required for processing such application under title
4, chapter 6 of this code; and
      6.   Additional Information: The director may require the submission of
additional preliminary site development information including slope analysis
and other conceptual planning information to the extent reasonably necessary to
permit the city to evaluate the proposed development;
      7.   Preapplication Conference: The applicant is encouraged to have a
preapplication conference with the director to ascertain the appropriate scope
of any additional information that may reasonably be expected in connection
with any application for an MU zone and development agreement approval. The
applicant is also encouraged to meet with the building official and the fire
marshal to be advised of how the proposed development standards may affect
building and fire code requirements;
      8.   Visual Presentation: The applicant shall provide as part of the
proposed master plan for the review of the planning commission and the city
council a three-dimensional visual presentation, preferably using computer
graphics, depicting the buildings to be constructed under the proposed project
master plan within the context of existing, surrounding development.
   C.   Planning Commission Review Of Nonredevelopment Project Area Initial
Rezoning Application; Preparation Of Proposed Development Agreement: For
projects not included in a redevelopment district:
      1.   The initial application shall first be referred to the planning
commission for review and comment at a public meeting. The purpose of such
review is not to provide or indicate any approval or denial of such
application, but to provide any comments that would assist the director in
negotiating the actual terms and conditions of a proposed development agreement
with the applicant, and to identify any other related, project specific
petitions requiring approval of the city council, such as required plan
amendments, which petitions must be filed for concurrent consideration with the
application.
      2.   After such review and comment of the planning commission, the
director, with the assistance of the city attorney, and with the concurrence of
the applicant, shall prepare a proposed development agreement containing all of
the information required by subsection
15-39-6A of this chapter. After such proposed agreement is completed, the
application shall then be scheduled and noticed as a petition for rezoning
before the planning commission, along with any other related, project specific
petitions requiring approval of the city council.
      3.   If the director and the applicant cannot concur on the terms and
conditions of a proposed development agreement, the applicant may prepare and
submit on its own behalf a proposed development agreement containing all of the
information required by subsection
15-39-6A of this chapter. Upon the submission of such agreement, and the
submission of any other related, project specific petitions requiring approval
of the city council, the application shall be scheduled and noticed as a
petition for rezoning before the planning commission.
      4.   The initial application, together with the proposed development
agreement containing all of the information required by subsection 15-39-6A of
this chapter and the complete submission of all other related, project specific
petitions requiring approval of the city council, shall constitute a final
application for MU zoning.
   D.   Review Of Final Application Of Nonredevelopment Project Area: The final
application for an MU zone shall be processed and reviewed following the normal
processes and procedures for the adoption or amendment of the zoning ordinances
and the zoning map. In any area, if general plan amendments are required, the
normal processes and procedures for plan amendments shall also be followed,
including all noticing and public hearing requirements. For projects not
included in a redevelopment district, before an MU zone is designated, the city
council, after review and recommendation of the planning commission, shall
determine that:
      1.   The proposed mixed use project to be covered by the MU zone may be
approved consistent with any general plan policies for the establishment of
mixed use projects or MU zoning and the provisions of this chapter;
      2.   The proposed mixed use project is described in a conceptual project
master plan meeting the requirements of this chapter showing the general
configuration of the project, including the general location of development
areas and including the types of uses contemplated within each development
area, necessary public and/or private roads, recreational and open space
amenity areas reasonably anticipated to meet the needs of the residents, any
public facilities and other features of the project, which conceptual project
master plan is to be incorporated into, and adopted along with, the development
agreement;
      3.   Adequate public and private utility services, streets and other
public services can service the proposed development and that if improvements
are needed the development agreement contains a mechanism to assure the
provision of such services in connection with any development approved pursuant
to the development agreement;
      4.   The applicant has demonstrated the feasibility of complying with all
necessary site development standards required for developments in Ogden City
and will establish mechanisms necessary to assure compliance with all
applicable city ordinances;
      5.   The proposed development (considering such mitigating conditions as
may be imposed) will not have a material adverse impact on other property in
the vicinity of the development;
      6.   The applicant has a reasonable financial plan providing for the
construction and maintenance of all reasonably required facilities and other
improvements in connection with the development of the project;
      7.   The proposed development furthers goals and objectives of the
general plan; and
      8.   Approving the MU zone classification will not adversely affect the
public health, safety, and general welfare.
Upon approval of an application for an MU zone, the ordinance reclassifying the
property to an MU zone and adopting the final development agreement and
incorporating the final project master plan shall be published as an amendment
to the zoning ordinances and the zoning map. The ordinance shall provide for
the execution of the final development agreement and the recording of such
agreement against the land covered by the project approvals.
   E.   Redevelopment Project Area Rezoning Procedures: A petition or request
to rezone property within an established redevelopment district to MU:
      1.   May be applied for by an interested party or begun by the city.
      2.   Shall follow the normal procedure for changing zoning of property
within Ogden City limits.
      3.   Shall follow the procedures required by the city.
      4.   Shall be reviewed by the planning commission in a public hearing
after which the planning commission may recommend approval or denial of the
request based on the request complying with the general plan and that such
zoning change would be in the best interest in furthering the attainment of the
purposes of the established redevelopment district.
      5.   Shall be referred to the city council who, after review and
recommendation of the planning commission, shall determine that:
         a.   The proposed mixed use project to be covered by the MU zone may
be approved consistent with any general plan policies for the establishment of
mixed use projects or MU zoning and the provisions of this chapter;
         b.   The proposed development (considering such mitigating conditions
as may be imposed) will not have a material adverse impact on other property in
the vicinity of the development;
         c.   The proposed development furthers goals and objectives of the
general plan;
         d.   Approving the MU zone classification will not adversely affect
the public health, safety, and general welfare; and
         e.   Approving the MU zone classification will further the attainment
of the purposes of the established redevelopment district.
   F.   Master Plan For A Redevelopment MU Zone: Once an area has been rezoned
MU in an established redevelopment district, but prior to any new construction,
an owner, developer or the redevelopment agency shall submit a master
development plan for the entire area that is zoned MU.
      1.   The master plan shall comply with the regulations and procedures
outlined in this chapter in order to be considered for approval.
      2.   Approval of the master plan, including any architectural design
book, shall be by the redevelopment agency board upon recommendation of the
planning commission that the master plan complies with the standards of this
chapter, the general plan and the purposes of the redevelopment district. If an
architectural design book is utilized, it may be approved or amended in
conjunction with the approval of the master plan or at any time thereafter.
      3.   An approved master plan for the complete area within a redevelopment
district that has MU zoning is required before new development can be
considered for a final development agreement.
   G.   Application For Construction, Expansion And Use In A Redevelopment
District:
      1.   Uses: When a mixed use zone is applied to the area of a
redevelopment district, generally the properties have current development or
uses on them which the redevelopment plan seeks to upgrade or change. The
application of the mixed use zone on these properties based on the
redevelopment plan creates a new zoning regulation on the properties.
         a.   The existing properties may continue their use at the time of
rezoning but any consideration of exterior improvements (excluding normal
maintenance) to the site, new uses on the property, expansion of existing
structures, proposals to construct new buildings or use vacant buildings shall
not be allowed until such proposals are reviewed and approved as being
consistent with the master plan unless special provisions for reuse are
approved during the rezoning and the conditions explained as additions to this
section.
         b.   A proposal for site improvements, new uses on the property,
expansion of existing structures, proposals for new construction or use of
vacant buildings shall be considered as final project master plans and
development agreement, and shall follow the general development standards and
requirements of this chapter in order to receive approval.
         c.   If the property to be developed is owned by the redevelopment
agency, the final site plan shall be reviewed by the planning commission and
approved or denied by the redevelopment agency. If the land is privately owned
the final site plan shall be reviewed by the planning commission and approved
or denied by the mayor.
      2.   Reuse Provisions For Ogden River Redevelopment Plan: Only the
existing buildings west of Lincoln Avenue and east of Wall Avenue in the Ogden
River redevelopment mixed use zone shall be considered for reuse under the
provisions of subsection G1 of this section, provided the reuse complies with
the provisions of a change of nonconforming use as required in subsection
15-6-3C of this title. No consideration of expansion of a nonconforming use
will be allowed to be considered. The ability to use this provision is lost if
the use is no longer nonconforming.
(Ord. 2011-23, 5-3-2011)
15-39-8: USES AND STANDARDS ALLOWED FOR MIXED USE ZONE PROJECTS:
   A.   Uses allowed in the Ogden River redevelopment MU zone between 18th and
20th Streets, and Wall Avenue to Washington Boulevard:
      1.   Dining:
         a.   Restaurants, provided that if adjacent to the river, required to
have outdoor dining areas as part of service. Maximum floor space limited to
three thousand (3,000) square feet.
         b.   Specialty food or drink businesses with a maximum of two thousand
(2,000) square feet of floor area.
      2.   Personal services:
         a.   Limited to hairdresser, barber, manicurist, tanning salon.
         b.   Must have residential units on floors above personal service
business if a ground floor use.
      3.   Professional or business office:
         a.   Building footprint square footage limited to ten thousand
(10,000) square foot maximum and required to have dwelling units on floors
above office area.
      4.   Residential of the following types:
         a.   Attached row homes/townhomes of a minimum of one thousand three
hundred (1,300) square feet per dwelling.
         b.   Apartment buildings with average unit size of nine hundred fifty
(950) square feet. An apartment building may also include common laundry area
or other personal services on main floor in building which are not counted in
the average unit size but would not alter the building type as an apartment. An
average unit size of nine hundred (900) square feet is allowed if the apartment
building provides an on site fitness, meeting or social room, or a combination
thereof, larger than the largest unit in the apartment complex on the block.
         c.   Dwelling units above nonresidential space except live-work:
Single story of dwelling units above nonresidential space shall have an average
unit size of one thousand one hundred (1,100) square feet if three (3) or more
units. Where only one residential unit above nonresidential space, unit shall
have the same exterior dimensions as the building below. Single story of
dwelling units above nonresidential space with two (2) units shall have the
same exterior dimensions as the building below and may have one unit a minimum
of four hundred (400) square feet for the smallest unit with second unit
occupying remainder of the building footprint. Two (2) or more stories of
residential above nonresidential space shall have an average unit size of nine
hundred (900) square feet.
         d.   Single-family detached dwelling units on lots up to three
thousand (3,000) square feet with a density of at least ten (10) dwelling units
per acre, provided that the total number of single-family detached dwelling
units does not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the total number of residential
units in the development.
      5.   Retail of the following types:
         a.   General retail sales, provided that individual retail use per
unit is limited in size to a maximum of ten thousand (10,000) square feet, with
no individual building having a footprint larger than fifteen thousand (15,000)
square feet and no outdoor storage areas.
         b.   Live-work space with a maximum total floor area size of two
thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet per live-work combined unit. The
ground floor retail space and the dwelling unit above the space shall be
internally connected. The product sold on the main floor may also be
manufactured or assembled on site provided there is no outdoor storage of
materials and only the finished product may be displayed in approved display
areas in front of store during business hours and the use does not produce
obnoxious odors, fumes, dust or noise detectable or audible from the exterior
of the building.
   B.   Special design standards for Ogden River redevelopment MU zone between
18th and 20th Streets, and Wall Avenue to Washington Boulevard:
      1.   The height of any building on the south side of the Ogden River
shall be limited to a height that will not cast a shadow at twelve o'clock (12:
00) noon on December 21 into the closest edge of the water in the river. The
edge of the water is determined by the height of the water during the average
flow in the river during December.
      2.   There are two (2) main building categories permitted in the
development: a small building category and a large building category.
         a.   In the small building category there are six (6) building types
which may be used and are limited to:
            (1)   Cottages;
            (2)   Carriage homes;
            (3)   Townhomes;
            (4)   Apartment buildings of six (6) or less units with one parking
stall per unit built into the building;
            (5)   Mixed use buildings with a maximum footprint of one thousand
five hundred (1,500) square feet and a maximum of two (2) dwelling units above
the nonresidential space; or
            (6)   Live-work.
         b.   The large building category is limited to three (3) building
types:
            (1)   Apartment;
            (2)   Mixed use; or
            (3)   Retail.
         c.   There shall be a mixture of at least four (4) different building
types on a development block. Buildings from the large building category shall
not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total number of buildings on a
development block.
         d.   A "development block" is defined as the area bounded by public
streets creating the exterior four (4) sides of a development area. When a
development block is divided by the Ogden River, a minimum of thirty three
percent (33%) of the buildings on each side of the river shall be from the
small building category with the entire development block not having more than
fifty percent (50%) of the buildings being from the large building category.
      3.   Within each building type are defined architectural styles that may
be used in the development project. The architectural styles that shall be used
for the small building types are: arts and crafts, victorian and transitional
modern. The architectural styles that shall be used for the large building
types also include loft/industrial. Live-work and small mixed use type
buildings may use all four (4) architectural styles. The general design
characteristics of these architectural styles and by which any building
development will be evaluated for compliance to this requirement is found in
the "Ogden River Project Design Guide" book. On any one "development block" as
defined in subsection B2 of this section there shall be a minimum of three (3)
architectural styles used.
      4.   No individual large building type shall be longer than one hundred
fifty feet (150') along a public street frontage except for the frontages of
Wall, Washington and 20th Street. The maximum individual large building type
length on those streets is two hundred fifty feet (250'); except the frontage
between Lincoln and Grant on 20th Street where the length of the building may
equal the length of the block. The maximum individual building length of a
large building type facing the Ogden River is one hundred twenty feet (120').
      5.   Screening walls are permitted only to screen service areas,
dumpsters or to provide separation of transition between spaces. Screening wall
design and materials shall match the architectural themes and materials of the
buildings in the area they are located.
      6.   Fencing shall meet the following standards:
         a.   No fencing of individual spaces is permitted between the front of
a building and a public street or between the fronts of buildings and common
open space area.
         b.   No fencing is permitted between buildings and the Ogden River
unless such fence is used to define a required outdoor dining area and the
materials and design are compatible with the building with which it is
associated.
         c.   Fencing used to define space between a cottage and an allowed
detached garage is limited to wood or ornamental metal fences.
         d.   No chainlink or vinyl fencing is permitted.
      7.   Temporary and banner signs meeting the following standards and
complying with section
18-3-11 of this code shall be permitted:
         a.   Temporary Signs: A-frame signs are the only type of temporary
signage allowed and are limited to the Ogden River Parkway frontage or the Park
Boulevard frontage. A-frame signs along the river frontage must be on private
property and may not be located between the river and the south edge of the
trail.
         b.   Banner Signs:
            (1)   Perpendicular building banner signs and light pole banner
signs are the only type of banner signage allowed and are limited to use on
commercial, mixed use and live-work buildings.
            (2)   Light pole banner signs are only allowed in parking lots.
      8.   The front of buildings located adjacent to 20th Street between Grant
Avenue and Washington Boulevard may orient to common open space rather than
20th Street.
(Ord. 2013-24, 5-28-2013; amd. Ord. 2013-33, 6-25-2013; Ord. 2013-34, 6-25-
2013; Ord. 2013-43, 10-1-2013)
CHAPTER 40
COMMERCIAL RECREATION ZONE CRC-1
SECTION:
15-40-1: Purpose And Intent
15-40-2: Permitted Uses
15-40-3: Conditional Uses
15-40-4: Site Development Standards
15-40-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of this Zone is to provide locations where limited service
facilities and goods normally required by the public in the pursuit of general
recreation activities can be obtained in mountain areas, at major canyon
highway intersections, and at major recreation resort areas. Even though the
Zone is commercial in concept, it is distinctly limited commercial and shall be
compatible with the general surrounding natural environment. To achieve this
objective, the general siting and architectural design of buildings and
structures, the layout of parking areas and landscaping will be carefully
reviewed to ensure the preservation to the greatest possible extent of the
natural amenities and environment.
(Ord. 72-13, 7-6-1972; amd. Ord. 99-38, 10-19-1999)
15-40-2: PERMITTED USES:
   A.   Gift shop.
   B.   Parks and recreation grounds, private or public, including picnic
areas.
   C.   Restaurant.
   D.   Swimming pool, private or public.
   E.   Temporary building for use incidental to construction work. Such
building shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of the
construction work.
   F.   Accessory building and use customarily incidental to any permitted use.
(Ord. 72-13, 7-6-1972; amd. Ord. 99-38, 10-19-1999)
15-40-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following uses shall be permitted only when authorized by a conditional use
permit as provided in Chapter 7 of this Title:
   A.   Indoor recreational facilities for rental to clubs or organized groups
for recreation activities.
   B.   Stables, public, including horse rentals, provided conducted in an area
of at least one acre size.
(Ord. 72-13, 7-6-1972; amd. Ord. 99-38, 10-19-1999)
15-40-4: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Minimum Lot Area: Minimum lot area, twenty thousand (20,000) square
feet.
   B.   Minimum Lot Width: Minimum lot width, one hundred twenty five feet
(125').
   C.   Minimum Yard Setbacks For Structures:
      1.   Front, thirty feet (30').
      2.   Side, twenty feet (20') each side.
      3.   Rear, thirty feet (30').
   D.   Building Height:
      1.   Minimum, one story.
      2.   Maximum, two and one-half (21/2) stories or thirty five feet (35').
(Ord. 72-13, 7-6-1972; amd. Ord. 99-38, 10-19-1999)
CHAPTER 41
NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL ZONES NC-1, NC-2
SECTION:
15-41-1: Purpose And Intent
15-41-2: Definitions
15-41-3: Scope And Applications
15-41-4: Site Design Standards
15-41-5: Commercial And Office Building Design Standards
15-41-6: Residential Building Design Standards
15-41-7: Uses
15-41-8: Special Requirements
15-41-9: Review And Administration
15-41-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The neighborhood commercial zones are intended to be applied to those areas of
the city where traditional commercial development patterns have established
generally small scale commercial uses in neighborhoods throughout Ogden City.
The neighborhood commercial zones are to provide for the reuse of existing
buildings and new construction of buildings that will be compatible with and
complement the residential character of the areas where they are located. The
purpose of the design standards is to provide physical upgrades in building
appearance, site improvements, signage limitations and other features of
development that not only improve the individual property but improve the
neighborhood character and are consistent with traditional compact neighborhood
development. Key to the requirements is compact development, mixed uses, being
pedestrian oriented and reflecting the traditional built environment in which
they are located.
   A.   Limited Scale Neighborhood Commercial (NC-1): The NC-1 zone is intended
for those small single lot developments or small clusters of single lot
developments that run linearly along the street or are located at intersections
of streets but are less than two and one-half (2.5) acres in composite size.
   B.   Expanded Scale Neighborhood Commercial (NC-2): The NC-2 zone is
intended for the northwest corner of 7th and Monroe and the 2400 block of
Monroe. These locations have existing larger scale buildings, multiple property
owners, and serve a larger area than just the immediate neighborhood. The
relationship of the development of the block beyond individual property lines,
mixed uses, and the other characteristics of the neighborhood commercial zone
are important for this zone.
(Ord. 2009-17, 1-13-2009)
15-41-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms, as used in this chapter, shall have the respective
meanings as defined in this section:
EAST CENTRAL COMMUNITY: The area located between 20th and 30th Streets, Adams
to Harrison.
FACADE: The exterior wall of a building.
FLOOR AREA: The square footage of the ground floor of a building measured from
exterior wall surface to exterior wall surface.
LIGHT SOURCE: The lamp or bulb that produces light.
LIVE-WORK SPACE ON GROUND FLOOR: A building that has a storefront for a
commercial type use and the rear portion of the building is used as a
residential dwelling unit.
PARAPET: A low wall used along the edge of a roof.
PUBLIC VIEW: The visual ability of any person at street level on or across a
public street within a one hundred fifty foot (150') distance to see
unobstructed any item on the property. Any ground mounted item set back more
than thirty feet (30') from the required building line and not visible except
when viewed at fifteen degrees (15°) or less from perpendicular is considered
not in the public view.
REQUIRED BUILDING LINE (RBL): The maximum distance a building shall be built
from the property line. The RBL is a requirement, not a permissive minimum as
is a setback.
REUSE: The use of an existing building for any permitted use if the building
has been vacant for a continuous time period of one year or longer or a change
of use in a noncomplying structure.
SETBACK: The minimum distance that is required to be landscaped between a
property line and the closest parallel edge of a building or parking area to
that property line.
(Ord. 2009-17, 1-13-2009)
15-41-3: SCOPE AND APPLICATIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all new construction or reuse of
existing buildings in the NC-1 or NC-2 zone. When not stated otherwise the
provisions of the other land use regulations of Ogden City are still applicable
to development under this chapter. If there are conflicts between the other
land use regulations and the provisions of this chapter the provisions of this
chapter shall apply.
(Ord. 2009-17, 1-13-2009)
15-41-4: SITE DESIGN STANDARDS:
New construction of a building on a portion of a lot or new construction on a
cleared site, reuse of an existing building, including change to the parking
area or expansion of an existing building and parking area are to be developed
according to the following requirements:
   A.   RBL And Setbacks For New Construction In NC-1 And NC-2 Zones: The
street facing facade shall have a minimum of sixty percent (60%) of the
building built to the required build to line (RBL). Parking areas shall be set
back from the property lines based on the following minimum setbacks. Interior
side yard setbacks shall be the same width for both interior side yards.
 
                Building                       Parking
Facing a street 0' RBL                         20' setback
Interior side   0' setback except when next to 10' setback unless has shared
                residential use then 10'       access then 0'
Rear            0' setback except when next to 5' setback
                residential use then 10'
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4297.png]
 
   B.   RBL And Setbacks For Existing Buildings, Additions, Parking Lots And
Vehicle Accessways:
      1.   Existing buildings that are being used or proposed for reuse are
exempt from the setbacks and RBL requirements for new construction.
      2.   Additions to an existing building shall comply with setback
requirements for new construction listed above. Expansions of the existing
building to the street face of the building shall meet the RBL requirement
distance as close as possible given the total size of the proposed addition.
The longest axis of the building addition shall be directed toward the street
property line. This provision is met when the expansion is toward the street in
either direction on a corner lot development.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4301.png]
 
      3.   When either an expansion or reuse of the building occurs, an
existing on site parking lot which does not meet the minimum parking setback
requirements for new construction shall comply with the required setback and
landscaping of unused access areas and parking lot landscaping requirements of
this chapter. The planning commission may approve a lesser landscaped setback
if it is determined the landscaping would eliminate required parking because it
removes the parking or the backup area needed to make the parking function. In
these situations the planning commission may require a maximum three foot (3')
tall screen brick wall or a hedge to be installed in lieu of the full
landscaped setback.
   C.   Maximum Building Height:
      1.   NC-1 zone: Twenty feet (20').
      2.   NC-2 zone: Thirty five feet (35').
   D.   Minimum Lot Area: There is no minimum lot area requirement. Appropriate
lot size is based on the ability to meet all development requirements of this
chapter to determine if the lot is of sufficient size for the proposed use.
   E.   Vehicle Access:
      1.   One vehicle access into or out of any single lot development shall
be permitted per street frontage. A second access on a street frontage for a
lot shall be allowed if there is a shared access with an adjoining NC zoned
property or if the lot has sufficient frontage for a second accessway separated
by at least two hundred fifty feet (250') from the first accessway.
      2.   The driveway width shall be a minimum of twenty four feet (24') wide
for two-way access and a maximum of twenty eight feet (28') wide. A one-way
driveway shall be a minimum of fourteen feet (14') wide and a maximum of
eighteen feet (18') wide.
      3.   Adjacent lots in an NC zone shall have a shared access when
possible. The developer must contact the adjacent property owner closest to the
proposed driveway and supply a letter that the owner is willing or not willing
to enter into a shared access easement. If the adjacent owner is not willing to
share access their reason should be stated on the letter. If a shared accessway
occurs it shall be secured by a shared reciprocal access easement recorded on
both properties which share the access prior to issuing a building permit.
      4.   If parking lots do not share an access, the accessway shall be set
back a minimum of ten feet (10') from any side or rear yard property line
extended to the street and shall not be closer than fifty feet (50') to any
street corner.
   F.   Parking Lot Locations:
      1.   Parking areas shall be located to the side or rear of the building.
      2.   For the purpose of this regulation the street facing facade is
considered the front of the building and parking cannot be located between the
front of the building and the street. Existing parking lots that are between
the front of the building and the street are allowed to continue after reuse of
the building or expansion of the building provided the landscape setbacks are
installed according to subsection B3 of this section and the parking lot design
standards of subsection G of this section are met.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4305.png]
 
   G.   Parking Lot Designs:
      1.   Parking areas shall have concrete edging installed to separate
landscaping from parking areas. When landscaping is required it shall not be
placed over asphalt or concrete. Whenever a landscaped island under this
provision is required it shall be a minimum width of nine feet (9') and shall
extend the length of the parking stalls it abuts. Landscaped islands shall be
required for each of the following conditions:
         a.   The end of each row of stalls.
         b.   One island shall be placed to divide a longer row of stalls so
there are no more than twenty (20) stalls between islands.
         c.   To define parking lot entrances.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4307.png]
 
      2.   When landscaped islands are required, a minimum of one deciduous
tree shall be planted for each eighteen foot (18') length of island. This tree
requirement is in addition to the number of trees required on the remainder of
the lot. The surface of the islands shall be planted and maintained with low
water demand plants. The plants shall be of such size and spacing that they
shall cover the surface of the island within three (3) years. Plantings shall
be maintained at a height not to exceed three feet (3') except for the trees
which shall have a clear area up to six feet (6') above the parking lot
surface.
      3.   A minimum five foot (5') wide walkway shall be installed which
connects the parking lot to the main entrance of the building and also leads to
the public sidewalk parallel to the street. This walk shall be of a different
material from the parking lot surface so it is easily identified and separates
pedestrian traffic routes from the vehicle movement patterns.
      4.   Sites formerly used as convenience stores or service stations where
fueling pumps have been removed or are no longer in service shall landscape
these areas which are no longer needed for required access or parking in order
to become more compatible with the residential character of the surrounding
area. Notwithstanding the provisions that specify when the required landscape
setback is to be installed, the specific locations of 675 N. Monroe, 1390 E.
9th Street, 2605 Monroe and 2975-2985 Lincoln shall submit a landscape
development plan to the planning commission by June 1, 2009, showing how the
total paved area on the site will be reduced to comply with a modified parking
requirement as provided in this paragraph, access areas and limited driveway
approaches according to the requirements of this chapter. Based on the scale of
the improvements, the planning commission shall establish a time frame from one
to a maximum of three (3) years for the landscaping improvements to be
completed and excess paving removed. The modified parking requirement to be met
is based on the use of the property on January 13, 2009, and allows maximum
parking of one stall per two hundred (200) square feet for a convenience store
that is being reused, one stall per three hundred (300) square feet for a
general retail use and one stall per one hundred (100) square feet for fast
food use.
   H.   Lighting:
      1.   The maximum height for freestanding parking lot lighting shall be
fifteen feet (15') in the NC-1 zone and twenty feet (20') in the NC-2 zone.
Lighting standards shall be installed along the street frontage of the property
on the private property side at a spacing of ninety feet (90') on center.
      2.   All parking lot and security light sources shall direct the light
downwards through the means of shields or light fixture designs. The maximum
light angle from the light source shall be sixty degrees (60°) from vertical.
      3.   Notwithstanding the maximum light angle, no direct lighting shall be
permitted to occur on adjacent residential properties. Direct view of the light
source and the light they produce from the rear or side yard of residential
properties including light from signs is prohibited.
      4.   A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the parking lot lighting shall
be extinguished one hour after the close of business but no later than ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M. Security lighting shall also meet the standards of this
section.
   I.   Mechanical And Service Equipment:
      1.   All ground mounted equipment, including transformers and dumpsters,
shall be located at the side or rear yard of the site and screened from the
public view and adjacent property owners by use of a minimum six foot (6') tall
masonry wall.
         a.   Walls must be compatible in design and materials to the buildings
within the development in regards to textures, colors and materials.
         b.   Dumpsters should be confined to portions of the site least
visible from public view.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4309.png]
 
      2.   Roof mounted mechanical equipment, including satellite dishes with a
diameter of four feet (4') or larger and antennas, shall be fully screened from
public view and adjacent property owners by means of a penthouse structure or
behind parapet walls. Screening materials should be compatible with the
materials, textures, and colors of the building. Screening designs should be
architecturally integrated with the building top and maintain balance in the
building design.
   J.   Fencing:
      1.   No fencing shall be allowed in the front parking setback area in
either the NC-1 or NC-2 zone. A masonry wall no taller than three feet (3') in
height may be allowed in the front setback area provided the wall has the same
design characteristics of color, texture and materials as found on the main
building on the site where the wall is constructed.
      2.   Screening fences or walls are required along the side or rear yard
areas when an NC zone is next to a residential zone. The fence or freestanding
wall shall be a minimum of six feet (6') and a maximum of seven feet (7') in
height. The wall of the building may act as the required screening wall
provided no service or delivery doors are on that wall face and there is no
parking or access between the wall of the building and the property line.
      3.   Chainlink with vision slats or other covering material shall not be
considered as appropriate screening fence material in the NC-1 and NC-2 zones.
   K.   Required Parking: The number of on site parking stalls for NC zones
shall be limited to a maximum number of stalls allowed in order to promote and
retain the neighborhood character of the NC zones. On site parking shall comply
with the parking design standards of chapters 4 and 12 of this title with the
exception of design standards listed in this chapter and the number of required
parking stalls as required in this section. The amount of parking allowed is
based on the total building square footage of all buildings on the site (not
including residential uses). Building expansion or new construction shall
create the requirement for the site to come into compliance with the required
maximum parking on the property.
 
                                Maximum Number Of
                                Parking Stalls Permitted
Commercial floor area:          
                                No on site parking required except if parking
 3,000 or less square feet    already exists then 1 stall per 400 square feet
                                of building maximum number of stalls
 3,001 to 5,000 square feet   1 stall per 400 square feet maximum number of
                                stalls
 5,001 to 10,000 square feet  Limited to 12 stalls plus 1 stall per 450
                                square feet of building over 5,000 square feet
                                Limited to 23 stalls plus 1 stall per 500
                                square feet of building over 10,000 square
                                feet. The planning commission may approve
                                additional parking up to a ratio of not less
                                than 1 stall per 350 square feet of building
                                provided that enhanced neighborhood amenities
 10,001 and greater           along the perimeter of the project are
                                installed as part of the development such as
                                sheltered mass transit stops, theme streetscape
                                lighting, or public plaza. The number of
                                additional parking stalls allowed will be based
                                on the equivalent value of additional parking
                                stalls to the value of the amenity proposed to
                                be provided
Residential                    1 stall per dwelling unit minimum with a
                                maximum of 2 stalls per unit
 
(Ord. 2009-17, 1-13-2009; amd. Ord. 2009-60, 9-8-2009)
15-41-5: COMMERCIAL AND OFFICE BUILDING DESIGN STANDARDS:
Architectural compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood is important in
the NC zones. The design standards recognize that commercial buildings do have
different functions than nearby residential structures. The NC zones are
located in different areas of the city which have different architectural time
periods. These time periods are recognized with additional specific detail
being required for those buildings located in the east central community. Basic
design requirements however are key to all NC zone locations. The following
standards apply to new construction or expansion and require compliance
throughout an entire building that is expanded.
   A.   Base, Body And Cap: Buildings should have a clearly defined base, body,
and cap in the design.
      1.   The base occupies the lowest portion of the building and shall be
between five (5) and twenty percent (20%) of the height of the street facade of
the building. The base shall be made of concrete, smooth stone, or brick. For a
storefront, the base may also include glass, wood, or wood appearing material
that would be used to make a traditional kickplate.
      2.   The body is the middle portion of a building and shall be between
sixty (60) and eighty percent (80%) of the building height. The solid exterior
wall finish will be limited to materials that are durable and have the visual
qualities equal to or better than brick, stone, stucco, wood clapboard or
HardiPlank. Vinyl or aluminum siding, split faced or concrete block, or similar
materials are not allowed. The body material for buildings in the east central
community is limited to an exterior veneer of brick. In the east central
community the planning commission may consider the use of stone or stucco
systems as accents and architectural relief materials based on the building
design and the contribution of these materials to the architectural theme of
the building and its relationship to the neighborhood architecture.
      3.   The cap is the top portion of the facade and contains the remaining
portion of the building height. Caps should include features such as cornices,
parapets or eaves and should be distinguishable from the body of the building
by changes in color, profile, material, texture or pattern. If eaves are used
in the east central community they should either reflect the wide projecting
eaves found in the prairie style architecture, or brackets and rafters of the
bungalow style.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4311.png]
 
   B.   Transparency:
      1.   A minimum of fifty percent (50%) and a maximum of eighty percent
(80%) of the street facing building facade, measured between two feet (2') and
eight feet (8') of the building height, shall be of clear windows that allow
views into the indoor space or product display inside the building.
      2.   Single use buildings on corner lots shall only be required to have
the entrance side of the building meet the above transparency standard. The
side of the building facing the other street shall have between ten percent
(10%) and twenty percent (20%) of the facade in clear windows measured between
two feet (2') and eight feet (8') of the building height.
      3.   Eighty percent (80%) of the area of ground level windows shall
remain clear of posters, banners, or other materials or objects which block
views through the window.
      4.   Buildings taller than one story shall have between twenty five (25)
and forty percent (40%) of each additional story above the entrance in clear
glass measured between two (2) and six feet (6') from the floor height of the
additional stories.
      5.   This section does not prohibit the installation and use of shades,
blinds, or other window shading devices not acting as signs. All window shading
devices must be able to be drawn open or closed so as not to create a permanent
barrier to visibility through the window.
   C.   Front Entrances And Front Facades:
      1.   The primary entrance to a building shall be located facing the
public street. Entrances at a building corner that faces the street may be used
to meet this requirement.
      2.   Multi-tenant buildings shall be oriented with the long axis of the
building parallel to the street and individual storefronts shall be designed to
face the street. The planning commission may consider multi-tenant buildings
with the long axis of the building perpendicular to the street provided that
the building is no larger than thirty percent (30%) of the size of the main
building on the site, the end use has a storefront facing the street, and it is
determined the change in building orientation provides better pedestrian and
vehicle access to all properties on the site, is needed for visibility to
interior buildings on the site, the tallest elements of the building are on the
street facing portion of the building, and the change does not include a
building design where the back face is visible from the public street.
      3.   Each storefront shall have an individual primary entrance and front
facade design. Building design elements which create a front facade include the
combination of a main entry door, storefront or larger window openings than on
the other sides of the building, and cornice or parapet detailing more detailed
than the other sides.
   D.   Roof And Parapet Lines:
      1.   The roof style of a building may be flat, gabled, or hipped. When a
flat roof is used, parapets along the street facade sides shall be used to hide
the roof design.
      2.   The line of a parapet shall have visual relief that adds variety and
rhythm to the design by having changes in height thus avoiding monotonous
straight lines. In the east central community front faced parapets shall be
stepped and if a pediment is desired it shall be angular.
      3.   Rooflines and parapet lines shall be designed to create the
appearance of individual commercial units in multiple use buildings. These
lines should relate to facade proportions including the height to width and
wall to windows ratio to create the appearance of individual units.
      4.   Roofing materials for pitched roofs is limited to asphalt
architectural shingles and must be muted earth tone colors.
      5.   When a pitched roof is used in the east central community the use of
gable dormers or shed dormers on the roof is strongly encouraged, to add visual
interest and character. These features are required on pitched roofs of
buildings over three thousand (3,000) square feet as a means to minimize the
massiveness of the roof. When provided, dormers shall be in scale with the roof
on which they are located.
   E.   Building Colors: The building colors shall be muted earth tone colors
to blend with the color schemes found in the surrounding neighborhood. Bold,
bright colors such as yellows, greens, reds and blues are not permitted as they
distract from being compatible with the overall neighborhood character.
   F.   Reuse And Existing Use Compliance Requirements: All existing buildings
in the NC-1 and NC-2 zones shall comply with the following standards of this
subsection within the time indicated:
      1.   Except as modified by subsection B5 of this section, existing window
openings shall be clear windows that allow views into the indoor space or
product display inside the building. Eighty percent (80%) of the ground level
window areas shall remain clear of posters, banners, and other materials or
objects which block views through the window. This provision shall be complied
with at the time reuse occurs or within six (6) months of the date a property
is zoned NC-1 or NC-2, whichever comes first.
      2.   The building colors shall be muted earth tone colors to blend with
the color schemes found in the surrounding neighborhood. Bold, bright colors
such as yellows, greens, reds and blues are not permitted as they distract from
being compatible with the overall neighborhood character. This provision shall
be complied with at the time reuse occurs or within one year of the date a
property is zoned NC-1 or NC-2, whichever comes first.
(Ord. 2009-17, 1-13-2009)
15-41-6: RESIDENTIAL BUILDING DESIGN STANDARDS:
The standards for this section apply to single-family row houses and multi-
family buildings.
   A.   Building Orientation:
      1.   The front of a multiple-family dwelling building shall face the
street. In facing the street one key design feature is a ground level main
front entrance into the building being on the street face of the building. This
entrance shall have ornamentation such as an awning over the doorway, pillars
on both sides of the entrance, a recessed entrance and other similar features.
Other entry doors are allowed on other sides of the building.
      2.   A single-family row house shall have the front entrance into each
unit facing the street. No garage doors are allowed in the front facade.
   B.   Unit Size:
      1.   A single-family row house development shall have an average unit
size of one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet of living space excluding
the garage area.
      2.   The dwelling unit size in a multiple-family building shall be an
average of one thousand (1,000) square feet.
   C.   Architectural Style: The east central community has a traditional
architectural style of prairie style and block style in apartment design and
bay style row houses. The building design should match the featured elements of
these styles in order to be compatible with the neighborhood.
   D.   Building Material: The exterior wall finish materials for both single-
family row houses and a multiple-family dwelling building is limited to brick
as the main material. Accent materials around windows, gable ends or indented
wall planes can be stucco, Hardiboard, or similar appearing material excluding
vinyl or metal siding.
   E.   Building Colors: The building colors shall be muted earth tone colors
to blend with the color schemes found in the surrounding neighborhood. Bold,
bright colors such as yellows, greens, reds and blues are not permitted as they
distract from being compatible with the overall neighborhood character.
   F.   Open Space: Open space requirement for a multiple-family building is
three hundred (300) square feet of open space per unit in the building. This
open space is to be a contiguous area with a minimum width of thirty feet
(30'). This area is required to be landscaped according to all applicable
regulations of the land use codes of Ogden City.
(Ord. 2009-17, 1-13-2009)
15-41-7: USES:
The following uses are permitted (P), conditional (C), or not allowed (N) in
the NC zones. Accessory uses to the permitted or conditional uses are allowed.
If a specific use is not listed it is considered as a use that is not allowed
in the zone.
 
Land Use NC-1 NC-2
Entertainment And Recreation
  Indoor business which provides activities for patrons of all ages by
 means of film, performance or activities (e.g., theaters, arcades, indoor N C
  sports); maximum floor area 10,000 square feet
 Sexually oriented business by live entertainment, movies, etc.            N N
Institutional
 Churches or houses of worship                                             P P
 Correctional facilities                                                   N N
 Government building                                                       N N
 High school or posthigh school education                                  N P
 Rehabilitation/treatment facilities                                       N N
 Soup kitchens/shelters for homeless                                       N N
Manufacturing
  Establishment engaged in the assembly of already processed materials into
  new products, provided all activities and storage are in a permanent
 enclosed building no greater than 5,000 square feet and there are no      C C
  outside noises, smoke or smells. Products created are sold on site and
  not shipped to other locations for sale (e.g., jewelry, pottery,
  ceramics, food for human consumption, artwork)
  Establishment engaged in the assembly of processed materials into new
 products, provided all activities and storage are in a permanent enclosed N N
  building and there are no outside noises, smoke or smells. Products
  created are shipped for sale at other locations
 Warehousing or storage indoors or outdoors as main use                    N N
Residential
 Assisted living/nursing home                                              N N
 Dwelling units above the ground floor                                     N P
 Live-work space on ground level                                           P P
 Multiple-family dwelling (apartment building)                             N P
 Single-family detached dwelling                                           N N
 Single-family row house dwellings                                         N P
Sales
  A sales establishment doing business in a permanent enclosed building of
  5,000 square feet or less which prepares and serves food and drink for
 human consumption on and off site provided that the facility has no       P P
  drive-up window and that outdoor dining areas are allowed along the front
  and/or side of the building which is visible from the street (e.g.,
  restaurants, cafes, diners, sandwich shops, delis, etc.)
  A sales establishment with no drive-up window where all activities and
  storage are in a permanent enclosed building that is engaged in the
 selling of new goods or new merchandise to the general public for
  personal, household, or business use and rendering service incidental to
  the sale of such goods (e.g., clothing, food, office supplies, jewelry,
  toys, hobbies)
     Floor area 3,000 or less square feet                                P P
     Floor area 3,001 to 10,000 square feet                              C P
     Floor area 10,001 to 40,000 square feet                             N C
     Greater than 40,000 square feet                                     N N
 Adult business                                                            N N
 Convenience store                                                         N P
 Drinking establishment                                                    N N
 Sales of motorized vehicles                                               N N
Services
  Contractor office located in a permanent enclosed building of 3,000
 square feet or less floor area provided no indoor or outdoor storage of   P P
  materials or equipment used for the business occurs on the property
 Deferred deposit lender, short term loan business, payday lenders         N N
  Laundry service located in a permanent enclosed building of 5,000 square
 feet or less floor area (e.g., self-service laundromat, professional      P P
  laundry and dry cleaner)
 Manual or laundry type car wash                                           N N
 Medical treatment facilities which require overnight stay                 N N
 Motorized vehicle repair and service                                      N N
  Personal care services located in a permanent enclosed building of 3,000
 square feet or less floor area (e.g., barber, beautician, nails, tanning  P P
  salon)
 Personal services which involve tattoos                                   N N
  Professional and business offices located in a permanent enclosed
  building that provides services directly to individuals, businesses and
 agencies such as offices of professional, personal, financial and
  business services and which does not store vehicles or other equipment of
  the business outdoors (e.g., architect, medical office, financial
  institutions, real estate offices, insurance office, etc.)
     3,000 square foot floor area or less                                P P
     3,001 square feet to 5,000 square foot floor area                   N P
  Service located in a permanent enclosed building of 3,000 square feet or
 less floor area which provides care and supervision of children or adults P P
  on a daily basis with no overnight housing and operation hours limited
  between 6:00 A.M. and 7:00 P.M.
 Service which provides temporary lodging for individuals, travelers, etc. N N
  (e.g., hotel, motel, boarding house, bed and breakfast inn)
  Veterinary, small animal grooming, training or daily care service located
 in a permanent enclosed building of 5,000 square feet or less floor area  C P
  provided no outdoor kenneling of animals
Transportation, Utilities And Communication
 Bus or other public transportation facility storage                       N N
 Parking lot, RV storage                                                   N N
 Utility substations                                                       N N
 Wireless communication towers                                             C C
 
(Ord. 2009-17, 1-13-2009; amd. Ord. 2020-24, 6-23-2020)
15-41-8: SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Temporary Structures: No temporary structures not related to
construction under a building permit or storage containers shall be permitted
in the NC zones. All storage shall be located in the main building.
   B.   Outdoor Display Or Storage: No outdoor display of products or
merchandise, nor outdoor storage of items whether in containers or not is
permitted.
   C.   Signage: Notwithstanding the provisions of the sign ordinance of Ogden
(title 18 of this code), the sign type, general design, sign size and heights
shall be according to the provisions of this chapter for uses in the NC-1 or
NC-2 zone.
      1.   Permitted Signage:
         a.   Monument.
         b.   Awnings, however the signage can only be on the valance.
         c.   Wall mounted sign.
         d.   Projecting sign.
         e.   Electronic message provided it is included in a monument sign.
      2.   Sign Design Standards:
         a.   All signage shall be fabricated and installed by a licensed sign
company in order to maintain a professional appearance. The sign surface shall
be restricted to rigid, durable materials of metal, wood, or rigid sign
plastics. Banner signs mounted on the back of hardboard or other such means of
mounting flexible signage surfaces to make them a permanent sign is not allowed
and signs painted directly on the building wall are not permitted.
         b.   Sign structures shall be constructed of quality durable material
limited to metal, stone, brick, concrete or other durable material.
      3.   Sign Height:
         a.   The maximum height of a monument sign, including the base of the
sign, is eight feet (8') measured from the public sidewalk adjacent to the
sign.
         b.   Signs attached to the building shall not extend above the parapet
line of the building.
      4.   Sign Lighting:
         a.   Light for signage shall be limited to the hours from six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
         b.   Exterior sign lighting shall be shielded in order to direct the
light only to the sign.
         c.   Electronic message signs must be controlled by an automatic
dimmer that dims the light intensity at dark to a level that does not light
adjacent residential properties. Any message displayed on an electronic sign
cannot be by means of flashing or blinking and a message text must be in place
for at least eight (8) seconds.
      5.   Sign Size: The maximum square footage for signage for all types of
signs permitted in the NC-1 and NC-2 zones is two (2) square feet of signage
per linear foot of building frontage up to a maximum of two hundred (200)
square feet. A property which has multiple tenants in one building shall be
allowed an additional forty (40) square feet of signage which is limited to a
multiple- tenant sign.
(Ord. 2009-17, 1-13-2009)
15-41-9: REVIEW AND ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Plans for development shall be submitted and reviewed according to
chapter 4 of this title.
   B.   Any development in the NC-2 zone, conditional uses, and other
conditions stated in this chapter shall require review and approval by the
planning commission in order to ensure compatibility of the site design and
building design in context with the adjacent properties in the NC-2 zone, the
neighborhood and the provisions of this chapter and title.
   C.   When a plan is reviewed administratively it shall be reviewed for
compliance with the regulations of this chapter and other applicable land use
ordinances.
   D.   When a development plan is being reviewed by the planning commission,
the commission will review the proposal for compliance with:
      1.   The regulations of this chapter and the other applicable land use
regulations;
      2.   On and off site traffic patterns, access and parking areas being
located to reduce impacts to adjoining neighbors, potential traffic impacts,
and the ability to share accesses with adjoining properties or create secondary
accesses;
      3.   Development patterns not adversely impacting the use and privacy of
any adjacent residential uses; and resolving design issues of impact to
adjacent properties which may need to be addressed on a case by case basis when
the design regulations of this chapter may not otherwise have adequately
addressed them. The purpose of the planning commission review is to work out
design issues of impact to create a planned, functioning block taking into
consideration all the uses.
(Ord. 2009-17, 1-13-2009)
TITLE 16
BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS OF TECHNICAL CODES
SECTION:
16-1-1: Application Of Administrative Provisions
16-1-2: Definitions
16-1-3: Technical Codes Appeals Board
16-1-4: Fees Adopted
16-1-5: Remedies And Penalties Under Technical Codes
16-1-6: Reserved
16-1-7: Board Of Building And Fire Code Appeals Filing Fee
16-1-1: APPLICATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS:
Except as modified by this chapter, the administrative provisions of the
technical codes shall be applied in accordance with the terms of each code.
(Ord. 2008-17, 5-20-2008)
16-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms shall be defined as indicated for the purposes of this
chapter:
BASE FEE SCHEDULE: The fee schedule for permits and other technical code
compliance contained in title 4, chapter 6 of this code.
BUILDING/CODE OFFICIAL: Whenever the term "building official" or "code
official" is used in the technical codes, or in the other provisions of this
chapter, it means the duly appointed building official of the city, or the
building official's duly authorized representative.
FIRE CODE OFFICIAL: Whenever the term "fire code official" is used in the
technical codes, or in other provisions of this chapter, it means the chief of
the Ogden City fire department, or the chief's duly authorized representative,
designated pursuant to subsection 2-4-17C of this code.
TECHNICAL CODES: The codes adopted pursuant to chapter 2 of this title as the
rules, regulations and standards for the construction, occupancy, alteration,
repair, remodeling and maintenance of all structures and buildings within the
city.
(Ord. 2013-31, 6-18-2013)
16-1-3: TECHNICAL CODES APPEALS BOARD:
Whenever a method of appeal is identified in any of the technical codes, the
following provisions shall apply:
   A.   General: The board of building and fire code appeals (the "board"), as
established under title 3, chapter 5 of this code is authorized to hear and
decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building
official, the code official, or the fire code official relative to the
application and interpretations of the technical codes.
   B.   Limitations Of Authority: The board shall have no authority relative to
interpretation of the administrative provisions of the technical codes, nor
shall the board be empowered to waive requirements of the technical codes.
   C.   The Board Of Building And Fire Code Appeals: The membership, terms,
appointment, powers and duties, and procedures of the board shall be as
outlined in title 3, chapter 5 of this code.
   D.   Compliance With Section
16-8A-12 Of This Title: All appeals filed with the board must comply with the
provisions of section
16-8A-12 of this title, and will be reviewed by the board in the manner
identified in that section, except that subsection 16-8A-12F of this title does
not apply to appeals under the technical codes.
(Ord. 2008-17, 5-20-2008)
16-1-4: FEES ADOPTED:
The following fees are adopted in connection with the administration and
implementation of the technical codes:
   A.   Whenever a technical code requires payment of a fee prescribed by law
in order to obtain a permit or take an action, such fee shall be determined by
using the base fee schedule.
   B.   When submittal documents are required by the technical codes, a fee
shall be paid for plan review of the submittal documents as described in title
4, chapter 6 of this code. The plan review fee is separate from, and in
addition to, the permit fees charged when a permit is issued.
      1.   A deposit, as determined by the building official, shall be paid at
the time of plan submittal. The amount of the deposit shall be credited against
the final calculated plan review fee;
      2.   If the building code official authorizes deferred submittal items, a
review fee shall be paid at the time any deferred item is submitted;
      3.   When submitted documents are incomplete or changed so as to require
additional plan review, an additional review fee shall be imposed and collected
as provided in title 4, chapter 6 of this code;
      4.   If submitted plans are for a structure that is substantially
identical to a structure for which building plans were previously submitted and
approved by the city and describe a building that is: a) located on land zoned
the same as land on which the building described in the previously approved
plan is located; and b) subject to the same geological and meteorological
conditions and the same law as the building described in the previously
approved plans, the plan review fee will be a nominal fee that reasonably
reimburses the city for time spent and expenses incurred in verifying that the
plans are identical plans, and reviewing and approving those minor aspects of
identical plans that differ from the previously revised and approved building
plans.
   C.   At the discretion of the building official, a person who commences any
work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system
before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to an enhanced fee in
an amount up to one hundred percent (100%) of the total permit fee that would
have been assessed under the base fee schedule for the work which was performed
before the required permit was issued.
      1.   The enhanced fee shall be in addition to any permit fee, plan review
fee or other fee required under the technical codes.
      2.   Payment of the enhanced fee does not exempt a person or project from
compliance with all other provisions of the technical codes.
      3.   Payment of the enhanced fee does not bar application of any other
penalties or remedies provided for by the technical codes or by law.
(Ord. 2013-31, 6-18-2013)
16-1-5: REMEDIES AND PENALTIES UNDER TECHNICAL CODES:
In addition to the enhanced fee described in section
16-1-4 of this chapter, measures for addressing violations of the technical
codes include, but are not limited to, the remedies and penalties contained in
chapter 12 of this title whenever the technical codes impose or provide for:
   A.   Violation penalties;
   B.   Penalties for unlawful continuance;
   C.   Penalties for failure to comply; or
   D.   Penalties as prescribed by law.
(Ord. 2008-17, 5-20-2008)
16-1-6: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2008-17, 5-20-2008)
16-1-7: BOARD OF BUILDING AND FIRE CODE APPEALS FILING FEE:
Whenever an appeal is allowed or provided for by the technical codes, upon
filing of any appeal to the board of building and fire code appeals, the
petitioner shall pay to the city a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00). The
fee shall be collected by the officer in whose office said petition is filed
and shall be deposited with the city treasurer and credited to the general
fund. No appeal shall be considered by the board of building and fire code
appeals unless and until such fee has been paid.
(Ord. 2008-17, 5-20-2008)
CHAPTER 2
BUILDING, FIRE AND OTHER TECHNICAL CODES
SECTION:
16-2-1: Definitions
16-2-2: Codes Adopted
16-2-3: Appointment And Removal
16-2-4: Property Maintenance Code
16-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following terms are used in the International Building Code, or in
the provisions of this chapter, they shall have the following meanings:
BUILDING OFFICIAL: The duly appointed building official of the City, or the
building official's duly authorized representative.
CODE OFFICIAL: A. When used in, or when referencing the official responsible
for the implementation, administration and enforcement of the International
Fire Code, the Chief of the Ogden City Fire Department, or the Chief's duly
authorized representative, designated pursuant to subsection
2-4-17C of this Code.
   B.   When used in, or when referencing the official responsible for, any
technical code adopted under the provisions of this chapter, other than the
International Fire Code, the building official.
DEPARTMENT OF BUILDING SAFETY: The Building Services Division of the Community
and Economic Development Department.
DEPARTMENT OF FIRE PREVENTION: When used in the International Fire Code, the
Fire Prevention Division established pursuant to subsection
2-4-17C of this Code.
DEPARTMENT OF PROPERTY MAINTENANCE INSPECTION: When used in the International
Property Maintenance Code, the Community Development Division of the Community
and Economic Development Department.
(Ord. 2008-17, 5-20-2008)
16-2-2: CODES ADOPTED:
   A.   The State Construction Code, as defined in section 15A-1-204, Utah Code
Annotated, as amended or superseded, and the State Fire Code, as defined in
section 15A-1-403, Utah Code Annotated, as amended or superseded, are hereby
adopted as the rules, regulations and standards for the construction,
occupancy, alteration, remodeling and repair of all structures and buildings in
the City. The State Construction and Fire Code includes:
      1.   The Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards
Act (HUD Code);
      2.   The International Building Code (IBC);
      3.   The International Existing Building Code (IEBC);
      4.   The International Energy Conservation Code (IECC);
      5.   The International Fuel Gas Code (IFGC);
      6.   The International Mechanical Code (IMC);
      7.   The International Plumbing Code (IPC);
      8.   The International Residential Code (IRC);
      9.   The National Electric Code (NEC);
      10.   The Utah Wildland Urban Interface Code (UWUI);
      11.   The International Fire Code (IFC);
      12.   National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) standards; and
      13.   All currently applicable editions, amendments or appendices to the
above codes promulgated or adopted by the Utah State Legislature, the Utah Fire
Prevention Board, and by the Utah Uniform Building Code Commission and the Utah
Division of Occupational and Professional Licensing in the Utah Uniform
Building Standard Act rules.
   B.   Appendices B, C, D, F and H, of the International Fire Code, 2015
edition, as published and promulgated by the International Code Council, are
hereby adopted for use in the City.
(Ord. 2017-17, 4-18-2017)
16-2-3: APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL:
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 103.2 of the International Fire Code,
section 103.2 of the Property Maintenance Code, or any other similar provision
contained in the adopted codes, it is not the intention of the code adoptions
provided herein to modify in any respect the terms or conditions of employment
applicable to the officers or employees of the City referenced therein.
(Ord. 2013-31, 6-18-2013)
16-2-4: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE:
The 2015 edition of the International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC),
including appendix A, promulgated by the International Code Council, which has
been printed as a code, in book form, and at least one (1) copy of which has
been filed for use and examination by the public in the Office of the City
Recorder, is hereby adopted to establish rules, regulations and standards for
the maintenance of exterior property areas and the maintenance of existing
structures and buildings.
   A.   The adoption of the IPMC as provided in this section is in addition to,
and not in place of, any other ordinance in this Code requiring or directing
maintenance of interior or exterior properties.
   B.   If the IPMC and another section of this Code address the same subject,
the more specific provision shall prevail, except that in the case of an
express conflict the provisions of this Code shall take precedence over the
IPMC.
   C.   The following sections of the IPMC are amended or added:
Section 103.5 of the IPMC is amended as follows: The fees for activities and
services performed by the department in carrying out its responsibilities under
this code shall be determined by using the base fee schedule adopted for use
with the current building code, pursuant to title 16, chapter 1 of the Ogden
City municipal code.
Section 106.4 of the IPMC is amended as follows: Any person who shall violate a
provision of this code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any requirement
thereof, shall be subject to the remedies and penalties contained in title 16,
chapter 12, and in title 12, chapter 4, of the Ogden municipal code. Each day
that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a
separate civil or criminal offense.
A new section 110.5 is adopted as follows: When a building is vacant, the owner
shall comply with the vacant building regulations established in the Ogden City
municipal code. When a building held in private ownership is demolished by
Ogden City, the assessment of the lien or other recovery shall be conducted as
provided in the Ogden City municipal code or by state law.
Section 111.1 of the IPMC is amended as follows: Any person directly affected
by a decision of the code official or a notice or order issued under this code
shall have the right to appeal to the board of appeals, or such other appeal
officer or body as is specifically identified in the Ogden City municipal code,
provided that a written application for appeal is filed within 20 days after
the day the decision, notice or order was served and the applicable appeal fee
is paid. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true
intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been
incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or the
requirements of this code are adequately satisfied by other means.
Section 112.4 of the IPMC is amended as follows: A stop work order is
considered to be notice of a violation under title 16, chapter 2 of the Ogden
municipal code for which there is no warning period. Any person who shall
continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such
work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation of unsafe
condition, shall pay a civil penalty equal to a civil citation issued after
expiration of a warning period as provided in section
16-12-1 of the Ogden municipal code. If work is continued after imposition of
the civil penalty, the person shall be subject to the intermediate and maximum
penalties provided for in that section.
Section 302.4 of the IPMC is amended as follows: All premises and exterior
property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of the
height established in subsection 12-4-3D of the Ogden municipal code. All
noxious weeds shall be prohibited.
302.4.1 Weeds [shall be] are defined as all grasses, annual plants and
vegetation, other than trees or shrubs provided; however, this term shall not
include cultivated flowers and gardens or cultivated decorative grasses that
are intended to exceed six inches (6") and are properly maintained within a
defined planting area.
302.4.2 Upon failure of the owner, agent or occupant having charge of a
property to cut and destroy weeds as described in this code, or in title 12,
chapter 4 of the Ogden municipal code, after service of a notice of violation,
they shall be subject to prosecution in accordance with section 106.3. One such
notice is sufficient for each annual season of weed growth on a property. Upon
failure to comply with the notice of violation, any duly authorized employee of
the city or contractor hired by the city shall be authorized to enter upon the
property in violation and cut and destroy the weeds growing thereon, and the
costs of such removal shall be paid for and collected from the owner, agent or
occupant responsible for the property as provided in title 16, chapter 8,
article C of the Ogden municipal code.
Where insect screens are required by section 304.14 of the IPMC, they shall be
in place year round.
Where a heat supply is required to be made available in sections 602.3 and
602.4 of the IPMC, the period during which heat shall be supplied or available
for supply is year round.
A new section 702.5 of the IPMC is adopted as follows:
702.5Required emergency escape openings for a bedroom in a basement. Except as
provided in section 702.7, all basement bedrooms in a residence built prior to
January 1, 1972, shall meet the following requirements in order to continue to
be used as a bedroom:
702.5.1Minimum room height: 6 feet 8 inches with 6 feet 4 inches allowed for
girders, beams or duct work.
702.5.2Unless the bedroom has a door that opens directly to the exterior of the
residence, the room shall have at least one emergency escape window as follows:
702.5.2.1The window shall be at least eighteen (18) inches in the horizontal or
vertical dimension;
702.5.2.2The window shall have a fully openable area (90 degrees or more) of at
least 3.75 square feet;
702.5.2.3The window shall be openable or removable without keys, tools or
special knowledge and without encountering any obstruction;
702.5.2.4The window may not be hinged on the top or bottom, except a window
opening into a room may be hinged on the bottom if it opens flush with the
wall;
702.5.2.5An existing window may not be reduced in overall size or in openable
area if it exceeds 18 inches in its smallest dimension and has more than 3.75
square feet of openable area.
702.5.3If the sill of a basement emergency escape window is not within 48
inches of the floor:
702.5.3.1A single permanent step or riser shall be installed so that the
distance between the top of the step or riser and the bottom of the window does
not exceed 44 inches.
702.5.3.2The maximum height of the step or riser shall be 24 inches
702.5.3.3The minimum depth of the step or riser shall be 10 inches.
702.5.3.4The width of the step or riser shall be at least as wide as the window
clear opening, but need not exceed 36 inches.
702.5.4Locks and latches and any window screen or storm window devices that
need to be operated to permit escape shall not be located more than 54 inches
above the finished floor or, if applicable, above a step or riser.
702.5.5If a basement window opens below grade, any window well shall comply
with R310 of the International Residential Code adopted pursuant to Title 16
Chapter 2 of the Ogden municipal code. If the window well is located in a
driveway, this may require removing a portion of the driveway and installing a
removable grille.
702.5.6If physical modifications to the foundation of a structure are required
to meet the standards of this section 702.5, the new window shall meet all
emergency escape and rescue opening requirements in R310 of the International
Residential Code adopted pursuant to Title 16 Chapter 2 of the Ogden municipal
code.
702.5.7Basement rooms that were not finished as a bedroom prior to January 1,
2016, in a residence built prior to January 1, 1972, may not be used as a
bedroom unless the room has an egress window or exit door to the exterior of
the structure that complies with the International Residential Code or other
applicable construction code adopted pursuant to Title 16 Chapter 2 of the
Ogden municipal code.
702.6Basement rooms in a residence built after January 1, 1972, may not be used
as a bedroom unless the room has an egress window or other method of escape
that complies with the construction code in effect at the time the residence
was built or the current applicable construction code.
(Ord. 2017-17, 4-18-2017)
CHAPTER 3
ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW OF SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL BUILDING INSPECTION
SECTION:
16-3-1: Administrative Review May Be Requested
16-3-2: Definitions
16-3-3: Request For Administrative Review
16-3-4: Time For Review
16-3-5: Conduct Of Investigation
16-3-6: Administrative Review Limitations
16-3-7: Right To Seek Additional Remedies
16-3-8: Conclusion Of Review
16-3-1: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW MAY BE REQUESTED:
In addition to any appeals allowed under the international residential code, a
person holding a permit for a single-family residential structure may request
an administrative review of a building inspection conducted pursuant to such
permit.
(Ord. 2010-27, 8-3-2010)
16-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms shall be defined as indicated for the purposes of this
chapter:
INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE (IRC): The residential building code as adopted
in chapter 2 of this title.
PERMIT HOLDER: A person holding a valid building permit for a single-family
residential dwelling.
REVIEWING OFFICER: The mayor or the mayor's designee.
(Ord. 2010-27, 8-3-2010)
16-3-3: REQUEST FOR ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW:
   A.   Upon written request by a permit holder, the reviewing officer shall
conduct an administrative review of the building official's inspection of a
single-family residential dwelling to determine whether the inspection
constituted a fair administration of the IRC.
   B.   A permit holder must request administrative review of a building
inspection within ten (10) days of the date of the inspection. The permit
holder shall file the request with the city recorder's office together with a
filing fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00). A request for administrative
review may not be requested by a person other than the permit holder and the
request will not be accepted without payment of the filing fee.
   C.   In addition to the filing fee, the request for administrative review
shall include:
      1.   The building permit number;
      2.   The address of the structure for which the permit was issued;
      3.   The name and address of the permit holder;
      4.   The name and address of the property owner;
      5.   The date of the challenged inspection;
      6.   A copy of the inspection paperwork from the inspection which the
permit holder claims to have been conducted unfairly;
      7.   A description of why the permit holder believes the inspection did
not constitute a fair administration of the building code;
      8.   A description of why the matter could not be brought by an appeal
under the technical codes;
      9.   A description of what the permit holder believes would have
constituted a fair administration of the building code under the circumstances;
and
      10.   Any other information the permit holder believes is relevant to the
reviewing officer's consideration of the claims presented.
(Ord. 2010-27, 8-3-2010)
16-3-4: TIME FOR REVIEW:
Once requested, an administrative review of a building inspection shall be
completed with reasonable diligence. In no event shall a review of a building
inspection be completed more than thirty (30) days after the request is filed.
A copy of the reviewing officer's determination shall be mailed to the permit
holder and shall be provided to the building official.
(Ord. 2010-27, 8-3-2010)
16-3-5: CONDUCT OF INVESTIGATION:
The reviewing officer shall investigate the claims raised by the permit holder
in whatever manner the officer deems appropriate. The reviewing officer is not
required to follow any specific procedure. The investigation could, but is not
required to, include such things as:
   A.   Personal contact with the permit holder;
   B.   Personal contact with the building official;
   C.   Personal contact with the property owner or any other person who may
have knowledge of, or experience with, the building being constructed under the
permit;
   D.   A review of the building permit file;
   E.   An unaccompanied site visit, or a site visit with the permit holder,
the building official, the property owner, or any other person who may have
knowledge of or experience with the building being constructed under the
permit; or
   F.   A meeting where the permit holder, the building official, and the
property owner attend at the same time.
(Ord. 2010-27, 8-3-2010)
16-3-6: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW LIMITATIONS:
The administrative review described in this chapter:
   A.   Is separate and unrelated to an appeal under the IRC.
   B.   May not be used to review a matter that could be brought by an appeal
under the IRC.
   C.   May not result in the waiver or modification of an IRC requirement or
standard.
   D.   May not conflict with an appeal, or the result of an appeal, under the
IRC.
   E.   Does not prohibit a person from bringing an appeal allowed by the IRC.
   F.   May not allow work to resume if the building official has issued a stop
work order.
   G.   May not alter the conditions included in a stop work order.
(Ord. 2010-27, 8-3-2010)
16-3-7: RIGHT TO SEEK ADDITIONAL REMEDIES:
By seeking administrative review of a building inspection, a permit holder is
not thereby precluded, estopped, or otherwise barred from raising an issue or
bringing a claim in an appeal under the IRC on the grounds that the issue or
claim was raised or previously addressed in an administrative review allowed by
this chapter.
(Ord. 2010-27, 8-3-2010)
16-3-8: CONCLUSION OF REVIEW:
   A.   An administrative determination that a building inspection constituted,
or did not constitute, a fair administration of the IRC is neither appealable
nor subject to judicial review.
   B.   If the reviewing officer determines that the building inspection did
not constitute a fair administration of the IRC:
      1.   The permit holder's administrative review filing fee shall be
returned; and
      2.   The building official shall promptly reinspect the single- family
dwelling without requiring the permit holder to pay any additional charge or
fee for the reinspection.
(Ord. 2010-27, 8-3-2010)
CHAPTER 4
RESERVED
CHAPTER 5
RESERVED
CHAPTER 6
RESERVED
CHAPTER 7
MANUFACTURED HOUSING; CONSTRUCTION AND INSTALLATION
SECTION:
16-7-1: Utah Uniform Building Standards Act Definitions For Manufactured
Housing
16-7-2: Installation Standards
16-7-3: Factory Built Housing Units And Mobile Homes
16-7-4: Modular Units Approval
16-7-5: Modification Of Factory Built Housing Units And Modular Units
16-7-1: UTAH UNIFORM BUILDING STANDARDS ACT DEFINITIONS FOR MANUFACTURED
HOUSING:
The definitions for manufactured housing, manufactured home, mobile home,
modular unit, factory built housing, or factory built housing set up contractor
as contained in Utah Code Annotated section 58-56-3, are hereby adopted and
incorporated herein by reference.
(1979 Code § 16.19.010; Ord. 92-6, 1-9-1992; amd. Ord. 98-15, 2-17-1998)
16-7-2: INSTALLATION STANDARDS:
Installation of manufactured homes and mobile homes shall be as provided in
Utah Code Annotated section 58-56-3(9), "The Standard for Manufactured Home
Installations" as published by the accompanying manufacturer's installation
instructions, or an equivalent standard.
(1979 Code § 16.19.020; Ord. 92-6, 1-9-1992; amd. Ord. 98-15, 2-17-1998)
16-7-3: FACTORY BUILT HOUSING UNITS AND MOBILE HOMES:
Factory built housing units and mobile homes shall be constructed as required
by Utah Code Annotated section 58-56-12, and shall be subject to the following
for set up:
   A.   Permit Required: Prior to the setting or set up of any factory built
housing unit or mobile home, a permit shall first be obtained from the
community and economic development department. The application for all such
permits shall be in accordance with section
16-3-1 of this title.
   B.   Fees: Fees for plan review and set up inspections shall be as set forth
in chapter 1 of this title.
(1979 Code § 16.19.030; Ord. 92-6, 1-9-1992; amd. Ord. 98-15, 2-17-1998; Ord.
2001-32, 6-5-2001, eff. 6-30-2001)
16-7-4: MODULAR UNITS APPROVAL:
Modular units shall be constructed, inspected and set up in accordance with
Utah Code Annotated section 58-56-13, and the following:
   A.   Inspection: Inspection of construction of modular units shall comply
with the prefabricated construction and approved fabricator requirements of
chapter 17 of the international building code.
(1979 Code § 16.19.040; Ord. 92-6, 1-9-1992; amd. Ord. 98-15, 2-17-1998; Ord.
2001-71, 12-18-2001, eff. 1-1-2002)
16-7-5: MODIFICATION OF FACTORY BUILT HOUSING UNITS AND MODULAR UNITS:
Modification to any factory built housing unit shall be made in accordance with
Utah Code Annotated section 58-56-14, and the applicable sections of this code.
(1979 Code § 16.19.050; Ord. 92-6, 1-9-1992; amd. Ord. 98-15, 2-17-1998)
CHAPTER 8
CODE FOR THE ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
ARTICLE A.  PUBLIC NUISANCES AND ABATEMENT PROCEDURES
SECTION:
16-8A-1: Title
16-8A-2: Purpose
16-8A-3: Definitions
16-8A-4: Alterations, Additions And Repairs; Inspections
16-8A-5: Enforcement; Inspections; Right Of Entry
16-8A-6: Abatement Of Dangerous Buildings; Public Nuisances
16-8A-7: Abatement Procedure; Notice And Order
16-8A-8: Time For Performance Of Work
16-8A-9: Recordation Of Notice And Order
16-8A-10: Standards For Repair, Vacation And Demolition
16-8A-11: Notice To Vacate
16-8A-12: Appeal
16-8A-13: Historic Resources
16-8A-14: Enforcement Of Orders To Repair, Demolish, And/Or Secure
16-8A-15: Procedure For City Performance Of Abatement By Repair Or Demolition
16-8A-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the OGDEN CITY CODE FOR THE ABATEMENT OF
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS.
(1979 Code § 16.28.010; Ord. 95-25, 5-16-1995; amd. Ord. 98-15, 2-17-1998)
16-8A-2: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to provide a just, equitable and practicable
method, to be cumulative with and in addition to any other remedy provided by
the building code or otherwise available by law, whereby buildings or
structures which from any cause endanger the life, limb, health, morals,
property, safety or welfare of the general public or their occupants may be
required to be repaired, vacated or demolished and to set reasonable standards
for the securing of buildings as a temporary method of abatement, in order to
prevent the buildings from having deleterious effects on surrounding
properties.
(1979 Code § 16.28.020; Ord. 95-25, 5-16-1995; amd. Ord. 98-15, 2-17-1998)
16-8A-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms, phrases, words and their
derivatives shall be construed as specified in this chapter, or if not defined
in this chapter as specified in the codes adopted in chapter 2 of this title.
Where terms are not defined herein or in the applicable codes they shall have
their ordinary accepted meanings within the context with which they are used.
As used in this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the meanings
given them:
BOARD: The board of building and fire code appeals as established in title 3,
chapter 5 of this code.
BOARDING OR BOARDED: The secured covering of openings to a building or
structure to prevent entrance pursuant to the provisions and standards of this
chapter due to the nonoccupancy of the building or structure, which openings
are boarded up or secured by any means other than conventional methods used in
the design of the building or permitted for new construction of similar type.
BUILDING CODE: The international building code, as adopted by chapter 2 of this
title, together with all other technical codes adopted therein.
BUILDING OFFICIAL: The duly appointed building official of the city or the
building official's duly authorized representative.
DANGEROUS BUILDING: Any building or structure deemed to be dangerous under the
provisions of section
16-8A-6 of this article.
OCCUPANT: Any person who has a legal or equitable interest in a parcel of real
property other than a fee interest, including a life tenant, tenant, lessee,
tenant at will, tenant at sufferance, or adverse possessor, as well as a person
in possession or a person who has charge, care or control of the parcel of real
property, as the agent or personal representative of the person(s) holding
legal title to a fee interest.
OPEN: The condition of a building or structure when not secured against
unauthorized or unlawful entry.
OWNER: Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others, shall have
legal title to a fee interest in the parcel of real property, with or without
accompanying actual possession thereof.
VACANT: A. Empty;
   B.   Not occupied on a regular basis by an occupant; or
   C.   Not used by a person on a regular basis for the usual and customary
purposes for which a building is designed and lawfully permitted.
(1979 Code § 16.28.030; Ord. 95-25, 5-16-1995; amd. Ord. 98-15, 2-17-1998; Ord.
2001-32, 6-5-2001; Ord. 2001-69, 12-4-2001; Ord. 2001-71, 12-18-2001, eff. 1-1-
2002; Ord. 2004-39, 6-15-2004, eff. 7-1-2004)
16-8A-4: ALTERATIONS, ADDITIONS AND REPAIRS; INSPECTIONS:
   A.   All buildings or structures which are required to be repaired under the
provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the provisions of all codes
adopted under chapter 2 of this title.
   B.   All buildings or structures within the scope of this chapter and all
construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to
inspection by the building official in accordance with and in the manner
provided by this chapter and the provisions related to inspections contained in
the codes adopted under chapter 2 of this title.
(1979 Code § 16.28.040; Ord. 95-25, 5-16-1995; amd. Ord. 98-15, 2-17-1998; Ord.
2001-71, 12-18-2001, eff. 1-1-2002)
16-8A-5: ENFORCEMENT; INSPECTIONS; RIGHT OF ENTRY:
   A.   Enforcement: The building official is hereby authorized to enforce the
provisions of this chapter. The building official shall have the power to
render interpretations of the provisions of this chapter and to adopt and
enforce rules and supplemental regulations in order to clarify the application
of its provisions. Such interpretations, rules and regulations shall be in
conformity with the intent and purpose of this chapter.
   B.   Inspections: The building official, the fire marshal, assistant fire
marshals, and health officers of the county health department are hereby
authorized to make such inspections and take such actions as may be required to
enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   C.   Right Of Entry: When it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce
the provisions of this chapter, or when the building official has reasonable
cause to believe that there exists in a building or upon a premises a condition
which is contrary to or in violation of this chapter which makes the building
or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official may enter the
building or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties
imposed by this chapter; provided, that if such building or premises be
occupied that credentials be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If
such building or premises be unoccupied, the building official shall first make
a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or
control of the building or premises and request entry. If entry is refused or
the building official has been unable to locate the owner or other persons
having charge or control of the building or premises to request entry, the
building official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure
entry. None of the above requirements are intended to restrict or limit the
power of the building official from inspecting or acting upon conditions
observed within plain view. The building official may enter a building or
premises to abate public nuisances pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
(1979 Code § 16.28.050; Ord. 95-25, 5-16-1995; amd. Ord. 98-15, 2-17-1998; Ord.
2001-69, 12-4-2001, eff. 12-9-2001)
16-8A-6: ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS; PUBLIC NUISANCES:
   A.   All buildings or portions thereof which are determined after inspection
by the building official to be "dangerous", as defined in subsection B of this
section, are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by
repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal in accordance with the procedures
specified herein.
   B.   For the purpose of this chapter, any building or structure which has
any or all of the conditions or defects hereinafter described shall be deemed
to be a dangerous building; provided, that such conditions or defects exist to
the extent that the life, health, property or safety of the public or its
occupants are endangered:
      1.   Whenever any door aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit
is not of sufficient width or size or is not so arranged as to provide safe and
adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic.
      2.   Whenever the walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway or
other means of exit is so warped, worn, loose, torn or otherwise unsafe as to
not provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic.
      3.   Whenever the stress in any materials, member or portion thereof, due
to all dead and live loads, is more than one and one-half (11/2) times the
working stress or stresses allowed in the building code for new buildings of
similar structure, purpose or location.
      4.   Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by fire, earthquake,
wind, flood or by any other cause, to such an extent that the structural
strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was before such
catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements of the building code for
new buildings or similar structure, purpose or location.
      5.   Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance thereof is likely to
fail, or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure
persons or damage property.
      6.   Whenever any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance or
ornamentation on the exterior thereof is not of sufficient strength or
stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be
capable of resisting a wind pressure of one-half (1/2) of that specified in the
building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location
without exceeding the working stresses permitted in the building code for such
buildings.
      7.   Whenever any portion thereof has wracked, warped, buckled or settled
to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less
resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the case of similar new
construction.
      8.   Whenever the building or structure, or any portion thereof, because
of: a) dilapidation, deterioration or decay; b) faulty construction; c) the
removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the
purpose of supporting such building; d) the deterioration, decay or inadequacy
of its foundation; or e) any other cause, is likely to partially or completely
collapse.
      9.   Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure, or any portion
thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used.
      10.   Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members
list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the
center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one-third (1/3) of the base.
      11.   Whenever the building or structure, exclusive of the foundation,
shows thirty three percent (33%) or more damage or deterioration of its
supporting member or members, or fifty percent (50%) damage or deterioration of
its nonsupporting members, enclosing or outside walls or coverings.
      12.   Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire,
wind, earthquake or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to
become: a) an attractive nuisance to children; b) a harbor for vagrants,
criminals or immoral persons; or as to c) enable persons to resort thereto for
the purpose of committing unlawful or immoral acts.
      13.   Whenever any building or structure has been constructed, exists or
is maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition
applicable to such building or structure provided by the building regulations
of this jurisdiction, as specified in the building code, or of any law or
ordinance of this state or jurisdiction relating to the condition, location or
structure of buildings.
      14.   Whenever any building or structure which, whether or not erected in
accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances, has in any nonsupporting
part, member or portion less than fifty percent (50%), or in any supporting
part, member or portion less than sixty six percent (66%) of the: a) strength;
b) fire resisting qualities or characteristics; or c) weather resisting
qualities or characteristics required by law in the case of a newly constructed
building of like area, height and occupancy in the same location.
      15.   Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to be used for
dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay,
damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, air or sanitation
facilities, or otherwise, is determined by an officer of the county health
department to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a condition
that is likely to cause sickness or disease.
      16.   Whenever any building or structure, because of obsolescence,
dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack of
sufficient fire resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, gas connections
or heating apparatus, or other cause, is determined by the fire marshal to be a
fire hazard.
      17.   Whenever any building or structure is in such a condition as to
constitute a public nuisance known to the common law or in equity
jurisprudence.
      18.   Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a site
after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or whenever
the construction of any building or structure is abandoned for a period in
excess of six (6) months so as to constitute such building or portion thereof
an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public.
      19.   Whenever any building or structure, or portion thereof, is vacant
or open and:
         a.   One or more of the doors, windows, or other openings are missing
or broken;
         b.   One or more of the doors, windows, or other openings are boarded
up or secured by any means other than conventional methods used in the design
of the building or permitted for new construction of similar type, unless
boarded in accordance with an approved vacant building plan pursuant to article
B of this chapter; or
         c.   In such condition that it constitutes an attractive nuisance or
hazard to the public.
(1979 Code § 16.28.060; Ord. 95-25, 5-16-1995; amd. Ord. 98-15, 2-17-1998; Ord.
2001-69, 12-4-2001)
      20.   Any other condition or defect defined as dangerous under section
202 of the international existing building code, as adopted by chapter 2 of
this title, or its successor provisions.
(Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
16-8A-7: ABATEMENT PROCEDURE; NOTICE AND ORDER:
   A.   Abatement Procedure: When the building official has inspected or caused
to be inspected any building or structure and has found and determined that
such building or structure is a dangerous building, under section
16-8A-6 of this article, the building official may use the procedures set forth
in this section for the abatement of such nuisance.
   B.   Notice And Order: The building official shall issue a written notice
and order directed to the record owner of the property on which the building or
structure is located. The notice and order shall contain:
      1.   The street address and a legal description sufficient for
identification of the premises upon which the building is located.
      2.   A statement that the building official has determined the building
to be dangerous with a brief description of the conditions which render the
building dangerous under section
16-8A-6 of this article.
      3.   A statement of the action required to be taken, as determined by the
building official, including the requirement to secure all necessary permits.
      4.   A statement of the required period of time as determined by the
building official to be reasonable to complete such action.
      5.   A statement advising that if the required work or action is not
commenced or completed within the time specified, the building official may
proceed to cause the work to be done and bill the owner for the abatement costs
and/or assess the costs against the property, and, if applicable, may vacate
the building or secure the building against entry.
      6.   A statement advising that any person having any record title or
legal interest in the building may appeal the notice and order or any action of
the building official within ten (10) days from the date of service of such
notice and order and that failure to appeal will constitute a waiver of all
right to an administrative hearing and determination of the matter.
      7.   A statement that failure to abate the nuisance within the required
time limit is a class B misdemeanor.
      8.   A statement advising that the notice and order will be recorded
against the property in the office of the county recorder if the notice and
order is not complied with and no appeal has been filed.
   C.   Service Of Notice And Order:
      1.   The notice and order, and any amended or supplemental notice and
order, shall be served upon the record owner and posted on the property; and
one copy thereof shall be served on each of the following, if known to the
building official or disclosed from the records of the county recorder's
office:
         a.   The holder of any mortgage or deed of trust or other lien or
encumbrance of record;
         b.   The owner or holder of any lease of record; and
         c.   The holder of any other estate or legal interest of record in or
to the building or the land on which it is located.
      2.   The failure of the building official to serve any person required
herein to be served shall not invalidate any proceedings hereunder as to any
other person duly served or relieve any such person from any duty or obligation
imposed by the provisions of this chapter.
   D.   Method Of Service:
      1.   Service of the notice and order shall be made upon all persons
entitled thereto either personally or by mailing a copy of such notice and
order by first class mail, postage prepaid, to each such person at their
address as it appears on the last assessment roll of the county or as known by
the building official. If no address of any such person so appears or is known
to the building official, then a copy of the notice and order shall be so
mailed, addressed to such person, at the address of the building involved in
the proceedings. The failure of any person to receive or accept such notice
shall not affect the validity of any proceeding taken under this chapter.
Service by mail in the manner herein provided shall be effective five (5) days
after the date of mailing.
      2.   Proof of service of the notice and order shall be documented at the
time of service by a declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the
person effecting service, declaring the time, date and manner in which service
was made.
(1979 Code § 16.28.070; Ord. 95-25, 5-16-1995; amd. Ord. 98-15, 2-17-1998; Ord.
2005-29, 5-24-2005)
16-8A-8: TIME FOR PERFORMANCE OF WORK:
   A.   Time Limit: The building official shall determine and set forth in the
notice and order a reasonable time limit under all of the circumstances. Except
for emergencies under section
16-8D-2 of this chapter, the time limit for completion of repair or demolition
shall not be less than ten (10) days. The period of time for the securing of
permits, if required, and the commencement of work, whether by repair or
demolition, shall not exceed sixty (60) days from the date of the order. If the
building official has determined that the building or structure must be
vacated, the order shall require that the building or structure shall be
vacated within a time certain from the date of the order as determined by the
building official to be reasonable.
   B.   Extension Of Time To Perform Work: Upon receipt of a written request
from any person required to comply with the order, the building official may
grant, in writing, an extension of time, not to exceed an additional one
hundred twenty (120) days (or a maximum time limit of 180 days from the date of
the notice and order) within which to complete abatement, if good cause exists
and the building official determines that the extension will not create or
perpetuate a situation imminently dangerous to life or property. The building
official's authority to extend time is limited to the physical repair,
rehabilitation or demolition of the premises and will not in any way affect the
time to appeal the notice and order. The building official shall have the
authority to place reasonable conditions on any such extensions.
   C.   Time Limit For Beginning Repair Work: Work under any building permit
issued for repair work required by this chapter must be begun within thirty
(30) days of obtaining the permit and must be prosecuted to completion with
reasonable diligence. If the work under the building permit is not begun or
pursued as required, the building official may revoke the building permit
without further notice and board the building as necessary.
(1979 Code § 16.28.080; Ord. 95-25, 5-16-1995; amd. Ord. 98-15, 2-17-1998)
16-8A-9: RECORDATION OF NOTICE AND ORDER:
   A.   Certificate: If compliance is not had with the order within the time
specified therein, and no appeal has been properly and timely filed, the
building official shall file in the office of the Weber County recorder a
certificate describing the property and certifying that:
      1.   The building is a dangerous building; and
      2.   The owner has been so notified; and
      3.   The costs of abatement may be charged against the property in the
future.
   B.   Corrections Completed; New Certificate: Whenever the corrections
ordered shall thereafter have been completed or the building demolished so that
it no longer exists as a dangerous building on the property described in the
certificate, the building official shall file a new certificate with the county
recorder certifying that the building has been demolished or all required
corrections have been made so that the building is no longer dangerous,
whichever is appropriate.
(1979 Code § 16.28.090; Ord. 95-25, 5-16-1995; amd. Ord. 98-15, 2-17-1998)
16-8A-10: STANDARDS FOR REPAIR, VACATION AND DEMOLITION:
The following standards shall be followed by the building official, or by the
board of building and fire code appeals in hearing an appeal, or in ordering
the repair, vacation, demolition, or securing of any dangerous building or
structure:
   A.   Any building or structure declared a dangerous building under this
chapter shall be made to comply with one of the following:
      1.   The building shall be repaired within a reasonable time in
accordance with the current building code or other current code applicable to
the type of substandard conditions requiring repair.
      2.   The building shall be demolished:
         a.   At the option of the building owner;
         b.   If the owner has failed to repair within a reasonable period of
time;
         c.   If the owner has failed to adequately secure the building against
entry or has failed to comply with the requirements of article B of this
chapter; or
         d.   If the building constitutes an immediate danger to the life,
limb, health, property or safety of the public and it is either unfeasible, or
the owner has failed to present plans, to repair the building within a
reasonable period of time.
      3.   If the building does not constitute an immediate danger to the life,
limb, health, property or safety of the public, it may be vacated, temporarily
secured and maintained against entry; provided, however, that the building
shall be secured and maintained in accordance with the requirements of article
B of this chapter.
   B.   Boarding shall be considered to be only a temporary or interim means of
abatement, until such time as the building is repaired or demolished, or
otherwise brought into compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
   C.   If the building or structure is in such condition as to make it
immediately dangerous to the life, limb, health, property or safety of the
public or its occupants, the building shall be ordered to be vacated in
addition to any other order to repair or demolish.
(1979 Code § 16.28.100; Ord. 95-25, 5-16-1995; amd. Ord. 98-15, 2-17-1998; Ord.
2001-69, 12-4-2001, eff. 12-9-2001)
16-8A-11: NOTICE TO VACATE:
Every notice to vacate shall, in addition to being served as provided in
section
16-8A-7 of this article, be posted at or upon each exit of the building and
shall be in substantially the following form:
Do Not Enter
Unsafe To Occupy
               It is a Class B misdemeanor to occupy this building, or to
remove or deface this notice.
               Building Official
                                (name)                 ; of Ogden City
(1979 Code § 16.28.110; Ord. 95-25, 5-16-1995; amd. Ord. 98-15, 2-17-1998)
16-8A-12: APPEAL:
   A.   Written Appeal: Any person entitled to service under section
16-8A-7 of this article may appeal from any notice and order or any action of
the building official taken to enforce the provisions of this chapter to the
board of building and fire code appeals, as established in title 3, chapter 5
of this code, by filing a written appeal in the office of the inspection
services division. Such appeal shall contain:
      1.   Identification of the property;
      2.   The names and addresses of all appellants;
      3.   A statement of appellant's legal interest in the subject property;
      4.   A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the specific
order or action protested; and
      5.   A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the relief
sought and the reasons why the protested order or action should be reversed,
modified or otherwise set aside, together with all material facts in support
thereof.
   B.   Filing Of Appeal: The appeal shall be filed within ten (10) days from
the date of the service of such order or the date of action of the building
official, whichever is the subject of the appeal.
   C.   Scheduling And Noticing Of Hearing: As soon as practicable after
receiving the appeal, the board shall fix a date, time and place for the
hearing of the appeal, which date shall not be less than ten (10) days nor more
than sixty (60) days from the date the appeal was filed. Written notice of the
time and place of the hearing shall be given at least ten (10) days prior to
the date of the hearing to each appellant by the secretary of the board either
by causing a copy of such notice to be delivered to the appellant personally or
by mailing a copy thereof, postage prepaid, addressed to the appellant at the
address shown on the appeal.
   D.   Effect Of Failure To File: Failure of any person to file an appeal in
accordance with the provisions of this section shall constitute a waiver of the
right to an administrative hearing and adjudication of the notice and order or
any portion thereof.
   E.   Scope Of Hearing: Only those matters or issues specifically raised by
the appellant in the written appeal shall be considered in the hearing.
   F.   Stay Of Order: Except for vacation orders made pursuant to section
16-8A-11 of this article, enforcement of any notice and order of the building
official issued under this chapter shall be stayed during the pendency of an
appeal therefrom which is properly and timely filed.
   G.   Effective Date Of Decision: If no appeal is filed within ten (10) days,
the notice and order of the building official shall be final. The decision of
the board shall be effective at the meeting in which the decision is made,
unless a different time is designated in the board's rules or at the time the
decision is made.
(1979 Code § 16.28.120; Ord. 95-25, 5-16-1995; amd. Ord. 98-15, 2-17-1998)
16-8A-13: HISTORIC RESOURCES:
Upon the recommendation of the landmarks commission, the mayor may grant
limited exceptions to this chapter in order to assist in the preservation of an
historic resource under title 17 of this code; provided, however, that such
exemption authority shall not prohibit the demolition or repair of structures
which has been determined to be an immediate danger to the life, limb,
property, health or safety of the public, and shall be limited to providing
extensions of time or alternative methods of temporary abatement until such
time as the conditions making the historic resource a dangerous building may be
abated by repair.
(1979 Code § 16.28.130; Ord. 95-25, 5-16-1995; amd. Ord. 98-15, 2-17-1998)
16-8A-14: ENFORCEMENT OF ORDERS TO REPAIR, DEMOLISH AND/OR SECURE:
   A.   Actions Of Building Official: If, after any unappealed order of the
building official becomes final or thirty (30) days after a final decision of
the board made pursuant to this chapter becomes final, the person to whom such
order is directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey such order within the
required time, the building official, in addition to any other remedy herein
provided or otherwise available at law, may:
      1.   Cause the building to be repaired to the extent necessary to correct
the conditions which render the building dangerous as set forth in the notice
and order, in accordance with section
16-8A-15 of this article.
      2.   Cause the building to be demolished and the materials, rubble and
debris therefrom removed and the lot cleaned, in accordance with section
16-8A-15 of this article, if:
         a.   The notice and order required demolition; or
         b.   The notice and order required repair or demolition and repair by
the city is determined to be unfeasible.
      3.   Cause the building to be secured against entry, if the notice and
order required that the building be secured.
      4.   Cause such person to be prosecuted under section
16-8D-1 of this chapter.
      5.   Refer the matter to the city attorney to institute any appropriate
action to abate the nuisance.
   B.   Order To Vacate: Whenever the required repair or demolition work is not
commenced within thirty (30) days after any final notice and order issued under
this chapter becomes final, the building official may cause the building
described in such notice and order to be vacated, unless previously ordered
under the provisions of this chapter, by posting at each entrance thereto a
notice to vacate which shall be in the same form as required under section
16-8A-11 of this article.
   C.   Standards For Boarding: If the building official determines that a
building is to be boarded in order to secure the building against entry, the
boarding shall be performed in accordance with the standards imposed in section
16-8B-9 of this chapter.
   D.   Costs: If the city causes the building to be repaired, demolished, or
secured against entry, the city shall charge the following costs against the
property or the property owner, which costs shall be recovered as provided in
article C of this chapter:
      1.   A one hundred dollar ($100.00) fee to partially recover the city's
costs in administering the abatement action; and
      2.   The actual costs of repair, demolition, or securing the building
against entry.
(1979 Code § 16.28.140; Ord. 95-25, 5-16-1995; amd. Ord. 98-15, 2-17-1998; Ord.
2001-69, 12-4-2001, eff. 12-9-2001)
16-8A-15: PROCEDURE FOR CITY PERFORMANCE OF ABATEMENT BY REPAIR OR DEMOLITION:
   A.   Petition For Hearing:
      1.   When any abatement work by repair or demolition is to be performed
by the city pursuant to section
16-8A-14 of this article, except in emergency situations under section
16-8D-2 of this chapter, the building official shall petition the mayor to hold
a hearing and order the property owner to show cause why the city should not
abate by repair or demolition a substandard or dangerous building or structure
constituting a public nuisance. The provisions of this section shall
specifically not apply to actions taken by the building official in securing a
building against entry.
      2.   Notwithstanding the provision of any other ordinance pertaining to
hearings before the mayor, said hearings may be held either before the mayor or
the mayor may direct the matter to be heard before a panel of hearing examiners
of the board to conduct such hearings to determine the facts and make
recommendations and findings to the mayor.
   B.   Panel Of Hearing Examiners: In the event the mayor may direct a panel
of hearing examiners from the board to act as hearing examiners in abatement
proceedings, the board shall select at least three (3) individual members of
its board to act as the panel of hearing examiners and designate one as acting
chair. The mayor or said panel of hearing examiners shall have the power and
authority to call, preside at, and conduct hearings to consider whether or not
structures are dangerous or substandard buildings under this chapter
constituting a public nuisance to be abated by the city by demolition or
repair, including the power to issue subpoenas, administer oaths, examine
witnesses, receive evidence, compel attendance of witnesses and/or the
production of witnesses or evidence; and based upon the evidence presented,
prepare for the approval of the mayor, findings of fact, conclusions of law and
proposed orders for said board. Hearings shall be conducted as provided in this
code. The owner shall have the right to appear at said hearing in person or by
counsel or both, present evidence and oral argument, cross examine witnesses,
and in all proper ways defend the owner's interest.
   C.   Notice Of Abatement Hearing: Reasonable notice (not less than 10 days)
of the time and place of said hearing, together with a petition for abatement
setting forth the nature of the complaint against the property sufficient to
reasonably inform the owner and enable them to answer the charges of the
complaint, shall be served upon the owner personally or by mailing by first
class mail, postage prepaid, a copy to the owner at their last known address
appearing on the last assessment rolls for the property on file in the county
assessor's office.
   D.   Action By Hearing Examiners: Within thirty (30) days of the conclusion
of abatement hearing held before the board's panel of hearing examiners as
provided in subsections B and C of this section, said panel shall submit to the
office of the mayor a report of written findings of fact, conclusions,
recommendations and proposed order based upon and supported by the evidence
presented at the hearing. A copy of such findings, conclusions, recommendations
and order shall be mailed or delivered to each party on the date they are filed
with the office of the mayor.
   E.   Consideration Of Report: The office of the mayor shall fix a date, time
and place to consider the panel of hearing examiners' report and proposed
recommendations. Notice thereof shall be mailed to each party to the action not
less than ten (10) days prior to the date fixed unless otherwise stipulated by
all parties.
   F.   Exceptions To Report: Not later than two (2) days before the date set
to consider said report, any party may file with the city recorder two (2)
copies of written exceptions, proposed additional or alternative findings to
any part or all of the hearing examiners' report and may attach thereto a
proposed decision, together with written argument in support of such decision.
Such exception must also indicate whether or not the party desires to present
oral argument, which may be heard only with the consent of the mayor and said
argument shall be confined to the issues set forth in the written exceptions or
as otherwise limited by the mayor.
   G.   Disposition By Mayor:
      1.   The mayor may adopt the report of findings as the basis for its
action in the abatement proceedings, or upon filing its own statement of the
legal or substantial basis in the record therefor, it may:
         a.   Reject all or any portion of the report's findings and remand the
same back to the same panel of hearing examiners for further hearing and
findings on specific issues;
         b.   Disregard any portion of the report's findings and proceed to
take action upon the remainder of the findings;
         c.   Substitute alternative or additional findings of fact on the
issues presented to the examiners, if the substituted findings are supported by
a preponderance of the evidence in the record.
      2.   Upon remand of any portion of the panel's reported findings, the
same panel of examiners shall conduct further hearing proceedings to the extent
necessary to make findings on the issues remanded for further hearing. Upon
remand, the panel of examiners shall prepare and submit its revised report and
findings as provided in subsection E of this section. Consideration of the
revised report by the mayor shall comply with subsections F through H of this
section.
   H.   Order Of Mayor: Upon disposition, the decision of the mayor shall be
made in written order supported by findings of facts, which may be those
submitted by the panel of hearing examiners if approved and adopted by said
board or as the report may be modified, reversed or rejected by the mayor. A
copy of the decision shall be mailed to parties in interest or their counsel.
All orders entered by the mayor shall be final and shall be effective as of the
date dated in such written order. Said order shall specify the manner in which
the expense of any abatement work ordered shall be charged and collected.
   I.   Procedure To Accomplish Abatement Work: Upon the order of the mayor to
complete abatement work by demolition or repair, the building official shall
cause the work to be accomplished by city personnel or by private parties under
his direction. Plans, specifications, bidding proposals, etc., therefor, may be
prepared by building official or his designee, or said official may employ such
appropriate professional assistance that he/she may deem reasonably necessary.
(1979 Code § 16.28.150; Ord. 95-25, 5-16-1995; amd. Ord. 98-15, 2-17-1998; Ord.
2001-69, 12-4-2001, eff. 12-9-2001)
ARTICLE B.  VACANT BUILDINGS 1
SECTION:
16-8B-1: Applicability
16-8B-2: Purpose And Intent
16-8B-3: Obligation To Register Vacant Buildings
16-8B-4: Registration Of Vacant Buildings
16-8B-5: Vacant Building Plan
16-8B-6: Review, Approval Or Modification Of Vacant Building Plan; Appeal
16-8B-7: Standards Governing Review
16-8B-8: Mitigation Fees
16-8B-9: Change Of Ownership
16-8B-10: Maintenance Standards
16-8B-11: Failure To Maintain
16-8B-12: Existing Boarded Buildings
16-8B-13: Appeals
16-8B-14: Building Permits And Inspections Required
16-8B-15: Enforcement Of Other Laws Or Notice And Orders
16-8B-16: Distribution Of Vacant Building Registry
16-8B-17: Exception For Temporary Filming Activities
 
Notes
  1. Prior ordinance history: 1979 Code §§ 16.28.200, 16.28.210, 16.28.220,
1 16.28.230, 16.28.240, 16.28.250, 16.28.260, 16.28.270; Ord. 95-25, 5-16-1995;
  Ord. 98-15, 2-17-1998.
16-8B-1: APPLICABILITY:
This article shall apply to all vacant buildings or structures within the city
now existing or hereafter becoming vacant.
(Ord. 2001-69, 12-4-2001)
16-8B-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
It is the purpose and intent of this article to protect the public health,
safety, and welfare by establishing a registration process for vacant buildings
and requiring responsible parties to implement a vacant building plan for such
buildings to remedy any public nuisance, prevent deterioration, unsightly
blight and consequent adverse impact on the value of nearby property, and to
establish minimum maintenance standards for vacant buildings. To such ends, it
is the specific purpose and intent of this article:
   A.   To minimize the period of time a building is boarded;
   B.   To provide alternative procedures for the abatement of dangerous
buildings, which, if adequately secured and maintained against entry in
accordance with the requirements of this article, will not constitute an
immediate danger to the life, limb, health, property or safety of the public;
   C.   To prevent vacant buildings from becoming a public nuisance; and
   D.   To improve the aesthetic appearance of vacant buildings, in order to
protect surrounding properties.
(Ord. 2001-69, 12-4-2001)
16-8B-3: OBLIGATION TO REGISTER VACANT BUILDINGS:
   A.   Except as provided in subsection B of this section, whenever a building
is vacant for more than ninety (90) days, or whenever any building is vacant
and such building or premises thereof contains one or more "public nuisance
violations", as defined herein, then the owner of such building shall, within
ten (10) days of notification, register such building as a vacant building and
submit a vacant building plan, unless a stay is granted under subsection E of
this section.
   B.   Whenever any building designed as a single-family dwelling is vacant
and such building or premises thereof contains one or more "public nuisance
violations", as defined herein, then the owner of such building shall, within
ten (10) days of notification, register such building as a vacant building and
submit a vacant building plan, unless a stay is granted under subsection E of
this section.
   C.   Notification of the registration requirement shall be made in writing
to the owner of such property either personally or by mailing notice first
class, postage prepaid, addressed to the owner at their last known post office
address, as disclosed by the records of the county assessor, or at such other
address as is known by the building official.
   D.   For purposes of this article, "public nuisance violations" includes:
      1.   A building or structure in violation of one or more provisions of
subsection 16-8A-6B of this chapter; and
      2.   Property maintenance violations pursuant to title 12, chapters 4, 5
and 8 of this code.
   E.   If repair or demolition of the building is required under a notice and
order issued pursuant to section
16-8A-7 of this chapter, the building official may grant a stay of the
registration requirement for a reasonable period of time, not to exceed ninety
(90) days, while the owner diligently investigates abatement options and
prepares plans for abatement. The maintenance standards imposed in section
16-8B-10 of this article shall be applicable during the stay period.
   F.   It is not the intention of this article to require the initial
registration of a building being actively and diligently constructed or
renovated, pursuant to valid building permit issued by the city, where persons
responsible for such construction or renovation are present in the building on
a regular basis; provided that the commencement of repair or rehabilitation
pursuant to a vacant building plan shall not eliminate the continuing
requirement for registration.
(Ord. 2001-69, 12-4-2001, eff. 12-9-2001)
16-8B-4: REGISTRATION OF VACANT BUILDINGS:
   A.   The owner registering a vacant building shall supply the following
information on a form provided by the building official:
      1.   The address of the vacant building;
      2.   The name, address, and telephone number of the owner;
      3.   The name, address and telephone number of a person authorized to act
as an agent for the owner for performing the owner's obligations under this
chapter, who lives within forty (40) miles of the city;
      4.   Legal description and tax parcel identification number of the
premises on which the building is situated;
      5.   Date on which the building became vacant;
      6.   The vacant building plan;
      7.   A description of the condition of the building and the landscaping
of the surrounding property.
   B.   The initial vacant building registration shall be accompanied by a
filing fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00), together with any mitigation fees
due under section
16-8B-8 of this article.
   C.   Registration of a vacant building shall be valid for a period of six
(6) months.
   D.   If the building is vacant at the expiration of any registration period
and requirements of the vacant building plan are not completed, or have not
otherwise been met, then the owner shall reregister such building and pay a
reregistration fee of five hundred seventy one dollars ($571.00), together with
any mitigation fees due under section
16-8B-8 of this article. If the building is vacant at the expiration of any
registration period and the requirements of the vacant building plan are
completed and otherwise met, the owner shall reregister such building, paying
any mitigation fees due under section
16-8B-8 of this article, without filing a new vacant building plan or paying a
filing fee.
(Ord. 2001-69, 12-4-2001, eff. 12-9-2001)
16-8B-5: VACANT BUILDING PLAN:
When a building is registered as required herein, the owner or agent shall
submit a vacant building plan. The plan shall contain the following:
   A.   A plan of action to repair any doors, windows, or other openings which
are boarded or otherwise secured by any means other than conventional methods
used in the design of the building or permitted for new construction of similar
type. The proposed repair shall result in openings secured by conventional
methods used in the design of the building or by methods permitted for new
construction of similar type.
   B.   For building and premises which are identified as being or containing
public nuisance violations unrelated to improperly secured openings, a plan of
action to remedy such public nuisance violations.
   C.   For each required plan, a time schedule shall be submitted identifying
a date of commencement of repair and date of completion of repair for each
improperly secured opening and identified public nuisance violations.
   D.   If the owner proposes to demolish the vacant building, then the owner
shall submit a plan and time schedule for such demolition.
   E.   If the owner proposes to repair the vacant building, then the owner
shall submit a plan and time schedule for such repair.
   F.   A plan of action to maintain the building and premises thereof in
conformance with the provisions of this article.
   G.   A plan of action to maintain the building against unlawful entry.
(Ord. 2001-69, 12-4-2001, eff. 12-9-2001)
16-8B-6: REVIEW, APPROVAL OR MODIFICATION OF VACANT BUILDING PLAN; APPEAL:
   A.   The building official shall have sole discretion to approve the vacant
building plan in accordance with the standards and requirements of this
article, and article A of this chapter.
   B.   The building official shall, upon notice to the vacant building owner
or agent, have the authority to modify the vacant building plan by altering the
dates of performance or the proposed methods of action.
   C.   If the owner or agent of the vacant building objects to the
modifications made by the building official, such owner shall have the right to
appeal to the board for final determination. Such appeal shall be filed with
the building official within ten (10) days of receipt of the building
official's notice of modification.
   D.   The board, after considering the testimony of the building official,
the building owner, and any other interested person, shall render its decision
on the owner's appeal of the building official's modifications to the proposed
vacant building plan. The board shall have the authority to fashion its own
vacant building plan or approve the plan submitted by the owner or the plan as
modified by the building official. The decision of the board shall be final and
constitute the approved vacant building plan.
(Ord. 2001-69, 12-4-2001, eff. 12-9-2001)
16-8B-7: STANDARDS GOVERNING REVIEW:
In considering the appropriateness of a vacant building plan, the building
official and the board shall consider the following:
   A.   The purpose and intent of this article to minimize the period of time a
building is boarded or otherwise vacant.
   B.   The effect of the proposed plan on adjoining property.
   C.   The general economic conditions of the community.
   D.   The financial resources of the owner.
   E.   The cost to implement the proposed plan.
   F.   The length of time the building has been vacant.
   G.   The presence of any public nuisances on the property.
   H.   The relative hardship on or gain to the public as contrasted and
compared to the hardship or gain of the owner resulting from approval or
modification of the proposed plan.
(Ord. 2001-69, 12-4-2001, eff. 12-9-2001)
16-8B-8: MITIGATION FEES:
   A.   Fees: The owner shall pay, along with the registration fee, a boarded
building fee of fifty five dollars ($55.00) for a single- family dwelling or
one hundred dollars ($100.00) for any other type of vacant building, for each
month that a building is boarded, which fee shall be due:
      1.   At initial registration:
         a.   For each month during the registration period that the building
is proposed to be boarded under the vacant building plan,
         b.   For each month, after notification of the registration
requirement that the owner failed to register as required herein.
      2.   At reregistration:
         a.   For each month that the building was boarded during the prior
registration period, for which fees were not previously paid,
         b.   For each month during the registration period that the building
will be boarded under the approved vacant building plan,
         c.   For the entirety of the upcoming registration period, if the
vacant building plan is not completed in accordance with the plan.
      3.   If the owner fails to register, at the end of each month, after
notification of the registration requirement that the owner fails to register
as required herein.
   B.   Refunds: The building official shall refund any of the above amounts
applicable to future months, if the building is not boarded in any respect for
the entirety of such month. In no event shall the owner be charged more than
once for the same month.
   C.   Failure To Pay Fees: If the property owner fails to register or pay the
boarded building fee, the city may take legal action to collect any amounts
owed.
(Ord. 2001-69, 12-4-2001, eff. 12-9-2001)
16-8B-9: CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP:
The approved vacant building plan shall remain in effect notwithstanding a
change in ownership. The new owner is required to file a revised registration
form with the building official for the applicable registration period, and
supply the name and address and telephone number of the new owner(s), agent or
local representative. The revised registration shall be in the same form as the
original registration and shall remain in effect for the remainder of the
registration period applicable to the original registration. No filing fee is
required for the filing of the revised registration form.
(Ord. 2001-69, 12-4-2001, eff. 12-9-2001)
16-8B-10: MAINTENANCE STANDARDS:
Any vacant building, whether or not subject to a vacant building plan, shall be
maintained in accordance with all of the following maintenance standards:
   A.   Boarding: If a building is boarded, the building shall be boarded in
the following manner:
      1.   Plywood Sheathing; Exterior Grade Chipboard: All openings in the
structure on the first two (2) floors, other openings easily accessible from
the ground, and openings with broken glass, shall be secured either by erecting
a single one-half inch (1/2") thick layer of plywood sheathing, or exterior
grade chipboard, covering over all exterior openings, overlapping the opening
on every edge by three inches (3"), nailed along the edges by eightpenny common
nails or equal spaced every six inches (6");
      2.   Wood Frame Construction: Alternately, the openings may be secured by
conventional wood frame construction. The frames shall use wood studs of a size
not less than two inches by four inches (2" x 4") (nominal dimension) placed
not more than twenty four inches (24") apart on center. The frame stud shall
have the four inch (4") sides or the wide dimension perpendicular to the face
of the wall. Each side of the frame shall be covered with plywood sheathing of
at least one-half inch (1/2") thickness or equivalent lumber nailed over the
opening by using eightpenny common nails or equal spaced every six inches (6")
on the outside edges and every twelve inches (12") along intermediate stud
supports;
      3.   Painting: All coverings shall be painted with the same color as the
building or its trim and maintained in accordance with subsection D of this
section.
   B.   Exterior Doors; Secured: Exterior doors or windows of a vacant building
shall be adequately locked to preclude entry of unauthorized persons, or shall
be covered as an opening described in subsection A1 or A2 of this section.
   C.   Landscaping; Lawn: Existing landscaping and lawn on the premises of a
vacant building shall be maintained in the manner otherwise required by law.
   D.   Exterior Walls; Surfaces: Exterior walls and surfaces of a vacant
building must be properly maintained. Any exterior surface which has previously
been treated with a weather coating material such as paint or stain shall be
maintained in good condition free from faded or peeling paint or other coating
material. Severely weathered, peeling or unpainted wood or damaged siding or
roofing must be replaced or repaired with similar materials and colors.
   E.   Snow Removal: Snow must be removed from public sidewalks surrounding
the premises of a vacant building in the manner otherwise required by law.
   F.   Utility Connections: Although service may be discontinued and meters
locked off during vacancy, all preexisting meters and service lines for water,
sewer, electric and gas shall be maintained on the premises of a vacant
building, unless eliminated or replaced as part of the approved vacant building
plan.
(Ord. 2001-69, 12-4-2001)
   G.   Reserved.
(Ord. 2003-61, 10-21-2003)
   H.   Interior Maintenance: The interior of a vacant building shall be kept
free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage, and shall be maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition.
   I.   Property Maintenance Violations: The exterior premises of a vacant
building shall be maintained in accordance with all ordinances of the city
regarding the maintenance of property, including, but not limited to, the
requirements of title 12, chapters 4, 5 and 8 of this code.
   J.   Obscuring Of Windows: The windows and glass exterior doors of a vacant
building shall not be painted or otherwise obscured in a manner which obstructs
visibility into the interior of the building; provided that the building
official may order that windows or glass doors are to be obscured with a solid
coat of paint as part of maintenance work to be performed by the city under
section
16-8B-11 of this article:
      1.   If the building official determines such action is necessary in
order to temporarily obstruct the view of interior conditions otherwise in
violation of this section, until such time as such conditions can be remedied
under an approved vacant building plan; and
      2.   The city cannot readily access the interior of the vacant building
in order to correct such conditions.
(Ord. 2001-69, 12-4-2001)
16-8B-11: FAILURE TO MAINTAIN:
   A.   Notice; Action By City: If the building official determines that a
vacant building is not being maintained in accordance with section
16-8B-10 of this article, either in whole or in part, the building official
shall send a notice to the owner or the owner's agent by first class mail,
prepaid, requiring compliance with the building maintenance standards within
ten (10) days. If the maintenance work is not performed within the required
time, the building official may cause the maintenance work to be done by city
personnel or by a contractor hired by the city. Such notice may occur whether
or not the vacant building is subject to an approved vacant building plan, and
may be sent in conjunction with a notice to register the building as a vacant
building under section
16-8B-3 of this article.
   B.   Charges To Property Owner: If the building official causes maintenance
work to be done pursuant to subsection A of this section:
      1.   The city shall charge the property owner:
         a.   An administrative fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) to
partially recover the city's costs in administering or contracting for the
maintenance of the building and/or premises; and
         b.   The actual costs of maintaining the building and/or the premises.
      2.   The costs shall be collected as provided under article C of this
chapter.
(Ord. 2001-69, 12-4-2001, eff. 12-9-2001)
16-8B-12: EXISTING BOARDED BUILDINGS:
   A.   Compliance Required: Owners of vacant buildings who obtained a boarded
building permit from the city, prior to December 4, 2001, pursuant to the
former provisions of this article, shall register the building and comply with
the new requirements of this article by the expiration date of such permit;
provided, that the owner of any such vacant building shall still be subject to
the maintenance standards imposed in section
16-8B-9 of this article.
   B.   Notification To Owners: The building official shall take reasonable
actions to notify the owners of buildings subject to a boarded building permit
as of December 4, 2001, informing the owner of the enactment of this article,
the revised maintenance standards, and the requirement to register as a vacant
building upon expiration of the permit.
(Ord. 2001-69, 12-4-2001, eff. 12-9-2001)
16-8B-13: APPEALS:
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the building official pursuant to the
provisions of this article, may appeal the decision in accordance with the
appeal procedures provided in section
16-8A-12 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2001-69, 12-4-2001, eff. 12-9-2001)
16-8B-14: BUILDING PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS REQUIRED:
Whenever a property owner, agent of the owner, manager or tenant intends to
clean, repair, renovate, reopen or reoccupy a building that is registered as a
vacant building, the building is to be inspected and a permit must be issued by
the building official prior to the building owner, agent, manager, or tenant
initiating any of the above actions. Any person conducting any work on a
building that is registered as a vacant building must have a copy of the permit
on the site at all times. Any person conducting work without a permit on the
site, will be evicted from the premises.
(Ord. 2001-69, 12-4-2001, eff. 12-9-2001)
16-8B-15: ENFORCEMENT OF OTHER LAWS OR NOTICE AND ORDERS:
   A.   This article shall not be construed to prevent the enforcement of other
laws, codes, ordinances, and regulations which prescribe standards other than
are provided herein, and in the event of conflict, the most restrictive
provision shall apply.
   B.   Registration of a vacant building shall not stay enforcement of any
existing notice and order requiring repair or demolition of the building; or
prevent issuance of subsequent or supplemental notice and orders, requiring the
securing, repair or demolition of the building in accordance with the
provisions and standards of this chapter.
(Ord. 2001-69, 12-4-2001, eff. 12-9-2001)
16-8B-16: DISTRIBUTION OF VACANT BUILDING REGISTRY:
The building official shall provide a registry of vacant buildings to the
police department, the fire department, and to other officials in the city who
may provide services to owners of vacant buildings.
(Ord. 2001-69, 12-4-2001, eff. 12-9-2001)
16-8B-17: EXCEPTION FOR TEMPORARY FILMING ACTIVITIES:
   A.   The building official is hereby authorized to grant temporary
exceptions to the maintenance standards adopted under section
16-8B-10 of this article for purposes of allowing the erection of a temporary
film set within the 25th Street historic district directly related to filming
activities authorized under a filming permit otherwise issued by the city. Such
exception shall only be granted for actual periods of filming and a reasonable
period of time for set up and removal immediately prior to and after filming.
No change or alteration shall be made to a historic resource, except in
compliance with the requirements of title 17 of this code. In no event shall
the content of any sign or display depicted in such temporary film set be
reviewed or considered in determining whether to grant such temporary
exception.
   B.   For purposes of this section, "temporary film set" means temporary
facades, structures, signs, set dressings or other temporary alterations to a
building or site that will be the subject of media broadcasts, motion pictures
or filming.
   C.   An application for a temporary exception under this section shall
contain the following:
      1.   The address of the vacant building(s);
      2.   The filming date(s) where the temporary film set(s) will be used;
      3.   Period of time necessary for set up and removal immediately prior to
and after filming;
      4.   A general physical description of the temporary film set or
activities without reference to content of any sign or display;
      5.   A copy of the filming permit issued by the city; and
      6.   Any additional information that the building official finds
reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether an exception should
be granted.
   D.   The building official may deny an application for temporary exception
on any of the following grounds:
      1.   The application for temporary exception (including any required
attachments and submissions) is not complete;
      2.   The application for temporary exception contains a material
falsehood or misrepresentation;
      3.   The granting of the proposed exception would present an unreasonable
danger to the health or safety of the applicant, or the public;
      4.   The proposed exception falls outside of subsection B of this
section;
      5.   The proposed exception is inconsistent with the purposes and intent
of this article;
      6.   A prior application for temporary exception or permit for the same
time and place has been received, and an exception or permit has been or will
be granted to a prior applicant authorizing uses or activities which do not
reasonably permit multiple usage;
      7.   The proposed use or activity intended by the applicant would
conflict with previous planned uses or activities previously scheduled for the
same time and place;
      8.   The proposed use or activity has not complied or cannot comply with
other applicable city, state, or federal ordinances, regulations, or licensing
requirements;
      9.   The proposed use or activity intended by the applicant is prohibited
by law;
      10.   The applicant on prior occasion(s) failed to comply with the
material terms of a permit or temporary exception granted under this section
and has failed to rectify such failure to comply; or
      11.   The applicant on prior occasion(s) damaged property or private
property of historic significance and has failed to provide for the repair or
such property or has otherwise failed to rectify such damage.
   E.   All applications for temporary exception shall be processed within ten
(10) business days of receipt by the division. Upon written notice to the
applicant, the building official shall be allowed an additional ten (10)
business days to process any application for temporary exception, if the
building official deems it necessary. If the building official denies the
application, the applicant may appeal the denial to the mayor within twenty
(20) business days. If the mayor affirms the application denial, the applicant
may seek judicial review in a court of competent jurisdiction. The applicant is
prohibited from violating the maintenance standards of this article pending a
final judicial determination.
(Ord. 2002-43, 7-16-2002, eff. 7-17-2002; amd. Ord. 2002-51, 8-20-2002)
CHAPTER 8
CODE FOR THE ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS 1
 
Notes
1 1. Prior ordinance history: 1979 Code §§ 16.28.300, 16.28.310, 16.28.320; Ord.
  95-25, 5-16-1995; Ord. 98-15, 2-17-1998; Ord. 2001-69, 12-4-2001.
ARTICLE C.  COST RECOVERY
SECTION:
16-8C-1: Recovery Of Cost Of Boarding, Repair Or Demolition
16-8C-2: Collection Through Taxes
16-8C-3: Collection By Lawsuit
16-8C-1: RECOVERY OF COST OF BOARDING, REPAIR OR DEMOLITION:
   A.   Itemized Statement; Preparation And Delivery: The city treasurer, in
coordination with the building official and the other officers and employees of
the city responsible for performing or contracting for the performance of
abatement work, shall prepare an itemized statement of all expenses incurred by
the city in the performance of abatement work authorized under the provisions
of this chapter, together with all administrative costs incurred by the city,
and shall mail a copy thereof to the property owner demanding payment within
thirty (30) days of the date of mailing. Such notice shall be considered when
mailed by certified mail addressed to the property owner's last known address.
   B.   Failure To Make Payment: In the event the property owner fails to make
payment of the amount set forth in the statement described in subsection A of
this section to the city treasurer within thirty (30) days of the date of
mailing, the city treasurer may cause suit to be brought in an appropriate
court of law or may refer the matter to the county treasurer as provided
herein.
   C.   Hearing: Any property owner mailed a statement of itemized costs and
demand for payment may request a hearing before the mayor or a hearing officer
designated by the mayor. All applications shall be made by filing a written
application in the city recorder's office, together with a copy of the
statement and the fee established in section
4-6-1 of this code, within ten (10) days of the date of mailing of the
statement. Upon receipt of an application for hearing, the city recorder shall
immediately notify the building official and the city treasurer. Hearings shall
be conducted as provided in title 1, chapter 4, article A of this code.
(Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
16-8C-2: COLLECTION THROUGH TAXES:
In the event that the city elects to refer the expenses to the county treasurer
for inclusion in the tax notice of the property owner, the city treasurer shall
make in triplicate an itemized statement of all expenses and administrative
costs incurred in the city's performance of such abatement work and shall
deliver the three (3) copies of said statement to the county treasurer within
ten (10) days after the expiration of the thirty (30) day period. Thereupon the
costs of said work shall be pursued by the county treasurer in the same manner
provided in section
12-8-9 of this code.
(Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
16-8C-3: COLLECTION BY LAWSUIT:
In the event collection of costs of abatement are pursued through the courts,
the city shall sue for and receive judgment for all of said expenses of
abatement, together with all administrative costs incurred by the city,
reasonable attorney fees, interest and court costs, and shall execute upon such
judgment in the manner provided by law.
(Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
CHAPTER 8
CODE FOR THE ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
ARTICLE D.  ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
16-8D-1: Prohibited Activities
16-8D-2: Emergencies
16-8D-3: District Court Review
16-8D-1: PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES:
   A.   Nuisances: It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any lot,
tract or parcel of land to cause or permit any nuisance as defined in section
16-8A-6 of this chapter to be created or remain, upon such premises; and it
shall be the duty of such owner or occupant to abate and remove any such
nuisance from such premises.
   B.   Buildings In Violation: It shall be unlawful for any person to erect,
construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish,
equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure or cause or permit the
same to be done in violation of this chapter.
   C.   Unlawful Entry: No person shall remain in or enter any building which
has been posted pursuant to section
16-8A-11 of this chapter or subsection 16-8A-14B of this chapter, except that
entry may be made to repair, demolish or remove such building under permit. No
person shall remove or deface any such notice after it is posted until the
required repairs, demolition or removal have been completed and a certificate
of occupancy issued pursuant to the provisions of the building code, if
applicable.
   D.   Refusal To Comply: It shall be unlawful for any person to fail, neglect
or refuse to obey any order made pursuant to this chapter.
   E.   Interference With Authorized Representative: No person shall obstruct,
impede or interfere with any officer, employee, contractor or authorized
representative of the city or with any person who owns or holds any estate or
interest in any building which has been ordered repaired, vacated or demolished
under the provisions of this chapter, whenever such officer, employee,
contractor or authorized representative of the city or person having an
interest or estate in such building or structure is engaged in the work of
securing, repairing, vacating or demolishing any such building, pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter, or in performing any necessary act preliminary to
or incidental to such work or authorized or directed pursuant to this chapter.
   F.   Noncompliance With Vacant Building Requirements: It shall be unlawful
for an owner of a vacant building to fail to:
      1.   Register or reregister such building in accordance with the
requirements of article B of this chapter.
      2.   Comply with the approved vacant building plan for such building, in
accordance with the requirements of article B of this chapter; or
      3.   Maintain such building in accordance with the standards imposed
under section
16-8B-10 of this chapter.
(1979 Code § 16.28.400; Ord. 95-25, 5-16-1995; amd. Ord. 98-15, 2-17-1998; Ord.
2001-69, 12-4-2001, eff. 12-9-2001)
16-8D-2: EMERGENCIES:
Whenever a nuisance as enumerated in section
16-8A-6 of this chapter creates an emergency requiring immediate action to
protect the public health, safety or welfare, the building official may issue
an immediate order directing the owner, occupant or other person in charge of
the premises to take such action as is necessary to correct or abate the
immediate emergency.
   A.   Notice: The building official shall attempt to make contact through a
personal interview, or by telephone with the owner or the person, if any,
occupying or otherwise in real or apparent charge and control thereof. In the
event contact is made, the building official shall notify such person of the
danger involved and require that such condition be immediately removed,
repaired or isolated so as to preclude harm to any person or property.
   B.   Abatement: In the event the building official is unable to make contact
as hereinabove noted, or if the appropriate persons, after notification by the
building official, do not take action as specified by such official, within
seventy two (72) hours, then the building official may, with the approval of
the mayor, take all steps deemed necessary to remove or isolate such dangerous
condition, or conditions, with the use of city forces or a contractor retained
pursuant to the provisions of this code.
   C.   Cost: The building official shall keep an itemized account of the costs
incurred by the city in removing or isolating such condition, or conditions.
Such costs may be recovered in the same manner that abatement costs are
recovered pursuant to this chapter, except that a tax lien may not be filed
against the property.
(1979 Code § 16.28.420; Ord. 95-25, 5-16-1995; amd. Ord. 98-15, 2-17-1998)
16-8D-3: DISTRICT COURT REVIEW:
Any person adversely affected by any decision of the board, or an order of the
mayor under subsection 16-8A-15H of this chapter, may petition the district
court for a review of the decision. In the petition, the plaintiff may only
allege that the board's decision, or the order of the mayor, was arbitrary,
capricious, or illegal. The petition shall be filed within thirty (30) days
after the board's decision, or the order of the mayor, is final.
(1979 Code § 16.28.430; Ord. 95-25, 5-16-1995; amd. Ord. 98-15, 2-17-1998)
CHAPTER 9
DEMOLITION OR MOVING OF BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES
SECTION:
16-9-1: Demolition Permits Required
16-9-2: Application
16-9-3: Qualifications
16-9-4: General Requirements
16-9-5: Completion Of Projects
16-9-6: Expiration
16-9-1: DEMOLITION PERMITS REQUIRED:
No person shall demolish or move any building or structure in the city or cause
the same to be done without first obtaining a separate building permit for each
such building or structure. All permits will be obtained from the inspection
services division.
(1979 Code § 16.37.010; Ord. 88-46, 12-1-1988; amd. Ord. 92-6, 1-9-1992; Ord.
95-25, 5-16-1995; Ord. 98-15, 2-17-1998)
16-9-2: APPLICATION:
To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first submit an application in writing,
on a form provided for that purpose. Every application shall:
   A.   Identify and describe the type of work to be covered by the permit.
   B.   State the address of the building or structure to be demolished or
moved.
   C.   Describe the structure or building to be demolished or moved,
indicating type of use, type of building construction, size in square footage,
number of stories and the size of the lot upon which the building or structure
is located.
   D.   Indicate whether building or structure is presently occupied.
   E.   Specify approximate dates of commencement and completion of demolition
or moving.
   F.   Indicate whether or not fences and/or barricades will be erected as
well as their proposed location.
   G.   Indicate whether or not fill material will be required to bring site
back to level grade at completion of project.
   H.   Indicate place where demolition debris will be disposed of.
   I.   Provide evidence of approval from the Weber-Morgan health department
regarding asbestos removal.
   J.   Provide verification from the utilities that all utilities (water,
natural gas, electric, etc.) have been properly disconnected, shut off and/or
secured.
   K.   Be signed by the applicant.
(1979 Code § 16.37.020; Ord. 88-46, 12-1-1988; amd. Ord. 92-6, 1-9-1992; Ord.
95-25, 5-16-1995; Ord. 98-15, 2-17-1998; Ord. 2004-1, 1-6-2004)
16-9-3: QUALIFICATIONS:
The permit required shall be obtained by the person doing the work specified in
the permit. Demolition permits may be issued by the inspection services
division to parties who meet the following qualifications:
   A.   Licensed Subcontractor: A subcontractor currently holding a license in
good standing with the state, qualified to do wrecking and/or demolition work.
   B.   Licensed General Contractor: A contractor currently holding a license
in good standing with the state, qualified as a general building contractor, or
residential and small commercial contractor.
   C.   Special Restricted Permittee: A property owner doing his own work, who
cannot qualify under subsection A or B of this section, may qualify for a
restricted special demolition permit conditioned upon compliance with the
following terms and restrictions:
      1.   Only one special demolition permit may be issued or outstanding at
any time for any property owner.
      2.   The permit is not transferable between parties.
      3.   Each demolition project commenced under a special permit must be
completed and receive final inspection and approval from the inspection
services division prior to the approval or issuance of any subsequent special
permit to the owner.
      4.   Special demolition permits may be issued for demolition of the
following structures only:
         a.   Accessory buildings;
         b.   Single-family or duplex residential structures.
(1979 Code § 16.37.030; Ord. 88-46, 12-1-1988; amd. Ord. 92-6, 1-9-1992; Ord.
95-25, 5-16-1995; Ord. 98-15, 2-17-1998)
16-9-4: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
All permittees shall comply with the following requirements:
   A.   Water Line Disconnect Fee: A water line disconnection fee must be paid
to water utility prior to making an application for permit.
   B.   Permit Required: A demolition or moving permit must be obtained by a
licensed contractor or special restricted permittee before the work is begun.
   C.   Bond Posted: A surety bond, cashier's check, or a cash bond must be
posted with the inspection services division. This bond is to secure compliance
with the terms of this chapter. Special circumstances may require special
bonds. Otherwise, the following bond schedule will apply:
   Floor Area Of Structure   Amount
   Up to 2,000 square feet   $ 2,000.00
   2,001 to 10,000 square feet   10,000.00
   Over 10,000 square feet   20,000.00
   D.   Release Of Bond: The bond will be released within ten (10) days after
certification, by the inspection services division, of the successful
completion of the demolition or moving project.
   E.   Safe Condition Maintained: All buildings and structures shall be
secured and maintained in a safe condition, both prior to and during demolition
or moving.
   F.   Protection Of Pedestrian Traffic: During the course of the demolition
or moving, all precautions must be taken to protect pedestrian traffic,
adjacent property and structures. Covered walkways will be constructed when
required by the inspection services division for pedestrian protection.
   G.   Dust Control: All demolition projects must have means of controlling
dust on the job site.
   H.   Removal Of Debris: The building being demolished and the foundation of
the building being moved must be removed from the job site. This includes the
basement floor and footings. No debris from the building will be allowed to be
buried in any basement or cellar space.
   I.   Sewer Lateral Uncovered:
      1.   The sewer lateral must be uncovered by the contractor/owner at the
property line. Upon notification, the sewer division will cap the exposed line
at no additional fee. If the sewer division is not contacted to cap the line,
the contractor/owner will be required to show that the lateral has been
properly capped before the bond will be released.
      2.   The sewer lateral must be uncovered and properly capped by the
contractor/owner within five feet (5') of the property line. This cap must
remain exposed until inspected and approved by the sewer division or inspection
services division and inspection approval is required before the bond may be
released.
(1979 Code § 16.37.040; Ord. 88-46, 12-1-1988; amd. Ord. 92-6, 1-9-1992; Ord.
95-25, 5-16-1995; Ord. 98-15, 2-17-1998)
16-9-5: COMPLETION OF PROJECTS:
A permit for demolition or moving requires that all materials comprising part
of the existing structure, including the foundation and footings, must be
removed from the site. The depression caused by removal of such debris must be
filled back and compacted to the original grade, as approved by the inspection
services division, with granular fill. The work must be completed, including
filling and leveling back to grade and removal of required pedestrian walkways
and fences within the permit period, unless the inspection services division:
   A.   Finds that any part of the foundation of the building will form an
integral part of a new structure to be erected on the same site for which plans
have already been approved by the inspection services division, in which case
it may approve plans for the appropriate adjustment and may impose reasonable
conditions, including the posting of a bond, erection of fences, securing,
etc., to guarantee the site does not create a hazard.
   B.   Finds that new construction will shortly commence and approves the
continuance of the protective pedestrian walkway.
   C.   Finds that the foundation, footings or existing retaining walls are
integral to the support of adjacent sidewalks, streets, legal easements, or
buildings, in which case the inspection services manager may permit such
supporting structures to remain.
(1979 Code § 16.37.050; Ord. 88-46, 12-1-1988; amd. Ord. 92-6, 1-9-1992; Ord.
95-25, 5-16-1995; Ord. 98-15, 2-17-1998)
16-9-6: EXPIRATION:
All permits issued shall expire sixty (60) calendar days from the date of
issuance, unless a completion date allowing more time is stated and approved by
the inspection services division at the time of application. Demolition permits
may be renewable upon request prior to expiration with approval of the
inspection services division, provided continuous progress is being made. If a
permit is allowed to expire without the prior renewal, any subsequent request
for reinstatement shall be accompanied by a reinstatement fee equal to the
original demolition permit fee.
(1979 Code § 16.37.060; Ord. 88-46, 12-1-1988; amd. Ord. 92-6, 1-9-1992; Ord.
95-25, 5-16-1995; Ord. 98-15, 2-17-1998)
CHAPTER 10
RESERVED
CHAPTER 11
RESERVED
CHAPTER 12
REMEDIES AND PENALTIES 1
SECTION:
16-12-1: Remedies And Penalties Designated; Failure To Comply
16-12-2: Persons Liable
 
Notes
  1. Prior ordinance history: 1979 Code §§ 16.45.010, 16.45.020, 16.45.030,
  16.45.050, 16.45.060, 16.45.070, 16.45.080; Ord. 88-46, 12-1-1988; Ord. 92-6,
1 1-9-1992; Ord. 95-25, 5-16-1995; Ord. 97-93, 12-16-1997; Ord. 98-25, 4-7-
  1998; Ord. 2001-69, 12-4-2001; Ord. 2001-71, 12-18-2001, eff. 1-1-2002; Ord.
  2002-73, 12-17-2002; Ord. 2004-48, 6-15-2004, eff. 7-1-2004.
16-12-1: REMEDIES AND PENALTIES DESIGNATED; FAILURE TO COMPLY:
   A.   Misdemeanor: Any person who fails to comply with any of the provisions
of this title is guilty of a class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction therefor,
shall be punished as provided in title 1, chapter 4, article A of this code.
   B.   Judicial Remedies: This title may also be enforced by injunction,
mandamus, abatement, or any other appropriate judicial action in law or equity.
   C.   City Abatement: The Ogden City code for the abatement of dangerous
buildings may also be enforced by city administrative abatement and the costs
either liened against the property as otherwise specifically provided in
chapter 8 of this title or collected by any other means available at law.
   D.   Civil Penalties: Failure to correct a violation of this title after
notice of violation and expiration of the applicable warning period may be
enforced by imposition of the following civil penalties pursuant to title 1,
chapter 4, article B of this code.
      1.   The first civil citation issued after expiration of the warning
period shall subject the responsible party to the initial civil penalty of one
hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00).
      2.   The second civil citation issued after expiration of the warning
period and the prior imposition of the initial penalty shall subject the
responsible party to the intermediate penalty of two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00).
      3.   Any subsequent civil citation issued after expiration of the warning
period and the prior imposition of the intermediate penalty, or any reoccurring
violation under section
1-4B-6 of this code, shall subject the responsible party to the maximum penalty
of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
   E.   Combination Permitted: Any one, all, or any combination of the
foregoing penalties and remedies may be used to enforce the provisions of this
title.
(Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
16-12-2: PERSONS LIABLE:
Any owner, owner's agent, occupant or lessee of any building who creates, or
fails to correct after notice of violation issued pursuant to the provisions of
this title, any condition that is contrary to the requirements of this title
may be held responsible for the violation, suffer the penalties, and be subject
to the remedies herein provided.
(Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
CHAPTER 13
CONSTRUCTION MANAGEMENT STANDARDS
SECTION:
16-13-1: Purpose
16-13-2: Definitions
16-13-3: Tracking Of Dirt, Mud And Debris
16-13-4: Storm Water Pollution Prevention Permits And Plans
16-13-5: Damage To Facilities In Public Ways
16-13-6: Use Of Public Way
16-13-7: Fugitive Dust
16-13-8: Street Signage And Posting Of Addresses
16-13-9: Compliance With Other City Ordinances
16-13-10: Permit Suspension Or Revocation And Stop Work Orders
16-13-11: Overlapping Authority
16-13-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate construction activities that may
have harmful effects on public facilities and adjacent properties.
(Ord. 2006-45, 7-25-2006)
16-13-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms shall be defined as indicated for the purpose of this
chapter:
BUILDING OFFICIAL: The duly appointed building official of the city or the
building official's duly authorized representative.
CITY ENGINEER: The duly appointed city engineer of the city, or the city
engineer's duly authorized representative.
CITY STORM DRAIN SYSTEM: All drainage structures, whether surface or
subsurface, that are part of, or connect to, the city's storm drainage system.
ENGINEERING REGULATIONS: The latest version of the engineering regulations,
specifications, design standards or criteria published or adopted by the city
engineer, pursuant to title 7, chapter 6 of this code.
LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY: A human induced change to improved or unimproved
land, including, but not limited to, new home or building construction,
expansion of an existing building or home, demolition activity, clearing,
grubbing, leveling, excavation, fill operations, trenching, landscaping,
grading, drainage, pipe installation, drilling, mining, dredging, road
construction or improvement, paving, construction of earthen berms, and
improvements for use as parking or storage.
PERMIT: Any permit, approval or authorization issued or granted by the city for
an improvement to, or alteration of, real property within the city, including,
but not limited to, an excavation permit pursuant to title 7, chapter 5 of this
code; a building, demolition, or other construction permit pursuant to this
title; an approval for the subdivision or development of land pursuant to title
14 of this code; or any approval pursuant to title 15 of this code, which
authorizes any type of grading, improvements, or construction activity.
PERMITTEE: Any person who has been issued a permit.
PERMITTING OFFICIAL: The officer of the city responsible for the issuance or
granting of the permit, administration of the permit, or the enforcement of
ordinance requirements or conditions of the permit, including, but not limited
to, the building official, the city engineer, or the planning director.
PLANNING DIRECTOR: The director of the community and economic development
department of the city, or the director's designee.
PUBLIC WAY: Means and includes all public rights of way and easements, public
footpaths, walkways and sidewalks, public streets, public roads, public
highways, public alleys, and public drainageways, including any public
drainageways located within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city.
WORK SITE: Any real property upon which improvement alterations, improvements,
or other construction activity is occurring.
(Ord. 2006-45, 7-25-2006)
16-13-3: TRACKING OF DIRT, MUD AND DEBRIS:
   A.   Action To Minimize: All necessary action shall be taken by the
permittee to minimize the depositing or tracking of mud, dirt, sand, gravel,
rock or debris on or within the public way.
   B.   Immediate Removal: The permittee shall be responsible for the immediate
removal of mud, dirt, sand, gravel, rock or debris on or within the public way
caused by:
      1.   Vehicles or equipment leaving the work site; or
      2.   The permittee's construction procedures or activities.
   C.   Performance By City: If it becomes necessary for the city to remove any
mud, dirt, sand, gravel, rock or debris which has been deposited on or within a
public way, the cost of such removal shall be charged to the permittee,
together with any legal fees or costs incurred in the collection of such costs.
Payment of such costs shall be payable to the city prior to issuance of any
certification of final inspection, utility clearances, or certificate of
occupancy. The collection of fees and charges under this section shall be in
addition to any other penalties that may apply and shall in no way alter, void
or supersede other applicable penalty provisions.
(Ord. 2006-45, 7-25-2006)
16-13-4: STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PERMITS AND PLANS:
   A.   SWPP Permits: The permittee shall obtain a storm water pollution
prevention permit (SWPP permit) prior to commencing land disturbing activities
on the work site, if required under title 9, chapter 7, article B of this code.
   B.   Erosion, Sediment Controls: Regardless of whether an SWPP permit is
required, the permittee shall provide erosion and sediment controls adequate to
prevent transportation of sediment and debris from the work site into the
public way, the city's storm drainage system or other adjacent properties.
   C.   Storm Water Prevention Plan: If the permitting official determines that
such controls are inadequate as a result of sediment or debris being
discharged, deposited or tracked from the work site, the permitting official
may require a permittee to prepare a storm water prevention plan for approval.
Such plan may be required any time during construction and must be submitted
within five (5) days of the request. The permitting official may suspend or
revoke all work under a permit until the plan is submitted and approved. The
permittee shall maintain all erosion and sediment control facilities required
under the plan throughout the life of the construction project authorized under
the permit, and shall monitor the plan's effectiveness after storms or other
erosion causing incidents to ensure that the plan functions correctly.
(Ord. 2006-45, 7-25-2006)
16-13-5: DAMAGE TO FACILITIES IN PUBLIC WAYS:
   A.   Sidewalks and curb and gutter within the public way shall not be
removed, blocked, ramped or otherwise rendered unusable by storage of
construction equipment or materials, or by the construction procedures used
under a permit, unless a safe, usable alternate walkway or water conveyance
system along the same side of the street is provided in accordance with
engineering regulations.
   B.   The permitting official may require that any damage to sidewalks,
streets, curb and gutter, or other facilities within the public way, resulting
from the removal, blocking, or ramping of such facilities, or from other
construction activities under the permit, be cleaned, repaired, or
rehabilitated by the permittee causing such damage. This section does not
relieve any other person or organization from responsibilities arising under
other permits, warranties or contracts to repair such structures. If it becomes
necessary for the city to make such repairs, the cost of such cleaning,
repairs, or rehabilitation shall be charged to the permittee, together with any
legal fees or costs incurred in the collection of such costs. Payment of such
costs shall be payable to the city prior to issuance of any certification of
final inspection, utility clearances, or certificate of occupancy. The
collection of fees and charges under this section shall be in addition to any
other penalties that may apply and shall in no way alter, void or supersede
other applicable penalty provisions.
(Ord. 2006-45, 7-25-2006)
16-13-6: USE OF PUBLIC WAY:
   A.   Except as may be specifically allowed under permit issued pursuant to
section
7-4-3 or title 7, chapter 5 of this code, no permittee shall occupy or use any
portion of the public way for the placement or storage of:
      1.   Dirt, fill, or excavated material;
      2.   Debris, refuse, "garbage", or other type of "solid waste", as
defined under section
12-1-1 of this code;
      3.   Building materials, construction or demolition waste, or other
materials prohibited under section
7-2-1 of this code; or
      4.   Receptacles or containers for the deposit of construction or
demolition waste, debris, refuse, "garbage", or other type of "solid waste", as
defined under section
12-1-1 of this code.
   B.   The permitting official may require a permittee to remove any material
placed or stored in the public way occurring as a result of the work under the
permit or permittee's construction procedures or activities. If it becomes
necessary for the city to remove such material which has been placed on or
within a public way or the city's storm drainage system, the cost of such
removal shall be charged to the permittee, together with any legal fees or
costs incurred in the collection of such costs. Payment of such costs shall be
payable to the city prior to issuance of any certification of final inspection,
utility clearances, or certificate of occupancy. The collection of fees and
charges under this section shall be in addition to any other penalties that may
apply and shall in no way alter, void or supersede other applicable penalty
provisions.
(Ord. 2006-45, 7-25-2006)
16-13-7: FUGITIVE DUST:
The permittee shall comply with the requirements of the fugitive dust rule
(R307-309), adopted pursuant to section 19-2-106, Utah Code Annotated, or its
successor provision.
(Ord. 2006-45, 7-25-2006)
16-13-8: STREET SIGNAGE AND POSTING OF ADDRESSES:
The permittee shall ensure that an address is assigned for the work site of the
permit, and that such address is posted in a manner clearly visible to
inspectors, utility representatives, and emergency personnel. If the work site
of the permit is located in a new subdivision, no construction activity related
to the construction of buildings or structures on an individual lot shall
commence until applicable street signage is in place.
(Ord. 2006-45, 7-25-2006)
16-13-9: COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER CITY ORDINANCES:
   A.   Noise Regulations: No permittee shall allow any construction activity
or the operation of any construction equipment on the work site of a permit,
which produces noise in violation of title 12, chapter 14 of this code.
   B.   Accumulation Of Litter: A permittee shall take those steps as are
reasonably necessary to prevent the accumulation of litter at the work site of
a permit, as provided in section
12-3-5 of this code.
   C.   Materials Transported On Streets: No permittee shall allow any trucks
or equipment to leave the work site of a permit in violation of section
12-3-4 of this code.
   D.   Permit Required For Occupation Or Use Of Public Way: No permittee shall
occupy or use any portion of the public way adjacent to the work site of the
permit without first obtaining a permit as provided in section
7-4-3 of this code.
(Ord. 2006-45, 7-25-2006)
16-13-10: PERMIT SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION AND STOP WORK ORDERS:
The permitting official is empowered to suspend, revoke, or stop work on, a
permit until the permittee:
   A.   Obtains any SWPP permit required under title 9, chapter 7 of this code;
or
   B.   Submits a storm water prevention plan as required under subsection
16-13-4C of this chapter; or
   C.   Installs or replaces erosion or sediment control facilities required
under the approved storm water pollution prevention plan, pursuant to
subsection
16-13-4C of this chapter.
   D.   Repairs or replaces any such equipment or facilities required under
subsections A and B of this section, if such official determines that such
equipment and facilities are not operating in a satisfactory manner.
   E.   Takes such action as is determined by the permitting official to be
necessary to ensure future compliance with the other requirements of this
chapter.
(Ord. 2006-45, 7-25-2006)
16-13-11: OVERLAPPING AUTHORITY:
Although the building official, the city engineer, the planning director, or
other permitting official may have concurrent authority over a work site under
the provisions of this chapter, primary responsibility for enforcing the
provisions of this chapter, including the authority to suspend, revoke or issue
a stop work order on a permit, shall rest with the official of the division
that issued the permit.
(Ord. 2006-45, 7-25-2006)
TITLE 17
LANDMARKS
CHAPTER 1
ADMINISTRATIVE AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
17-1-1: Purpose And Intent
17-1-2: Definitions
17-1-3: Landmarks Commission
17-1-4: Administration And Enforcement
17-1-5: Licenses And Permits; Conformity
17-1-6: Maintenance Of Records
17-1-7: Hazardous Structures
17-1-8: Penalty
17-1-9: Amendments To Title
17-1-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
This title is enacted to promote the economic, educational, cultural and
general welfare of the people of Ogden City. It is deemed essential by the city
council, that the qualities relating to the history of Ogden be preserved
through:
   A.   The protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of structures, sites
and areas that are reminders of past eras, events and persons important in
local, state and national history or which reflect the distinct phases of
political and architectural heritage;
   B.   The presentation and encouragement of a variety of architectural styles
of the past or are landmarks in the history of architecture, or a method of
construction, or a particular builder or designer, or contains extraordinary or
unusual architectural design, detail, use of materials or craftsmanship;
   C.   The development and maintenance of appropriate settings and environment
of such structures and in such sites and areas;
   D.   The enhancement of property values, the stabilization of neighborhoods
and areas of the city, the increase of economic and financial benefits to the
city and its residents, and the promotion of tourist trade and interest; and
   E.   The enrichment of human life in its educational and cultural dimensions
in order to serve spiritual as well as material needs, by fostering knowledge
of the living heritage of the past.
(1979 Code § 11.00.010; Ord. 85-4, 2-7-1985; amd. Ord. 92-9, 1-9-1992)
17-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this title, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
BUILDING: Typically includes only the exterior of a building which is subject
to public view, but may include interior spaces only when the interior space
has been formally designated as a historic resource.
CERTIFICATE OF HISTORIC APPROPRIATENESS: A written authorization issued by the
landmarks commission before work can be done, including building, demolition or
sign permit, which affects a designated or formally nominated historic
resource. The certificate is official acknowledgment that the proposed action
is in compliance with this title.
COMMISSION: The Ogden City landmarks commission, as designated by this title.
CONTRIBUTORY STRUCTURE: A structure in a historic district identified in the
creation of the district as a contributory structure which has had little or no
alteration from the original building and is representative of the
architectural or historic qualities of the historic district in which it is
located.
CROSSROADS DISTRICT: The crossroads of the west historic district established
pursuant to Pub. L. 106-577, title III, section 302, on December 28, 2000, 114
stat. 3072.
DEMOLITION BY NEGLECT: The condition of property that is neglected to the
extent that the property suffers significant deterioration. This event occurs
when the owner fails to correct a violation of title 16 of this code or this
title and fails to comply with a written request or order to repair.
DESIGNATION: The legal listing of a site, structure, building, natural feature
or district, as a historic resource pursuant to this title.
ELIGIBLE STRUCTURE: A structure in a historic district identified in the
creation of the district which has had significant alteration from the original
building such that in its present condition has not retained its original
historic characteristics but with renovation work could be restored to its
historic integrity and be considered as a contributory structure.
EMERGENCY SITUATIONS: Any unforeseen circumstances or combination of
circumstances which calls for immediate action by the commission, in order to
obtain building and demolition permits to remedy a damaging, dangerous,
unhealthy or otherwise adverse situation to a nominated or designated historic
resource.
HISTORIC DISTRICT: An area containing a significant number of historic
buildings or structures which, because of such buildings or structures, has
been determined to be a unique historic resource, in accordance with the
designation criteria in this title.
HISTORIC RESOURCE: Any site, structure, building, natural feature or district
of historic, architectural or neighborhood significance, which has been
determined to be unique in accordance with the designation criteria of this
title, and formally so designated by the city council, pursuant to this title,
including a structure in a historic district, whether or not individually
designated, and properties in the crossroads district that have received
federal funding.
NOMINATION: The act of proposing a site, structure, building, interior space,
natural feature or district to be formally designated as a historic resource,
in accordance with chapter 2 of this title.
OGDEN CITY REGISTER OF HISTORIC RESOURCES: A listing of any site, structure,
building, natural feature or district located within the city, which has been
formally designed as a historic resource, in accordance with chapter 2 of this
title.
OWNER: The owner or other person who has legal possession, custody or control
of a historic resource.
PUBLIC VIEW: That which can be seen from public property or a viewpoint which
is commonly occupied by the public. The interior of a structure may be
considered subject to public view if it is in a publicly owned building, or if
in a privately owned building and is legally open to public occupation for at
least one day each year.
SIGNIFICANT DETERIORATION: A condition that results from the failure of the
owner to maintain:
   A.   A historic resource or improvement thereon in a structurally sound or
reasonably watertight condition;
   B.   A character defining, protected, architectural feature of such historic
resource; or
   C.   The integral historic material of such feature.
Significant deterioration includes some water penetration or slight structural
deterioration only if the condition has existed over a period of time which led
or may reasonably lead to significant water penetration or severe structural
damage to a:
   A.   Significant part of a facade or roof;
   B.   Small part of a single, character defining, protected architectural
feature; or
   C.   Small portion of the decorative, architectural features of the resource
or structure taken as a whole.
(Ord. 2013-17, 4-2-2013)
17-1-3: LANDMARKS COMMISSION:
   A.   Creation; Membership; Compensation: In order to execute the purposes
declared in this title, there is created the Ogden City landmarks commission,
which shall consist of nine (9) voting members. The membership of the
commission shall consist of one member of the city planning commission, one
architect with experience in historic preservation, one realtor, one historian
whose credentials meet the criteria for the federal local government
certification program, two (2) representatives of designated historic
districts, one representative from the Weber County Heritage Foundation, and
two (2) members at large other than represented above. Members of the
commission shall serve without compensation.
   B.   Appointment; Term: All members of the commission, except the planning
commission representative, shall be appointed by the mayor, with the advice and
consent of the city council and will serve for a term of three (3) years or
until their successor is appointed. Appointments shall be made so that the
composition specified in this section is maintained. The planning commission
representative will be recommended yearly by the planning commission with the
approval of the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council.
   C.   Vacancies; Removal: Vacancies occurring in the membership of the
commission other than by expiration of term of office shall be filled by the
mayor with the advice and consent of the city council for the unexpired term.
Members of the commission may be removed by the mayor for cause.
   D.   Conditions For Appointment: In order to be appointed to the commission,
a member must be a resident, own property or operate a business within the
city.
   E.   Staff Assistance: Staff assistance will be provided by the community
and economic development department, which staff assistance shall include the
following duties:
      1.   Keep commission records;
      2.   Provide information and answer inquiries concerning historic
preservation;
      3.   Prepare and handle correspondence of the commission;
      4.   Perform the technical work of the commission;
      5.   Encourage and advise owners in the protection, enhancement, and
perpetuation of historic resources;
      6.   Carry out, assist and collaborate in studies and programs designed
to further the intent of this title, and consider methods, other than those
provided for in this title, for encouraging and achieving historic preservation
and make recommendations as appropriate to the commission;
      7.   Consult with and consider the ideas and recommendations of civic
groups, public agencies and citizens interested in historic preservation; and
      8.   Coordinate the business of the commission with the inspection
services division, planning commission, board of zoning adjustment and site
plan review committee.
   F.   Operating Procedures:
      1.   Election Of Chair And Vice Chair: The commission shall elect from
its membership a chair and a vice chair elect, who shall serve for terms of one
year or until their successor is elected.
      2.   Quorum: A majority of the current appointed members of the
commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. At no
time shall the quorum be less than five (5) members. All official actions of
the commission shall require a majority vote of the members present and voting.
      3.   Adopt Rules And Procedures: The commission shall adopt rules and
procedures for the conduct of its business and meetings, which rules and
procedures shall not be inconsistent with law or ordinance.
   G.   Meetings:
      1.   Monthly: Regular meetings shall be held at least monthly. The
notices for the meetings shall meet the requirements of the Utah public and
open meetings law. Written notification shall be sent to the applicant.
      2.   Minutes; Filing: All meetings of the commission shall be open to the
public. The commission shall take minutes of its meetings, copies of which
shall be filed with the city recorder's office as part of the official records
of the city. Records of the commission shall be filed in the office of the
community and economic development department.
   H.   Duties And Powers: The major duties and powers of the landmarks
commission shall be:
      1.   Recommend Amendments: To recommend the amendments to the
preservation element of the Ogden City general plan to the planning commission
and city council;
      2.   Designate Historic Resources: To designate historic resources as
provided in section
17-2-2 of this title;
      3.   Review Certificate Applications: To review applications from both
private agents or government entities for certificates of historic
appropriateness concerning any alterations affecting, visually or structurally,
a designated or formally nominated historic resource, including, but not
limited to, alterations that require a permit from the building services
division;
      4.   Interior Arrangement: To disregard interior arrangement and building
features unless the interior also has been designated; nor shall it make any
requirement except for the purposes of preventing development, alteration,
demolition, or significant deterioration that is obviously incongruous to a
designated or formally nominated historic resource, as determined by the
commission;
      5.   Use Of Land: To not consider the use of land or buildings; which is
regulated by the zoning title; however, the landmarks commission may review all
petitions for rezoning which may affect designated, or formally nominated,
historic resources and such recommendations shall be forwarded to the city
council;
      6.   Review Loan Applications: To review applications for community
development historical resource loans for buildings which are not on the Ogden
City register of historic resources to determine the historic appropriateness
of the application. (Recommendations of the commission shall be forwarded to
the Ogden City redevelopment agency (RDA).);
      7.   Recommend Policies And Procedures: To recommend future policies,
programs, or ordinances to the city council, the mayor, and the planning
commission which will further the purposes of historic preservation, as stated
in section
17-1-1 of this chapter;
      8.   Enforce Laws: To implement and seek enforcement of the Utah state
and Ogden City preservation laws;
      9.   File Formal Requests: Pursuant to section
17-5-4 or
17-5-5 of this title:
         a.   To file a formal, written request to the building official to
investigate an alleged demolition by neglect of a historic resource, to
determine if the relevant property suffers from significant deterioration
amounting to demolition by neglect, and to order repair upon such
determination; or
         b.   To file a formal, written request to the city attorney to file a
petition for injunctive relief and civil penalties in district court. The
petition to enjoin ongoing significant deterioration and to require repair and
maintenance of a historic resource may be filed only by the Ogden City attorney
on behalf of the city of Ogden;
      10.   Conduct Certain Proceedings: To conduct hearings and make
determinations on an owner's petition for undue economic hardship as provided
in section
17-5-6 of this title;
      11.   Review Nominations: To review nominations for the national register
of historic places as referred to the commission by the Utah state division of
history.
(Ord. 2013-17, 4-2-2013)
17-1-4: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Chief Building Official: The chief building official ("building
official") is hereby charged with the administration and enforcement of the
provisions of this title.
      1.   General Enforcement: The building official and other designated
officers shall enforce all the provisions of this title. The designated
official, in coordination with the building official as necessary, shall
inspect or cause to be inspected all structures or sites in the course of
construction, alteration, or repair and any change in the use of the land. If,
in the course of such inspection or otherwise, the designated official
determines that any such construction, alteration or repair, or lack thereof,
or that any such use of the land is in violation of the provisions of this
title, the designated official may issue, in coordination with the building
official as necessary a written order to the person responsible therefor,
ordering and directing such person to cease and desist construction,
alteration, repair or use, or to take affirmative action such as repair or
maintain, or other appropriate action consistent with this title.
      2.   Report Violations: The building official shall report a violation of
this title to the city's legal department for prosecution and may make
complaint thereof before the court or courts having jurisdiction of such
violation. The legal department may bring a civil action for the abatement of
any nuisance existing in violation of this title.
      3.   Assistance; Law Enforcement: The building official may call for the
assistance of law enforcement personnel whenever, in the building official's
opinion, such assistance is necessary in the investigation of a suspected
violation of this title, including administration of the necessary warrants,
signed permission forms, or signed waiver provisions for interior inspections.
      4.   Establish Rules And Regulations: The building official may establish
reasonable rules and regulations necessary or desirable in the administration
of this title. Three (3) copies of such rules and regulations shall be filed
with the city recorder and such rules and regulations shall become effective
when so filed.
   B.   Fees: The mayor may, by resolution or executive order, prescribe an
exact payment of reasonable fees to cover the expense of processing
applications for designation and reviewing certificates of historic
appropriateness. A reasonable fee for appealing an order of repair issued
pursuant to section
17-5-5 of this title, for requesting a determination of economic hardship, or
hearing appeals thereof, or for a request for demolition of a historic
resource, shall be incorporated into the fee schedule.
(Ord. 2013-17, 4-2-2013)
17-1-5: LICENSES AND PERMITS; CONFORMITY:
All departments, officials and public employees of the city, which are vested
with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses, shall conform to the
provisions of this title and shall issue no such permit or license for uses,
buildings or purposes where the same would be in conflict with the provisions
of this title, and any such permit or license, if issued in conflict with the
provisions of this title, shall be null and void.
(1979 Code § 11.06.020; Ord. 80-7, 2-21-1980; amd. Ord. 92-9, 1-9-1992)
17-1-6: MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS:
To provide guidance and insight into the goals and objectives of historic
resources and for the maintenance of consistent policies, the commission shall
maintain a file containing records of all applications brought before it for
review, action taken, drawings submitted, and amendments of drawings pertaining
thereto.
(1979 Code § 11.06.040; Ord. 80-7, 2-21-1980; amd. Ord. 92-9, 1-9-1992)
17-1-7: HAZARDOUS STRUCTURES:
This title shall not prohibit the razing of structures which pose an immediate
hazard to human health and safety.
(1979 Code § 11.06.050; Ord. 80-7, 2-21-1980; amd. Ord. 92-9, 1-9-1992)
17-1-8: PENALTY:
   A.   Any person, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise,
violating or causing or permitting the violation of any of the provisions of
this title shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor, and upon conviction
thereof shall be subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4, article
A of this code.
   B.   Failure to correct a violation of this title after notice of violation
and expiration of the warning period may be enforced by imposition of the
following civil penalties pursuant to title 1, chapter 4, article B of this
code:
      1.   The first civil citation issued after expiration of the warning
period shall subject the responsible party to the initial penalty of one
hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00).
      2.   The second civil citation issued after expiration of the warning
period and the prior imposition of the initial penalty shall subject the
responsible party to the intermediate penalty of two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00).
      3.   Any subsequent civil citation issued after expiration of the warning
period and the prior imposition of the intermediate penalty, or any reoccurring
violation under section
1-4B-6 of this code, shall subject the responsible party to the maximum penalty
of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
   C.   This title may also be enforced by injunction, mandamus, abatement, or
any other appropriate judicial action in law or equity.
   D.   Any one, all, or any combination of the foregoing penalties and
remedies may be used to enforce the provisions of this title.
   E.   The penalties provided in this section shall be in addition to any
denial, suspension or revocation of any license or permit issued under this
code.
(1979 Code § 11.06.030; Ord. 80-7, 2-21-1980; amd. Ord. 92-9, 1-9-1992; 1999
Code; Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
17-1-9: AMENDMENTS TO TITLE:
Any amendment to the provisions of this title shall follow the procedural
requirements for the adoption or amendment of land use ordinances as provided
under section
15-1-4 of this code and the requirements of the land use development and
management act, chapter 9a, title 10, Utah Code Annotated, or their successor
provisions.
(Ord. 2005-67, 12-6-2005)
CHAPTER 2
DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC RESOURCES
SECTION:
17-2-1: Criteria
17-2-2: Designation; Procedures
17-2-3: Recording Of Designation
17-2-1: CRITERIA:
Any site, structure, building, interior space, district or natural feature, may
be designated as an historic resource if it has significant character, interest
or value as part of the development, heritage or cultural characteristics of
the city, state or nation, and if it falls into one or more of the following
categories:
   A.   Historical Significance:
      1.   It is the location of or is associated in a significant way with an
historic event which had a significant affect upon the city, state or nation;
or
      2.   It is associated in a significant way with the life of a person
important in the history of the city, state or nation; or
      3.   It is associated in a significant way with an important aspect of
the cultural, political or economic heritage of the community, city, state or
nation.
   B.   Architectural Significance:
      1.   It embodies the distinctive visible characteristics or an
architectural style, period or a method of construction; or
      2.   It is an outstanding work of designer or builder; or
      3.   It contains elements of extraordinary or unusual architectural or
structural design, detail, use of material, or craftsmanship; or
      4.   It portrays the environment of a group of people in an era of
history characterized by a distinctive architectural style.
   C.   Neighborhood Significance: Because of its prominent spatial location,
contrasts of siding, age or scale, it is an easily identifiable visual feature
of its neighborhood or the city and contributes to the distinctive quality or
identity of its neighborhood or the city.
   D.   Historic Districts: In addition to the above criteria, the following
also may be considered in determining if an area of related historic resources
shall be designated as an historic district:
      1.   Areas which consist of a linkage of sites, structures, buildings,
objects and spaces, a majority of which form a recognizable entity;
      2.   A group of structures, buildings or sites which provide the area
with a sense of uniqueness;
      3.   Areas which have a major historic focal point or points within the
area;
      4.   Areas which contain a relatively dense grouping of historic
resources;
      5.   Areas which are readily definable by manmade and/or natural
boundaries.
(1979 Code § 11.03.010; Ord. 80-7, 2-21-1980; amd. Ord. 85-4, 2-7-1985; Ord.
92-9, 1-9-1992; 1999 Code)
17-2-2: DESIGNATION; PROCEDURES:
   A.   Application: Any person, group or association may nominate a
prospective historic resource for formal designation. The initiation of
designation proceedings must be made by submitting to the community and
economic development department staff an application for such designation on a
form furnished by the commission. The commission, on its own motion, may
initiate proceedings for the designation of a potential historic resource. Such
application shall be similar in form to that used for the national register of
historic places.
   B.   Notice To Owner: Notice that an application for designation is being
considered shall be given to the owner or owners of record who would be
affected by such designation. The owner or owners shall be notified by
certified mail at least five (5) business days prior to commission
consideration of the applicable application. The owner or owners shall have the
right to confer with the commission prior to final action by the commission.
   C.   Decision Of Commission: Following any investigation deemed necessary to
the commission, but in no case more than sixty (60) days after the receipt of
any application for designation, the application shall be approved or
disapproved by the commission. If designation proceedings are initiated by the
commission, final approval or disapproval shall be made by the commission no
more than sixty (60) days after such initiation. Such approval or disapproval
shall be in writing and signed by the chairperson of the commission and shall
state the reasons for the action taken by the commission. The approval may be
limited to the proposed historic resource as described in the application, or
may include modifications thereof and approval as so modified.
   D.   Forward Recommendations To City Council: Within thirty (30) days after
the final determination of the commission on a designation application, the
commission shall forward each application to the city council, together with
the attached recommendations of the commission.
   E.   Action By City Council: The city council may, by approval and passage
of an appropriate ordinance, designate historic resources. Prior to the passage
of the ordinance, the city council shall hold a public hearing, notice of which
shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation and mailed to the
owner or owners of property proposed for designation. Following designation, a
notice of such shall be mailed to the owners of record together with a copy of
this title.
   F.   Amend Or Rescind: After an historic resource has been formally
designated by the city council, the designation may be amended or rescinded in
the same manner as the original designation was made.
(1979 Code § 11.03.020; Ord. 80-7, 2-21-1980; amd. Ord. 85-4, 2-7-1985; Ord.
92-9, 1-9-1992; 1999 Code; Ord. 2001-32, 6-5-2001, eff. 6-30-2001)
17-2-3: RECORDING OF DESIGNATION:
When a site, structure, building, interior space, natural feature, historic
district, or other historic resource has been designated by the city council,
as provided in section
17-2-2 of this chapter, the commission shall promptly notify the owners of the
property included therein. Upon official designation, the city recorder shall
record the designation with the county recorder's office to indicate such
designation on the official title thereof. The commission will also deposit a
listing of designated historic resources with the planning commission and
inspection services division.
(1979 Code § 11.03.030; Ord. 80-7, 2-21-1980; amd. Ord. 85-4, 2-7-1985; Ord.
92-9, 1-9-1992; 1999 Code)
CHAPTER 3
CERTIFICATE OF HISTORIC APPROPRIATENESS
SECTION:
17-3-1: Certificate Required
17-3-2: Application; Procedure
17-3-3: Demolitions Of Designated Historic Resources
17-3-1: CERTIFICATE REQUIRED:
No person shall make alterations significantly affecting a designated or
formally nominated, historic resource unless a certificate of historic
appropriateness has been issued by the Ogden City landmarks commission.
(1979 Code § 11.04.010; Ord. 80-7, 2-21-1980; amd. Ord. 85-4, 2-7-1985; Ord.
92-9, 1-9-1992)
17-3-2: APPLICATION; PROCEDURE:
   A.   Scope: The inspections services division shall forward all applications
for permits which apply to designated historic resources or potential historic
resources which have been formally nominated, pending designation proceedings,
to the commission. Applications forwarded shall include, but not be limited to:
      1.   All rehabilitation, restoration or reconstruction of or addition to
the exterior of any improvement which constitutes all or part of an historic
site, structure, building or district;
      2.   A demolition or relocation of any improvement which constitutes all
or part of an historic site, structure, building or district;
      3.   New construction or erection of or addition to any improvement upon
any land included within an historic district;
      4.   Any signs placed on an historic site, structure, building or within
a district; also fences and walls;
      5.   Encroachments over the public right of way.
   B.   Request; Issuance: An applicant seeking a certificate of historic
appropriateness, in order to obtain a permit from the building services
division, shall file a request for such with the community and economic
development staff on a form furnished by the commission. A certificate of
historic appropriateness shall be issued by the commission for applications
which comply with the provisions of this title, within thirty (30) days after
the filing of the application.
   C.   Commission; Action: The commission shall approve the application, in
whole or in part, if found to be in compliance with the provisions of this
title and may impose conditions on the approval, if necessary to bring the
application into compliance. If the application is determined to be in
noncompliance with the provisions of this title, the application shall be
denied.
   D.   Notification: The commission shall forward notification of its final
decision to the building services division.
   E.   Appeal: If the commission has imposed conditions on its approval of an
application, denied an application or suspended issuance of a certificate of
historic appropriateness under this section, the applicant may appeal that
decision to the mayor. The appeal must be filed with the building services
division within thirty (30) days after the decision of the commission. The
appeal shall immediately be transmitted to the mayor. At the mayor's hearing on
the appeal, all interested parties may be heard. The mayor may reject the
appeal and affirm the decision of the commission, may modify the decision or
may grant the appeal and issue a certificate of historic appropriateness. If
the appeal is rejected by the mayor, a further appeal may be made to the
district court; provided, that such appeal is made within thirty (30) days
after the final decision of the mayor.
   F.   Expiration: Unless there is substantial action leading toward
completion of the work described in the certificate for historic
appropriateness within a period of twelve (12) months from day of approval,
such approval shall expire, unless after reconsideration of the progress of the
project, an extension is approved by the landmarks commission.
   G.   Subcommittee; Emergency: Under the emergency situations, a subcommittee
is hereby authorized upon twenty four (24) hour notice to make special review
of requests for certificates of historic appropriateness and approval of the
same. Emergency decisions must be ratified by a majority of the voting quorum
at the next regular meeting of the landmarks commission. The technical
committee shall be authorized to make such emergency reviews. The decision as
to whether emergency conditions exist shall rest with the commission chair.
(1979 Code § 11.04.010; Ord. 80-7, 2-21-1980; amd. Ord. 85-4, 2-7-1985; Ord.
92-9, 1-9-1992; Ord. 2001-32, 6-5-2001, eff. 6-30-2001)
17-3-3: DEMOLITIONS OF DESIGNATED HISTORIC RESOURCES:
   A.   Considerations: When any application is made for a certificate of
historic appropriateness to demolish any designated or formally nominated
historic resource or any building or structure located within the boundaries of
a designated or formally nominated historic district, the commission shall
consider, in addition to the standards outlined in chapter 4 of this title:
      1.   The state of repair of the building or structure;
      2.   The technical feasibility of preservation of the historic resource;
      3.   The reasonableness of the cost of restoration or repair;
      4.   The purpose of preserving the historic resource;
      5.   The impact of the demolition to the historic district, if
applicable; and
      6.   Proposed new construction, if in an historic district.
   B.   Findings: In order to approve the issuance of a certificate of historic
appropriateness for the demolition of an historic resource, the commission
shall find that the historic resource is in such a condition that it is not
feasible to preserve or restore it, taking into consideration the economic
feasibility of alternatives to the proposed demolition, and balancing the
interest of the public in preserving the historic resource, or portion thereof,
and the interest of the owner of the historic resource in its utilization.
   C.   Approve Or Deny: After consideration of the above, the commission shall
either approve or deny the application in whole or in part, or suspend the
issuance of a certificate of historic appropriateness for a period not to
exceed one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of application. Within the
suspension period the commission, together with the applicant, shall explore
all means for preserving the historic resource, including, by way of example
and not limitation:
      1.   The feasibility of modification of the plans;
      2.   Feasibility of alternative uses of the historic resource;
      3.   Feasibility of public or private acquisition;
      4.   Feasibility of acquiring easement;
      5.   The availability of economic incentives; and
      6.   The making of an historical record as described in subsection E of
this section, if it is to be eventually demolished.
   D.   Suspension: During the period of suspension, no demolition permit shall
be issued for such demolition nor shall any person demolish the building or
structure. No demolition permits in an historic district shall be approved by
the building services division, nor shall the commission approve a certificate
of historic appropriateness for a demolition within an historic district until
the commission has determined the proposed new construction will comply with
the provisions of this title.
   E.   Historic Record: If an historic resource is to be demolished, the
commission shall require the applicant to preserve the historic resource by
providing an historic record, which may include written history, floor plans
and photographs of the structure. The adequacy of the historic record shall be
determined by the commission.
(1979 Code § 11.04.020; Ord. 80-7, 2-21-1980; amd. Ord. 85-4, 2-7-1985; Ord.
92-9, 1-9-1992; Ord. 2001-32, 6-5-2001, eff. 6-30-2001)
1CHAPTER 4
REHABILITATION STANDARDS AND GUIDELINES
SECTION:
17-4-1: Rehabilitation Standards
17-4-2: Special Standards For Historic Districts
17-4-3: Guidelines For Rehabilitation And New Construction
17-4-1: REHABILITATION STANDARDS:
The following standards for rehabilitation shall be used by the Commission when
determining the historic appropriateness of any application under its
jurisdiction:
   A.   Use: A property shall be used for its historic purpose or be placed in
a new use which requires minimal change to the defining characteristics of the
building, and its site and environment.
   B.   Character: The historic character of a property shall be retained and
preserved. The removal of historic materials or alteration of features and
spaces which characterize a property shall be avoided.
   C.   Physical Record: Each property shall be recognized as a physical record
of its time, place and use. Change which create a false sense of historical
development (such as adding conjectural features or architectural elements from
other buildings) shall not be undertaken.
   D.   Change: Most properties change over time; those changes which have
acquired historic significance in their own right shall be retained and
preserved.
   E.   Distinctive Features: Distinctive features, finishes and construction
techniques or examples of skilled craftsmanship which characterize a property
shall be preserved.
   F.   Repair: Deteriorated historic features shall be repaired rather than
replaced. Where the severity of deterioration requires replacement of a
distinctive feature, the new feature shall match the old design, color, texture
and other visual qualities and, where possible, materials. Replacement of
missing features shall be substantiated by documentary, physical or pictorial
evidence.
   G.   Treatments: Chemical or physical treatments, such as sandblasting,
which cause damage to historic materials shall not be used. The surface
cleaning of structures, if appropriate, shall be undertaken using gentlest
means possible.
   H.   Archaeological Resources: Significant archaeological resources affected
by a project shall be protected and preserved. If such resources must be
disturbed, mitigation measures shall be undertaken.
   I.   New Construction: New additions, exterior alterations or related new
construction shall not destroy historic materials which characterize the
property. The new work shall be differentiated from the old and shall be
compatible with the massing, size, scale and architectural features to protect
the historic integrity of the property and its environment.
   J.   Form And Integrity: New additions and adjacent or related new
construction shall be undertaken in such a manner that if removed in the
future, the essential form and integrity of the historic property and its
environment would be unimpaired.
(1979 Code § 11.05.010; Ord. 80-7, 2-21-1980; amd. Ord. 92-9, 1-9-1992)
17-4-2: SPECIAL STANDARDS FOR HISTORIC DISTRICTS:
The following guidelines shall be used by the Commission, in addition to the
standards of Section
17-4-1 of this Chapter, when determining the historic appropriateness of any
application under its jurisdiction related to historic districts, and, in
particular, to construction of new buildings or structures:
   A.   Height: The height of the proposed building and structures shall be
visually compatible with adjacent buildings.
   B.   Front Elevation: The relationship of the width to the height of the
front elevation shall be visually compatible to buildings, public ways and
places to which it is visually related.
   C.   Windows: The relationship of the width to height of windows shall be
visually compatible with buildings, public ways and places to which it is
visually related.
   D.   Front Facade: The relationship of solids to voids in the facade of a
building shall be visually compatible with buildings, public ways and places to
which it is visually related.
   E.   Open Space: The relationship of a building or structure to open space
between it and adjoining buildings or structures shall be visually compatible
with buildings, public ways and places to which it is visually related.
   F.   Entrances: The relationship of entrances and other projections to
sidewalks or other walkways shall be visually compatible with the building,
public way and places to which it is visually related.
   G.   Materials; Texture; Color: The relationship of the materials, texture,
and color of the facades shall be visually compatible with the predominant
materials used in the buildings and structures to which it is visually related.
   H.   Roof: The roof shape and function of a building shall be visually
compatible with the buildings to which it is visually related.
   I.   Elements; Appurtenances: The use of elements such as building facades
and appurtenances such as walls, fences and landscape masses shall function to
ensure visual compatibility with the existing site design features, orientation
and layout pattern of the buildings, public ways, and places to which such
elements are visually related.
   J.   Size: The size and mass of buildings and structures in relation to open
spaces, to windows, door openings, porches, and balconies shall be visually
compatible with the buildings, public ways, and places to which it is visually
related.
   K.   Building Directional Character: A building shall be visually compatible
with buildings, public ways, and places to which it is visually related in its
directional character, whether this be vertical, horizontal, or nondirectional
character.
(1979 Code § 11.05.020; Ord. 80-7, 2-21-1980; amd. Ord. 92-9, 1-9-1992; Ord.
98-45, 9-17-1996)
17-4-3: GUIDELINES FOR REHABILITATION AND NEW CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   Established: The Commission may adopt and maintain a list of guidelines
for rehabilitation to aid applicants in formulating plans for rehabilitation,
preservation, and continued use of historic resources consistent with the
intent of the "Guidelines for Rehabilitation" prepared by the U.S. Department
of Interior.
   B.   New Construction: The Commission may adopt and maintain guidelines for
new construction in historic districts consistent with the standards adopted
under Section
17-4-2 of this Chapter, to aid applicants in formulating plans for constructing
new buildings and structures within historic districts.
   C.   Considerations: The Commission shall consider an applicant's
conformance with the standards and associated guidelines for rehabilitation or
new construction in historic districts, whichever is more applicable, as a
factor in judging compliance with this Chapter.
(1979 Code § 11.05.030; Ord. 80-7, 2-21-1980; amd. Ord. 85-4, 2-7-1985; Ord.
92-9, 1-9-1992; Ord. 96-45, 9-17-1996)
CHAPTER 5
PRESERVATION AND PROTECTION OF HISTORIC RESOURCES OR STRUCTURES
SECTION:
17-5-1: Policy To Preserve And Protect Historic Resources Or Structures
17-5-2: Maintenance Required
17-5-3: Formal Requests For Action; Demolition By Neglect
17-5-4: Petition For Injunctive Relief And Civil Penalties
17-5-5: Request For Investigation; Order To Repair; Hearing
17-5-6: Undue Economic Hardship; Criteria; Hearing; Findings
17-5-7: Appeals
17-5-8: Penalties And Remedies
17-5-1: POLICY TO PRESERVE AND PROTECT HISTORIC RESOURCES OR STRUCTURES:
This chapter is enacted to promote the preservation and protection of any
historic resource or contributory or eligible structure in a historic district
within Ogden City, and to abate any significant deterioration, amounting to
demolition by neglect, of a historic resource.
(Ord. 2013-17, 4-2-2013)
17-5-2: MAINTENANCE REQUIRED:
   A.   Any owner of property which is a historic resource or a formally
nominated historic resource, is a contributory or eligible structure located
within a historic district, or is eligible to receive funding associated with
the crossroads district, shall maintain such property in compliance with the
standards provided in section 304 of the international property maintenance
code, and title 12, chapter 4, and section
16-8B-10 of this code.
   B.   Any owner of a historic resource shall keep in good repair all of the
exterior portions of the historic resource, and all interior portions thereof
if the interior has been designated, which if not so maintained may cause or
tend to cause the exterior or interior portions of such to significantly
deteriorate into a condition of demolition by neglect. The provisions of this
section shall be in addition to all other provisions of law requiring
maintenance.
   C.   Any maintenance conducted pursuant to this chapter on a historic
resource or a formally nominated historic resource, is subject to the
requirements for obtaining a certificate of historic appropriateness as
provided in section
17-3-1 of this title.
(Ord. 2013-17, 4-2-2013)
17-5-3: FORMAL REQUESTS FOR ACTION; DEMOLITION BY NEGLECT:
   A.   If a historic resource is considered to be neglected to such a degree
as to amount to significant deterioration equivalent to "demolition by neglect"
as defined in section
17-1-2 of this title, the following alternative remedies may be utilized by the
commission:
      1.   File a formal request to the building official to investigate an
alleged significant deterioration and determine if the relevant property
suffers from significant deterioration amounting to demolition by neglect and
to order repair; or
      2.   File a formal request to the city attorney to file a petition for
injunctive relief and civil penalties in district court. The petition to enjoin
ongoing significant deterioration and to require repair and maintenance may be
filed only by the Ogden City attorney.
   B.   Upon the commission's filing a formal request for action in accordance
with this section, or upon the building official's initiation of an
investigation pursuant to section
17-5-5 of this chapter without a request from the commission, an owner may not
file an application for a certificate of historic appropriateness to demolish
such historic resource under chapter 3 of this title. Any further proceedings
pertaining to the historic resource shall proceed in accordance with this
chapter.
(Ord. 2013-17, 4-2-2013)
17-5-4: PETITION FOR INJUNCTIVE RELIEF AND CIVIL PENALTIES:
   A.   The commission may file a request with the city attorney to file a
petition for injunctive relief to compel the owner to repair the significantly
deteriorating historic resource undergoing demolition by neglect, to seek civil
penalties to penalize the owner from ongoing violation of the law, and to deter
other owners from failing to repair or maintain. The petition may be filed only
by the Ogden City attorney.
   B.   This chapter does not create a private right of action or any right or
remedy that is the same or substantially equivalent to the remedies provided
under federal or state law.
   C.   This chapter requires compliance with any federal or state standards
when the city is engaged in any project funded by the federal or state
government to promote the preservation and protection of any historic resource
in Ogden City.
(Ord. 2013-17, 4-2-2013)
17-5-5: REQUEST FOR INVESTIGATION; ORDER TO REPAIR; HEARING:
   A.   The commission may formally request in writing that the building
official investigate any alleged significant deterioration of a historic
resource equivalent to demolition by neglect.
   B.   Upon a written request of the commission, the building official shall
investigate and respond to the commission within a reasonable time. The
building official may initiate an investigation pursuant to this section with
or without a request from the commission.
   C.   If the preliminary investigation discloses significant deterioration,
the building official shall attempt to resolve the maintenance and repair
issues through a resolution conference with the owner or owner's agent provided
that any such resolution time period shall not exceed forty five (45) days. If
the resolution conference is not successful in resolving the issues, the
building official may issue a notice and an order to the owner, requiring that
specific repairs or maintenance be completed within thirty (30) days of the
notice, unless the owner proposes an alternative reasonable plan with target
dates specified. Alternatives set forth in subsection 17-5-6F of this chapter
may be considered.
   D.   The building official shall cause the notice to be served upon the
owner, identifying the significant deterioration and requiring a prioritized
list of maintenance or repair to alleviate demolition by neglect.
   E.   Notice shall be accomplished upon mailing to the owner at the address
of record and complete upon mailing.
   F.   The owner shall be given the right to appeal any order issued pursuant
to this section before the board of building and fire code appeals as set forth
in section
17-5-7 of this chapter.
   G.   The commission shall receive a written copy of the notice and order to
comply and the time and date of any appeal.
   H.   If the owner fails to comply with the final order to repair within the
time specified, the time for appeal has run, or any subsequent appeal or
procedural claim has been exhausted, the building official shall file in the
office of the city recorder and Weber County recorder a certificate describing
the property and certifying that significant deterioration exists amounting to
demolition by neglect and that notice has been provided to the owner. If the
repairs ordered in the notice and order have been completed so that the
condition of demolition by neglect no longer exists, the building official
shall file a new certificate with the city recorder and Weber County recorder
that the property is no longer in violation.
   I.   If the owner chooses to file a written claim of undue economic
hardship, the claim shall be filed with the building official within five (5)
days of the building official's order. The building official shall notify the
commission within seven (7) days after the claim is filed. The building
official's written order shall be stayed until after the commission has made an
undue economic hardship determination pursuant to section
17-5-6 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2013-17, 4-2-2013)
17-5-6: UNDUE ECONOMIC HARDSHIP; CRITERIA; HEARING; FINDINGS:
   A.   If a claim of undue economic hardship is made under this section, the
building official shall notify the commission within seven (7) days after the
claim is filed. The commission shall schedule a hearing on the claim at its
next regular meeting after receipt of the claim but no sooner than three (3)
days after receipt of the claim.
   B.   The owner shall present the information to the commission as provided
under subsection C of this section. The commission may require that the owner
furnish such additional information relevant to its determination of undue
economic hardship and may direct staff to furnish additional relevant
information. The commission shall also state which form of financial proof it
deems relevant and necessary in each particular case. In the event that any
required information is not reasonably available to or obtainable by the owner,
the owner shall state the reasons why such information is not available or
obtainable.
   C.   If a claim of undue economic hardship is made under this section, the
owner shall pay the fee established in the fee schedule and provide evidence
during the hearing on the claim, describing the circumstances of hardship.
Private information may be submitted by affidavit and considered protected for
purposes of government records access and management act, title 63G, Utah Code
Annotated, as amended. The minimum evidence for any property shall include, if
applicable:
      1.   Form of ownership, i.e., individual, business, or nonprofit or legal
possession, custody, or control;
      2.   Financial resources of the owner or other party in interest;
      3.   Cost estimates of repairs and engineering feasibility of
rehabilitation;
      4.   Assessed value of the land and improvements;
      5.   Property tax information for the previous two (2) years;
      6.   Purchase date, price, and financing arrangements, names of buyer and
seller, or other means of acquisition of title, such as by gift or inheritance;
      7.   Annual debt service, if any, for previous two (2) years;
      8.   Any listing of the property for sale or rent, price asked, and
offers received, if any;
      9.   For income producing property, rental rates and annual gross income
from the property for the previous two (2) years; and
      10.   Itemized operating and maintenance expenses for the previous two
(2) years, including proof that adequate and competent management procedures
were followed.
   D.   Within a reasonable time of the commission's hearing on the claim, the
commission shall cause to be made a written finding of undue or no undue
economic hardship.
   E.   If there is a finding of no undue economic hardship, the commission
shall report such finding to the building official and the owner, and the
building official shall cause an order to be issued immediately to the owner
for such property to be repaired within the time specified.
   F.   If there is a finding of undue economic hardship, the commission may
include a recommended plan, in conjunction with the building official, to
relieve the undue economic hardship which may include, but is not limited to,
loans or grants from the city or other public, private or nonprofit sources,
acquisition by purchase or eminent domain, court ordered receivership,
alternate methods of construction, changes in applicable zoning regulations,
incentive programs, or temporary closure of the structure through a mothball
program. The commission shall report such findings and plan to the building
official. The building official immediately shall issue a written order for
such property to be repaired in accordance with the commission's recommended
plan, to eliminate the condition of demolition by neglect within the time
specified by the commission.
(Ord. 2013-17, 4-2-2013)
17-5-7: APPEALS:
Any finding, notice, or order initiated by a demolition by neglect review by
the building official or by the commission may be appealed to the board of
building and fire code appeals. To preserve the appeal, an application shall be
filed by an aggrieved party with the building official within ten (10) days
following receipt of the order for repair or hardship determination and upon
payment of a fee as provided in the fee schedule.
   A.   For an appeal of an order of the building official, the purpose of the
appeal shall be for the board of building and fire code appeals:
      1.   To receive evidence and testimony concerning the building official's
determination that conditions of significant deterioration exist, amounting to
demolition by neglect;
      2.   To review the evidence regarding the facts of those conditions; and
      3.   To affirm or reverse the building official's order.
   B.   For an appeal of a finding of no undue hardship, the purpose of the
appeal shall be for the board of building and fire code appeals:
      1.   To receive evidence and testimony concerning the commission's
determination that there is no undue economic hardship;
      2.   To review the evidence regarding a claim of economic hardship; and
      3.   To affirm or reverse the commission's order.
   C.   The rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not
control in the hearing before the board, rather, the hearing shall be conducted
in accordance with the board's duly adopted rules and procedures.
   D.   If after such notice and hearing, the board determines that the
property is undergoing "demolition by neglect" as defined in section
17-1-2 of this title, or affirms a finding by the commission of no economic
hardship, the board shall state in writing the findings of fact in support of
such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner a
final order to repair. The order shall require the owner to make the necessary
repairs within thirty (30) days of the final order or in such other period of
time as determined by the board.
(Ord. 2013-17, 4-2-2013)
17-5-8: PENALTIES AND REMEDIES:
Any owner of the property that is determined to be significantly deteriorating
equivalent to demolition by neglect shall be subject to: the civil penalties
provided in section
17-1-8 of this title for failure to comply with the order; injunctive relief
and civil penalties granted by the district court pursuant to section
17-5-4 of this chapter; criminal penalties pursuant to title 1, chapter 4,
article A of this code; or any one, all or any combination of the foregoing
penalties and remedies.
(Ord. 2013-17, 4-2-2013)
TITLE 18
OUTDOOR SIGNS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
18-1-1: Short Title
18-1-2: Purpose
18-1-3: Definitions
18-1-4: Applicability; Exemptions To Title
18-1-5: Sign Permit Requirement; Fees
18-1-6: Exemptions To Sign Permit Requirement
18-1-7: Safety Regulation Authority
18-1-8: Enforcement; Right Of Entry
18-1-9: Sign Removal; Nonconforming Signs
18-1-10: Compliance With Title And Safety Regulations
18-1-11: Penalty
18-1-12: Appeals
18-1-13: Amendments To Title
18-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This title shall be known as the OUTDOOR SIGN CODE.
(1979 Code § 15.04.010)
18-1-2: PURPOSE:
The city council hereby finds and declares that the regulations set forth in
this title:
   A.   Will eliminate potential hazards to motorists and pedestrians;
   B.   Encourage signs which, by their good design, are integrated with and
harmonious to the buildings and sites which they occupy;
   C.   Encourage sign legibility through the elimination of excessive and
confusing sign displays thus reducing driver inattention;
   D.   Preserve and improve the appearance of the city as a place in which to
live and to work, and create an attraction to nonresidents to come to visit or
trade;
   E.   Allow each individual business to clearly identify itself and the goods
and services which it offers in such a manner as to become the hallmark of the
business and of the city, thus creating a distinctive appearance and enhancing
the city's character as a place in which to live;
   F.   Safeguard and enhance property values;
   G.   Protect public and private investment in buildings and open space,
supplement and be a part of the regulations imposed within the city; and
   H.   Promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens
of the city.
(1979 Code § 15.04.12; Ord. 96-61, 11-19-1996)
18-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and terms as used in this title shall have the meanings
indicated:
ARCHITECTURAL PROJECTION: Any projection which is not intended for occupancy
and which extends beyond the face of an exterior wall of the building, but does
not include signs.
AWNING: A shelter projecting from and supported by the exterior wall of a
building constructed of nonrigid materials on a supporting framework.
BLANKETING OR BLANKET: When applied to signs or sign structure, means the
partial or complete shutting off of the face of one sign by another sign.
BUILDING: Any structure built for the support, shelter and enclosure of
persons, animals, chattels or movable property of any kind.
BUILDING CODE: The current building code as adopted by title 16, chapter 2 of
this code, or its successor provisions.
BUILDING FACADE: That portion of an exterior elevation of a building extending
from grade to the top of the parapet wall or eaves and the entire width of the
building elevation.
BUILDING FACADE FACING: A resurfacing of an existing facade with approved
material, illuminated or nonilluminated.
BUILDING OFFICIAL: The building services manager, or the manager's duly
authorized representative.
CHANGEABLE COPY PANEL: A panel which is characterized by changeable copy,
regardless of method of attachment.
FRONTAGE: The linear dimension of a building which abuts a street or parking
area which is open and accessible to the general public.
INCOMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL: Any material which will not ignite at or below a
temperature of one thousand two hundred degrees Fahrenheit (1,200°F) during an
exposure of five (5) minutes and will not continue a burn or glow at that
temperature. Tests shall be made as specified in the building code.
LINEAR SPACING: The distance measured in a straight line from one sign located
on a lot facing a street to the next sign located on a lot on the same side of
the same street.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4315.png]
 
MAINTAIN: Includes, but is not limited to, the following: service, repair,
alter, remodel, reletter, redecorate, repaint, move or remove. It does not
include the removal of signs by a licensed wrecking contractor. Owner or lessee
of sign may repaint, redecorate and/or change letters or panels on his own
sign.
MARQUEE: A permanent roofed structure attached to and supported by the building
and projecting over public property.
SEARCHLIGHT OR SPOTLIGHT: A device whether mobile or mounted that projects
light in such a manner that a visual light beam is created by concentrating
light rays into a parallel path and the concentrated beam of light is used with
the intent to attract attention to a location, service, event or product.
SHOPPING CENTER: A conglomerate of business enterprises associated and doing
business as a retail shopping complex and utilizing a common parking area.
SIGN: A presentation of words, letters, figures, designs, pictures or colors,
or a searchlight or spotlight publicly displayed so as to give notice relative
to a person, a business, an article or merchandise, a service, an assemblage, a
solicitation or a request for aid; also the structure or framework or any
natural object on which any sign is erected or is intended to be erected or
exhibited or which is being used or is intended to be used for sign purposes.
SIGN, ADVERTISING: See definition of Sign, Off Premises.
SIGN, ANIMATED: A sign which involves motion or rotation of any part, created
by artificial means, or displays flashing or intermittent lights. This
definition does not apply to time and temperature or electronic message display
signs which are defined elsewhere in this chapter.
SIGN, AWNING: A sign painted on, printed on or attached flat against the
surface of an awning.
SIGN, BACKGROUND AREA: The entire background area of a sign upon which copy is
placed.
SIGN, BANNER: A business sign made of fabric, vinyl, plastic, mylar or any
nonrigid material (except paper) with or without enclosing framework, and
securely attached to a building or sign structure.
SIGN, BUSINESS: A sign which directs attention to a commercial building or a
use conducted, a commodity sold or a service performed on the premises.
SIGN, COMBINATION: A sign incorporating any combination of the features of
projecting, roof or freestanding signs.
SIGN, CONSTRUCTION PROJECT: A sign identifying a construction project. The sign
may contain name of project, name and address of construction firm, architect
and developer.
SIGN COPY AREA: The area of a sign that is used for display purposes excluding
the minimum frame and supports. In relation to signs that do not have a frame
or separate background, sign area shall be computed on the basis of the least
rectangle, triangle or circle large enough to frame the display. In computing
sign area, only the face or faces which can be seen from any one direction at
one time shall be counted.
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL: On premises incidental signs designated to guide or direct
pedestrians or vehicular traffic.
SIGN, ELECTRONIC MESSAGE DISPLAY: A sign which uses changing patterns of lights
to display public information and/or commercial messages.
SIGN, FLAT: Any sign attached to a building or other structure that projects
less than eighteen inches (18") beyond the building but extends parallel or
substantially parallel thereto.
SIGN, FLOODLIGHTED: Any sign illuminated in the absence of daylight only by
devices which reflect or project light upon it.
SIGN, FREESTANDING: A sign which is supported by one or more columns upright or
braces in or upon the ground.
SIGN, IDENTIFICATION: A sign used to identify the name of, or nature of a
building or parcel of land, its use, i.e., name of a subdivision, industrial
park, airport, church, school, apartment complex, mall or shopping center,
public or semipublic building. This shall not apply to a commercial building
and cannot be used to advertise or promote the use of a product or service
except when used for a mall or shopping center according to the conditions of
section
18-3-18 of this title.
SIGN, ILLUMINATED: A sign in which a source of light is used in order to make
the message readable. This definition includes internally and externally
lighted signs.
SIGN, INCOMBUSTIBLE: A sign which is constructed entirely of incombustible
material.
SIGN, INFORMATION: A sign used to provide notification or information to the
public, i.e., tenants within an industrial park, the nature of coming events,
meeting schedules, hours of operation, access and egress from parking, drive-up
or service areas, etc. It may not be used to advertise or promote the use of
any product or service except when used in connection with a mall or shopping
center according to the provisions of section
18-3-18 of this title.
SIGN, MARQUEE: A sign attached to the street frontage or sides of a marquee.
The sign must be constructed to be the same thickness or less as the marquee
and may not project above or rest upon the top of the marquee. A sign may be
attached to the bottom of a marquee if the clearance above the sidewalk, as
defined in the building code, is maintained.
SIGN, MENU BOARD: A permanently mounted sign describing the bill of fare for a
drive-in or drive-through restaurant.
SIGN, MULTIPLE COPY: A sign which advertises other than the name of the
business and the principal product or service.
SIGN, NAMEPLATE: A sign indicating the name of a person or persons residing in
the premises.
SIGN, OFF PREMISES: A sign which directs attention to a use, products,
commodity or service not related to the premises on which it is located.
SIGN, ON PREMISES: See definition of Sign, Business.
SIGN, PAINTED WALL: Any sign which is applied with paint or similar substance
on the face of a wall.
SIGN, PERMANENT: A sign on rigid weatherproof materials such as plastic, metal
or wood and necessary framework that is designed for attachment of the sign to
the exterior of a building or other sign structure and intended to remain in a
single location for a long period of time; e.g., wall signs, flat signs,
freestanding signs, menu board signs and projecting signs.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4317.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4319.png]
 
SIGN, PROJECTING: Any sign attached to a building or other structure and
extending in whole or in part more than eighteen inches (18") beyond the
building line.
SIGN, PROPERTY: A sign related to the property upon which it is located and
offering such property for sale or lease, or announcing the destruction,
construction or remodeling of a building, or announcing the enterprise to be
allocated in a building under construction, or announcing the name and address
of the architect, contractor, or other professional involved in the design or
construction of the building, or the owner thereof.
SIGN, ROOF: Any sign erected upon or supported by a parapet of a building.
SIGN, SPONSORSHIP: Any sign that recognizes by name, logo or other visual means
the financial contributions of a business, group or individual as a sponsor of
the public facility, building or structure on which the sign is located. It
shall not include a sign identifying the name of a building or facility.
SIGN STRUCTURE: Any structure which supports any "sign", as defined in this
chapter. A sign structure may be a single pole or poles or an integral part of
the building.
SIGN, TEMPORARY: A portable, nonelectric business sign designed to be carried
by hand with a base or framework that is designed to be set on the ground
surface, but not inserted into the ground or permanently anchored to the
ground, intended for the purpose of outdoor advertising for short periods of
time and made of wood, metal, or molded plastic; e.g., A-frame or sandwich
board.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4321.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4323.png]
 
SIGN, TEMPORARY DIRECTIONAL: A temporary sign giving direction to a specific
location, either on or off of the property on which the sign is located, for
any public or private event. Such signs are limited to instruction or direction
only and are not to have any form of commercial advertising on them other than
a company logo. Such signs shall not be illuminated in any manner.
SIGN, TIME AND/OR TEMPERATURE: A display containing illuminated numerals to
show the time and/or temperature.
SIGN, WALL: A sign which is affixed to an exterior wall or building or
structure and which projects not more than eighteen inches (18") from the
building or structure wall and which does not extend more than two feet (2')
above the parapet, eaves or building facade of the building on which it is
located.
TRIM, NONSTRUCTURAL: The molding, battens, caps, nailing strips, latticing,
cutouts or letters and walkways which are attached to the sign structure.
(Ord. 2013-12, 3-5-2013)
18-1-4: APPLICABILITY; EXEMPTIONS TO TITLE:
The provisions of this title shall have no application to signs used
exclusively for:
   A.   Traffic control devices, signs and markings erected or maintained by
the city or the state on streets, highways, or other public rights of way under
their respective jurisdictions.
   B.   The display of official notices used by any court or public body or
official, or the posting of notices by any public officer in the performance of
a duty, or by any person giving legal notice.
   C.   Any official flag, pennant, or insignia of any nation, state, city, or
other political unit.
   D.   Handbills or placards not placed, affixed, erected or installed upon
any property, building or structure.
(1979 Code § 15.04.020; amd. Ord. 81-45, 11-5-1981; Ord. 82-26, 6-17-1982; Ord.
87-4, 1-22-1987; Ord. 87-10, 2-26-1987; Ord. 96-61, 11-19-1996)
18-1-5: SIGN PERMIT REQUIREMENT; FEES:
   A.   Required: Unless specifically exempted under the provisions of sections
18-1-4 and
18-1-6 of this chapter, it is unlawful to erect or maintain or remodel any sign
upon or over public or private property within the city until a sign permit
with respect to such sign has been obtained from the division of building
services.
   B.   Conditions:
      1.   Electrical Permit: No illuminated or floodlighted sign shall be
connected to the electrical wiring source at a location until an electrical
permit with respect thereto has been issued by the division of building
services.
      2.   Licensed Contractor:
         a.   Other than a sign permit for searchlights and spotlights, no sign
permit shall be issued to any person other than a licensed sign contractor,
unless exempt from licensing requirements under the construction trades act of
the state. All sign permit requests shall be accompanied with two (2) complete
sets of drawings and specifications.
         b.   A sign permit for a searchlight or spotlight may be issued to the
owner or lessee of property where a searchlight or spotlight is to be used and
shall be valid from January 1 through December 31.
   C.   Fees: Before any sign permit for construction, remodeling or relocation
will be issued, the review and permit fees as determined in title 4, chapter 6
of this code shall be paid.
   D.   Expiration; Extension: A sign permit shall expire and become invalid
unless the authorized sign installation is commenced within one hundred eighty
(180) days after its issuance, or if at any time after commencement, the
authorized installation is suspended or abandoned for a period of one hundred
eighty (180) days. One 180-day extension to a sign permit which has not
commenced construction under the permit may be authorized upon the approval of
the chief building official.
(Ord. 2013-32, 6-18-2013)
18-1-6: EXEMPTIONS TO SIGN PERMIT REQUIREMENT:
Exemptions shall not be construed as relieving the owner of such signs from the
responsibility of complying with applicable provisions of this chapter. The
exemption shall apply to the requirement for sign permit only, and no sign
permit shall be required for the erection of the following signs:
   A.   Signs displaying house or street numbers, danger and warning signs, or
nameplate signs.
   B.   Memorial tablets or markers containing the name, date, erection and use
of the buildings, when constructed of bronze, brass, marble, stone or other
incombustible materials and either built into the walls of the buildings or
built as a freestanding sign or wall sign, if approved by the city as a
standard designation for historic resources under title 17 of this code.
   C.   Unilluminated and nonfloodlighted business or identification signs,
constructed as a flat sign, wall sign or a freestanding sign, having an area
not in excess of sixteen (16) square feet advertising the place of business of
a doctor, dentist or other profession or of a home occupation.
   D.   A banner sign notifying the public of the opening of a new business as
provided under section
18-3-24 of this title.
   E.   Nonilluminated scoreboard signs or sponsorship signs meeting the
requirements of section
18-3-28 of this title.
   F.   Nonilluminated and nonfloodlighted property signs, having an area not
in excess of thirty two (32) square feet if constructed as a freestanding sign,
or having an area not in excess of sixteen (16) square feet if constructed as a
flat sign or wall sign.
   G.   Nonilluminated and nonfloodlighted temporary directional signs.
   H.   Temporary signs meeting the requirements of subsection
18-3-11C of this title.
(Ord. 2013-32, 6-18-2013)
18-1-7: SAFETY REGULATION AUTHORITY:
The mayor is authorized to establish such rules and regulations as he may find
to be reasonably necessary to protect the public from injury in the course of
the erection of signs and other advertising structures, and, when such
regulations are established, all sign contractors and holders of sign permits
shall comply strictly therewith. Such regulation shall be established by order
of the mayor filed with the city recorder, a copy thereof to be furnished under
the direction of the mayor, to all persons holding licenses as sign
contractors; and holders of sign permits shall comply strictly therewith.
(1979 Code § 15.12.030; amd. 1999 Code)
18-1-8: ENFORCEMENT; RIGHT OF ENTRY:
   A.   Building Services Division: The building services division shall be
responsible for the enforcement and administration of this title. The building
services division shall inspect each sign for which a permit has been issued
and shall require the proper maintenance of all signs subject to the provisions
of this title.
   B.   Building Official: Upon presentation of proper credentials, the
building official may enter at reasonable times any building, structure or
premises in the city to perform any duty imposed upon him by this title.
(1979 Code § 15.20.010; amd. 1999 Code; Ord. 2001-32, 6-5-2001)
18-1-9: SIGN REMOVAL; NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
   A.   Building Official Authority: If a sign does not conform with the
requirements of this title, or if a sign should have been removed pursuant to
subsections B through E of this section, or if a sign does not comply with
section
18-1-7 of this chapter, the building official shall proceed in any manner he/
she deems necessary to cause the removal of the sign or the rebuilding of the
sign to conform with the requirements of this title or to remedy the defects
therein.
   B.   Occupant Duty:
      1.   Any person occupying a building or portion of a building, and who
owns or maintains a sign in connection therewith, shall upon vacating the
premises or discontinuing the business advertised:
         a.   Cause the sign and structure to be removed; or
         b.   Maintain the sign structure and sign copy area in good condition
except where the business advertised has relocated, in which case the owner of
the sign shall replace the sign copy area with a solid, blank sign copy area.
      2.   Any person who owns and maintains a building on which a sign is
erected for the benefit of another person occupying the building or portion of
the building shall, if the person for whom the sign was erected vacates the
premises or discontinues the business advertised:
         a.   Cause the sign and structure to be removed; or
         b.   Maintain the sign structure and sign copy area in good condition
except where the business advertised has relocated, in which case the building
owner shall replace the sign copy area with a solid, blank sign copy area.
      3.   It is a violation of this title, which shall subject the owner of
the sign and the owner of the building to the penalties provided in section
18-1-11 of this chapter, for the owner of a sign or for the person responsible
for maintaining a sign to:
         a.   Fail to maintain a sign as required by this section or, when the
business advertised has relocated, to replace the sign copy area with a solid
blank sign copy area within thirty (30) days after the premises have been
vacated; or
         b.   Fail to remove the sign and structure within thirty (30) days
after the premises have been vacated if the sign and sign structure will not be
maintained.
      4.   It is a violation of this title for any person occupying a building
or portion of a building with an existing sign structure that has been allowed
to remain under this provision to fail to remove the structure within thirty
(30) days of occupying the building if the occupant does not use the sign
structure for signage purposes.
   C.   Abandoned: Any sign determined to be abandoned shall be removed within
thirty (30) days of notification by certified mail from the building official
to the property owner and/or owner of the business advertisement and/or owner
of the sign. If any notification sent by certified mail is refused by the
recipient, the recipient shall be deemed to have received notification.
   D.   Removal Of Nonconforming Signs:
      1.   Any sign not in conformance with the provisions of the zoning title
or the provisions of this title, or which was erected or installed without a
required permit, shall be removed within thirty (30) days upon notification
from the building official.
      2.   Nonconforming signs or structures for which required permits were
previously issued and which are made nonconforming by the provisions of the
zoning title or the provisions of chapter 3 of this title shall be permitted to
remain. Under no circumstances shall nonconforming signs or structures be
remodeled or replaced, unless otherwise permitted under the zoning title, this
title or the provisions of section 10-9a-511 Utah Code Annotated.
      3.   For purposes of this subsection, "nonconforming" shall mean any
existing sign or sign structure that:
         a.   Legally existed before its current designation or classification
under chapter 3 of this title or a provision of the zoning title;
         b.   Has been maintained continuously since the time the regulation
governing the sign has changed; and
         c.   Because of subsequent changes under chapter 3 of this title or a
provision of the zoning title, does not conform with the regulations that now
govern the sign or structure.
   E.   Dangerous Condition: Any existing sign or sign structure determined by
the building official by reason of its construction, design, manner of use,
method of anchoring or support, to be in such a condition so as to endanger
life, health, property or safety of the public or the occupants of surrounding
buildings shall be considered to be a public nuisance and a dangerous building
under title 16, chapter 8 of this code and subject to abatement under such
provisions.
   F.   Roof Mounted Signs: A nonconforming roof mounted business sign may be
replaced at the same location with a new roof mounted business sign structure,
provided that:
      1.   The new sign or sign structure shall not exceed the height or square
footage of the sign face or sign structure being replaced; and
      2.   The design character of the existing sign and sign structure shall
be maintained, i.e., open channel lettering shall not be replaced with a solid
sign area.
(1979 Code §§ 15.12.020, 15.12.050, 15.12.060; amd. Ord. 94-95, 11-15-1994;
1999 Code; Ord. 2001-57, 10-9-2001; Ord. 2006-77, 11-28-2006; Ord. 2009-46, 6-
23-2009)
18-1-10: COMPLIANCE WITH TITLE AND SAFETY REGULATIONS:
It is unlawful for any person erecting any sign or other advertising structure
to fail to comply strictly with the requirements of this title and any and all
regulations pertaining to safety promulgated by the mayor, pursuant to section
18-1-7 of this chapter.
(1979 Code § 15.12.040; amd. 1999 Code)
18-1-11: PENALTY:
   A.   Any person who fails to comply with or violates any of the provisions
of this title, or any rules or regulations promulgated hereunder, shall be
deemed guilty of a class C misdemeanor and shall be subject to penalty as
provided in title 1, chapter 4, article A of this code.
   B.   Failure to correct a violation of this title after notice of violation
and expiration of the warning period may be enforced by imposition of the
following civil penalties pursuant to title 1, chapter 4, article B of this
code:
      1.   The first civil citation issued after expiration of the warning
period shall subject the responsible party to the initial penalty of one
hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00).
      2.   The second civil citation issued after expiration of the warning
period and the prior imposition of the initial penalty shall subject the
responsible party to the intermediate penalty of two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00).
      3.   Any subsequent civil citation issued after expiration of the warning
period and the prior imposition of the intermediate penalty, or any reoccurring
violation under section
1-4B-6 of this code, shall subject the responsible party to the maximum penalty
of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
   C.   This title may also be enforced by injunction, mandamus, abatement, or
any other appropriate judicial action in law or equity.
   D.   Any one, all, or any combination of the foregoing penalties and
remedies may be used to enforce the provisions of this title.
   E.   The penalties provided in this section shall be in addition to any
denial, suspension or revocation of any license or permit issued under this
code.
(1979 Code § 15.20.020; amd. 1999 Code; Ord. 2005-29, 5-24-2005)
18-1-12: APPEALS:
Any person who is aggrieved by a decision involving signs by any administrative
official of the city may appeal that decision as follows:
   A.   Decisions involving application or interpretation of provisions
involving design and construction standards under chapter 2 of this title,
application of the building code or the current electrical code, or any sign
projection or clearance requirements, appeal may be made to the board of
building and fire code appeals;
   B.   Decisions involving permit fees, safety regulations adopted pursuant to
section
18-1-7 of this chapter or the use of public property under chapter 4 of this
title, appeals may be made in accordance with title 4, chapter 4, article A of
this code;
   C.   Decisions involving the imposition of civil penalties, appeals may be
made in accordance with title 1, chapter 4, article B of this code.
   D.   All other decisions, appeal may be made to the board of zoning
adjustment.
(Ord. 2011-39, 6-28-2011)
18-1-13: AMENDMENTS TO TITLE:
Any amendment to the provisions of this title shall follow the procedural
requirements for the adoption or amendment of land use ordinances as provided
under section
15-1-4 of this code and the requirements of the land use development and
management act, chapter 9a, title 10, Utah Code Annotated, or their successor
provisions.
(1999 Code; amd. Ord. 2005-67, 12-6-2005)
CHAPTER 2
DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
SECTION:
18-2-1: State License Required
18-2-2: Design Standards
18-2-3: Construction Standards
18-2-4: Projection And Clearance Standards
18-2-1: STATE LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to erect or maintain or to engage in the business
of erecting or maintaining any "sign", as defined in this title, within the
corporate limits of the city, except those which are specifically exempt from
the provisions of this title, or from the requirement to obtain a sign permit
under section
18-1-6 of this title, until such person has obtained a license from the state
authorizing such person or entity to do sign contracting of signs for which
state licenses are required.
(1979 Code § 15.04.030; amd. Ord. 82-26, 6-17-1982; Ord. 86-33, 7-10-1986; Ord.
96-61, 11-19-1996)
18-2-2: DESIGN STANDARDS:
   A.   Resist Wind, Seismic Forces: Signs and sign structures shall be
designed and constructed to resist wind and seismic forces as specified in this
section. All bracing systems shall be designed and constructed to transfer
lateral forces to the foundations. For signs on buildings, the dead and lateral
loads shall be transmitted through the structural frame of the building to the
ground in such manner as not to overstress any of the elements thereof.
   B.   Dead Load Resisting Moment: The overturning moment produced from
lateral forces shall in no case exceed two-thirds (2/3) of the dead load
resisting moment. Uplift due to overturning shall be adequately resisted by
proper anchorage to the ground or to the structural frame of the building. The
weight of earth superimposed over footings may be used in determining the dead
load resisting moment. Such earth shall be carefully placed and thoroughly
compacted.
   C.   Wind Forces: Signs and sign structures shall be designed and
constructed to resist wind forces, as specified in the building code, thirty
feet (30') aboveground with adjustment in pressure for height as outlined in
the building code, and seismic zone III.
   D.   Placement Upon Another Sign: No sign shall be placed on top of or
suspended from the bottom of another sign over public and private property
unless application is made to the building official with necessary calculations
to show that the sign is structurally sound and safe to support the additional
weight, display area and wind resistance and is properly fastened to the
existing sign structure.
   E.   Plastic Materials: The building official shall require that sufficient
technical data be submitted to substantiate the proposed use of any plastic
material; and, if it is determined that the evidence submitted is satisfactory
for the use intended, he may approve its use. Design and construction with
plastic material shall be in accordance with the building code.
(Ord. 2011-39, 6-28-2011)
18-2-3: CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
   A.   Supports: The supports for all signs or sign structures shall be placed
in or upon private property and shall be built, constructed and erected in
conformance with the requirements of the building code.
   B.   Compliance With Electrical Code: All signs which utilize or are
illuminated by electricity shall comply with the current electrical code and
with title 7, chapter 14 of this code.
(Ord. 2011-39, 6-28-2011)
18-2-4: PROJECTION AND CLEARANCE STANDARDS:
   A.   Conformance Required: All types of signs shall conform to the clearance
and projection requirements of this Title.
   B.   Overhead Conductors; Clearance: Signs shall be located not less than
six feet (6') horizontally or twelve feet (12') vertically from overhead
electrical conductors which are energized in excess of seven hundred fifty
(750) volts. The term "overhead conductors", as used in this subsection, means
any electrical conductor, either bare or insulated, installed above the ground,
except such conductors which are enclosed in rigid conduit or other material
covering of equal strength.
   C.   Fire Escapes; Exists; Standpipes: No sign or sign structure shall be
erected in such a manner that any portion of its surface of supports will
interfere in any way with the free use of any fire escape, exit or standpipe.
   D.   Opening Within Exterior Wall: Signs erected within five feet (5') of an
opening in an exterior wall shall be constructed of incombustible material or
UBC-approved plastics.
   E.   Above Grade: No sign or sign structure is located more than sixteen
feet (16') above grade.
   F.   Lights: For purposes of illumination, lights shall not extend more than
eight feet (8') from the sign structure if attached to the sign or sign
structure.
(1979 Code § 15.16.030)
CHAPTER 3
GENERAL REGULATIONS
SECTION:
18-3-1: Appendix A; Compliance Required
18-3-2: Compliance With Zoning Title
18-3-3: Frontage Calculations
18-3-4: Copy Area Limitations
18-3-5: Signposting Method Restrictions
18-3-6: Signposting Prohibited On Private Property Without Consent
18-3-7: Safety Precautions Over Streets And Sidewalks
18-3-8: Signs Covering Doors Or Windows Prohibited
18-3-9: Light Inflammable Material Prohibited
18-3-10: Maintenance Requirements; City Liability
18-3-11: Use Of Temporary Or Banner Signs
18-3-12: Awning Sign Restrictions
18-3-13: Animated Sign Restrictions
18-3-14: Marquee Sign Restrictions
18-3-15: Noise Signs Prohibited
18-3-16: Projecting Sign Limitations
18-3-17: Painted Wall Sign Restrictions
18-3-18: Shopping Center Sign Regulations
18-3-19: Directory Signs
18-3-20: Property Sign Time Limits
18-3-21: Temporary Directional Signs Time Limits
18-3-22: Historical Signs
18-3-23: Banners For Special Occasions
18-3-24: Banner Signs For New Business
18-3-25: Menu Board Signs
18-3-26: Noncommercial Opinion Signs; Transition Provisions
18-3-27: Off Premises Sign Regulations
18-3-28: Sponsorship Signs
18-3-29: Electronic Message Display Signs
18-3-30: Special Exceptions And Restrictions For Signage In The Junction
Development
18-3-31: Special Regulations Regarding Use Of Searchlights Or Spotlights
18-3-32: Special Regulations For Cannabis Production Establishments And Medical
Cannabis Pharmacies
18-3-1: APPENDIX A; COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
Chapter 5, "Appendix A", of this title, is made a part of this section by
reference. It is unlawful for any person to erect or otherwise install, or to
maintain a sign which is located in a zone in which the sign is not permitted,
violates the provisions regarding the allowable type of sign construction,
exceeds the maximum size or height requirements, violates the spacing
requirements, or is at a location on the site in violation of the controls
specified in appendix A of this title.
(1979 Code § 15.12.010; amd. Ord. 96-61, 11-19-1996; 1999 Code)
18-3-2: COMPLIANCE WITH ZONING TITLE:
All signs shall be erected and maintained in full compliance with any
additional condition or requirement imposed under the authority of the zoning
title.
(1999 Code)
18-3-3: FRONTAGE CALCULATIONS:
The following requirements shall be used in determining the maximum sign area
permitted given the following frontage conditions:
   A.   Two Frontages: Where a building has frontage on more than one street,
both sides may be used in calculating the allowable sign area.
   B.   Multi-Tenants:
      1.   Where more than one tenant occupies a building and has frontage on
the ground floor, the length of the exterior wall under the exclusive control
of a tenant may be used in determining his frontage. In multi-story buildings,
only the ground floor may be used in determining allowable area.
      2.   Where a tenant occupies a portion of a building without street
frontage or does not have frontage on the ground floor, the frontage of the
common public entrances to the building shall be used to determine the tenant's
frontage. Signage for tenants in this case shall be a wall sign. The total
signage for all such tenants shall be limited to the allowable area for that
individual length of frontage.
(1979 Code § 15.12.191; Ord. 89-30, 11-9-1989; amd. Ord. 2003-26, 6-17-2003)
18-3-4: COPY AREA LIMITATIONS:
Copy area of a building facade or of multiple copy signs shall not exceed forty
percent (40%) of the background facing to which it is applied.
(1979 Code § 15.12.190)
18-3-5: SIGNPOSTING METHOD RESTRICTIONS:
No sign shall be pasted, glued or tacked directly to any wall or roof or
affixed directly on any wall or roof by means of any similar adhesive
substance. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit awning signs.
(Ord. 2013-12, 3-5-2013)
18-3-6: SIGNPOSTING PROHIBITED ON PRIVATE PROPERTY WITHOUT CONSENT:
It is unlawful for any person to fasten, attach, paint or place any sign, as
defined in this title, upon any private wall, window, door, gate, fence or sign
or upon any other personal property without the consent of the owner or lessee
or someone authorized to act on behalf of such owner or lessee.
(1979 Code § 15.12.090)
18-3-7: SAFETY PRECAUTIONS OVER STREETS AND SIDEWALKS:
Whenever any sign or other advertising structure is erected in whole or in part
on or over any public street or sidewalk, the person performing the work shall,
before proceeding to erect the same, take all precautions necessary to ensure
the safety of persons and property on such street or sidewalk. Before hoisting
any material whatsoever above the surface of any street or sidewalk or placing
any material upon the traveled portion of any street or sidewalk, the person
performing such work shall exclude the traveling public from the portion of
such street or sidewalk in which such work is to be done by means of suitable
barriers, protected walkways and warning devices approved by the building
services division; and, whenever the division shall deem it necessary under the
conditions then existing, shall provide a guard or guards to exclude all
persons not concerned in the work from the portion of the street or sidewalk in
which the work is to proceed. When hoisting any sign or advertising structure
above the surface of any street or sidewalk, the same shall be accomplished by
hoisting devices of approved design and adequate capacity to accomplish the
work in accordance with approved engineering practices, all of which hoisting
equipment shall be kept and maintained in good and workable condition.
(1979 Code § 15.12.100; amd. 1999 Code; Ord. 2001-32, 6-5-2001)
18-3-8: SIGNS COVERING DOORS OR WINDOWS PROHIBITED:
No sign shall cover or obstruct windows, doorways or other openings providing
light, ventilation or exit facilities which are required by the building code
or which are deemed by the fire department to be necessary to give the fire
department access to the building, or to afford fire protection in the event of
a fire; provided, however, that flat signs, wall signs, banner signs and
projecting signs meeting all other requirements of this title may cover
transom.
(Ord. 2013-12, 3-5-2013)
18-3-9: LIGHT INFLAMMABLE MATERIAL PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to construct or maintain any signs made of light
inflammable material, such as paper or untreated fabric, on the outside of any
building or structure within the city limits.
(Ord. 2013-12, 3-5-2013)
18-3-10: MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS; CITY LIABILITY:
Signs regulated by this title shall be maintained in good visual appearance and
structural condition at all times. The city, its building official and its
other agents shall in no way be liable for negligence or failure of the owner,
or the person responsible for maintaining any sign, to keep such sign in good
condition or be responsible for any damage caused by defective conditions.
(1979 Code § 15.12.110; amd. 1999 Code)
18-3-11: USE OF TEMPORARY OR BANNER SIGNS:
The use of temporary signs or banner signs as part of the signage allowed for a
business use are permitted in the zones described in appendix A of this title
subject to the following:
   A.   General Requirements For Temporary Or Banner Signs:
      1.   A temporary or banner sign is not allowed unless:
         a.   There is in place existing permanent signage which equals at
least twenty five percent (25%) of the allowed sign area for the building or
use; or
         b.   The sign is used for a grand opening as allowed by section
18-3-24 of this chapter.
      2.   Temporary or banner signage shall not have any electrical connection
to illuminate, inflate or draw attention to the sign.
      3.   Temporary or banner signs shall be located:
         a.   Out of any "sight triangle area" as defined in section
7-3-2 of this code;
         b.   At least ten feet (10') from any driveway; and
         c.   On private property unless exempted by this section.
      4.   Temporary or banner signs shall not be secured or attached to
utility poles, fences, trees, equipment, vehicles, retaining walls or other
items not originally designed to be a sign structure.
      5.   Signs shall be maintained in a professional, neat and attractive
condition, e.g., no fraying, cracking or peeling of the sign.
      6.   Signs determined to be a hazard or in violation of this code by a
code enforcement officer may be removed immediately.
      7.   A sign permit shall be obtained as required by section
18-1-5 of this title.
   B.   Specific Requirements For Banner Signs:
      1.   Total Area; Square Footage: Except as provided in subsections B4c
and B6 of this section:
         a.   The total area of all permanent business signs and banner signs
is limited to the maximum sign area of all signs allowed on the property as
found in appendix A of this title; and
         b.   The square footage allowed for banner signs shall not exceed
twenty percent (20%) of the total permitted sign area.
      2.   One Banner Sign Per Street Frontage: Only one banner sign is allowed
per street frontage which advertises products, services, contact information,
or special sales of goods.
      3.   Freestanding Or Building Banner Signs: Freestanding or building
banner signs that are limited to only the business name, logo or artwork
without any other descriptive wording on the banner are not limited in the
number of signs permitted on the property provided they meet the other
requirements of this section.
      4.   Banners Attached To Buildings: A banner sign attached to a building:
         a.   May be flat mounted or perpendicular to building wall. If the
sign is perpendicular to the wall, it shall not extend out farther than two
feet (2') from the wall, shall be located no less than ten feet (10') above
grade, and shall be secured by a permanent bracket meant for banners that is
attached to the building.
         b.   May not cover architectural features of the building, such as
cornice, moldings, windows, doors and brick detail.
   PERPENDICULAR BANNER
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4325.png]
   FLAT MOUNTED
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4327.png]
         c.   May exceed the size limitations in appendix A of this title if it
is flat mounted, meets the other terms of this section, and has been given a
waiver from the planning commission. In considering a waiver the commission
must find:
            (1)   No more than ten percent (10%) of the sign is devoted to
business signage, such as written text, logos or images of services, goods or
uses available on the premises, with the remaining ninety percent (90%) being
composed of nonadvertising artwork;
            (2)   The location of the sign fits architectural areas of the
building which are capable of accommodating such artwork;
            (3)   The banner design complements the building architecture in
terms of size, location and color; and
            (4)   The sign location does not violate other sign ordinance
provisions.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4329.png]
 
         d.   A waiver issued by the planning commission under subsection B4c
of this section terminates automatically upon a change in ownership of the
property where the sign is displayed or upon the repeal of subsection B4c of
this section.
      5.   Freestanding Banners: A freestanding banner sign must be:
         a.   Attached to signposts that are permanently anchored to the
ground;
         b.   Set back ten feet (10') from the property line;
         c.   Not taller than six feet (6') above the ground for a banner sign
and not more than ten feet (10') above the ground for a banner flag; and
         d.   Hung taut and not sag.
   BANNER SIGN
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4333.png]
   BANNER FLAG
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4335.png]
      6.   Banners Attached To Light Poles On Private Property: Banner signs
may be attached to light poles on private property, and are not included in the
total allowable square footage allowed by appendix A of this title, if:
         a.   The light pole is set back at least ten feet (10') from the
property line;
         b.   Each sign maintains a ten foot (10') ground clearance;
         c.   Each light pole has no more than two (2) banner signs;
         d.   The primary purpose of the pole the sign is attached to is to
provide light in parking areas;
         e.   There is a minimum separation of one hundred feet (100') between
each pole with a banner;
         f.   Banner signage does not exceed twelve (12) square feet per light
pole; and
         g.   The signs are attached to the light pole with a permanent support
structure for banners meant for the placement of a sign where such signs shall
hang taut.
   PRIVATE LIGHT POLE BANNERS
   DISTANCE SPACING
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4337.png]
 
   C.   Specific Requirements For Temporary Signs:
      1.   A single temporary sign is allowed in front of a business:
         a.   When the building front is adjacent to the right of way, except
that on a corner lot one temporary sign per frontage is allowed; or
         b.   When the sign is next to the business entrance on a shopping
center sidewalk.
      2.   Temporary signs may only be displayed during the hours of operation
and then must be taken inside the building.
      3.   Temporary signs may be located on the sidewalk in the right of way
or on private property and shall:
         a.   Be located within three feet (3') of the building or within five
feet (5') from back of curb when located in the public right of way;
         b.   Leave a six foot (6') wide clear path area on the public
sidewalk;
         c.   Not obstruct pedestrian or wheelchair access; and
         d.   Not block entrance and exit doors.
   A-FRAME/SANDWICH BOARD SIGN
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4339.png]
   MENU SIGN
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/8d88d86b54f2f9b5e1331f1df12c45538c7876f1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4341.png]
   POSSIBLE TEMPORARY SIGN LOCATION
(Ord. 2014-15, 4-8-2014)
18-3-12: AWNING SIGN RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Construction: Awnings shall have noncombustible frames, but may have
combustible coverings. Awnings may be collapsible, retractable or capable of
being folded against the face of the supporting building. When collapsed,
retracted or folded, the design shall be such that the awning does not block
any required exit.
   B.   Projection: Awnings may extend over public property not more than seven
feet (7') from the face of the supporting building, and no portion shall extend
nearer than two feet (2') to the nearest curb line measured horizontally. In no
case shall the awning extend over public property greater than two-thirds (2/3)
of the distance from the property line to the nearest curb in front of the
building side.
   C.   Clearances: All portions of any awning shall be at least eight feet
(8') above any public walkway.
(1979 Code § 15.12.111; amd. Ord. 86-33, 7-10-1986)
18-3-13: ANIMATED SIGN RESTRICTIONS:
No animated signs shall be erected or maintained in, nor closer than seventy
five feet (75') from any Residential Zone except when such sign is an
information sign and meets the requirements for an electronic message
information sign. Revolving animated signs are limited to eight (8) revolutions
per minute and may not have flashing lights attached thereto. No sign employing
the use of blinking or flashing lights shall be permitted below a height of ten
feet (10') above grade.
(1979 Code § 15.12.170; amd. Ord. 80-4, 1-31-1980; Ord. 82-26, 6-17-1982; Ord.
99-17, 4-6-1999, eff. 4-17-1999)
18-3-14: MARQUEE SIGN RESTRICTIONS:
Marquee signs may be placed on, attached to or constructed in a marquee. For
the purpose of determining height, projection and clearance, the table as
specified in the Building Code for marquees shall govern.
(Ord. 2011-39, 6-28-2011)
18-3-15: NOISE SIGNS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful to use in connection with any sign or to use for advertising
purposes any radio, phonograph, whistle, bell or any other sound or noisemaking
or transmitting device or instrument for the purpose of commercial advertising.
(1979 Code § 15.12.160)
18-3-16: PROJECTING SIGN LIMITATIONS:
   A.   Allowed Zones Other Than CBDI And CBD Zones: In zones where projecting
signs are permitted other than the CBDI and CBD Zones, projecting signs shall
only be allowed under all of the following conditions:
      1.   The sign shall not extend more than twenty four inches (24"):
         a.   From the face of the structure or building to which it is
attached; or
         b.   Into or over any public right-of-way or sidewalk.
      2.   There shall be a minimum clearance of ten feet (10') between the
ground or sidewalk and any part of a projecting sign.
   B.   CBDI And CBD Zones: Projecting signs shall only be allowed in the CBDI
and CBD Zones under all of the following conditions:
      1.   The sign shall not extend more than six feet (6'):
         a.   From the face of the structure or building to which it is
attached; or
         b.   Into or over any public right-of-way or sidewalk.
      2.   The sign shall be no closer than two feet (2') from the curb line.
      3.   The sign shall have a minimum clearance of ten feet (10') between
the ground or sidewalk and any part of a projecting sign.
      4.   The sign shall not extend above the bottom of the cornice work of
the building or, in the case of no cornice detailing, shall not extend above
the roofline of the building. The sign may be lit by neon, backlighting, or
direct lighting.
      5.   The materials used for the face of the sign are limited to metal or
wood that is painted or carved; provided that metal sign faces may have cutouts
or channels for lettering, which lettering areas may be of plastic.
      6.   Only one projecting sign shall be allowed per building or per
tenant, if the tenant has frontage on the main floor.
      7.   The projecting sign shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the
allowed sign area for a use that is allowed exterior signage on the building.
      8.   Signs proposed on a building that is designated as a historic
resource under title 17 of this Code also require the issuance of a certificate
of historic appropriateness, which may impose stricter conditions and
requirements.
      9.   Installation is to be only by a licensed sign contractor.
      10.   The length of the sign from top to bottom shall not exceed twenty
five feet (25').
(Ord. 2019-3, 1-22-2019)
18-3-17: PAINTED WALL SIGN RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Off Premises Not Allowed: Off premises signs are not allowed as painted
wall signs.
   B.   Limitation; Identification, Limited Business: Painted wall signs shall
be limited to identification signs and limited business signs restricted to
only the name of the business and shall comply with the area requirements for
the applicable major sign group.
   C.   Conditional Use In All Zones; Considerations: A painted wall sign is a
conditional use in all zones, and in the review of such signs, the Planning
Commission shall consider:
      1.   The character of the proposed sign, not only in and of itself, but
also in terms of the effect such a sign will have upon the character of the
surrounding area;
      2.   The way in which the sign will be read, and whether its size,
location, configuration and character are appropriate to its intended audience,
or whether a more appropriate sign could better serve its intended purpose, and
at the same time, be less visually disruptive;
      3.   The sign shall be designed to complement the architecture of the
building, without detracting from its significant details.
   D.   Where Prohibited: Painted wall signs are not allowed for a cannabis
production establishment or a medical cannabis pharmacy.
(1979 Code § 15.12.171; amd. Ord. 86-33, 7-10-1986; Ord. 90-15, 3-15-1990; Ord.
92-36, 6-16-1992; Ord. 2019-46, 10-22-2019)
18-3-18: SHOPPING CENTER SIGN REGULATIONS:
   A.   Area; Type: In shopping centers, the sign area for each separate store
with exterior access will be determined by the width of the frontage of that
store in the center. Signage for each tenant with exterior access in a shopping
center shall be a wall sign located above the store front. The total sign area
allowable on the exterior of the center for all tenants without exterior access
shall be determined by the width of the common public entry ways located on the
ground floor. Signage for tenants without exterior access shall be a wall sign
located above the common public entryway. The total signage over each common
entry shall be limited to the allowable area for that individual length of
frontage.
   B.   Freestanding Identification, Information: In addition to the wall sign,
each shopping center is permitted either a freestanding identification or
information sign. The freestanding sign shall meet the applicable sign area
regulations for the zone in which it is located. One electronic message display
sign may be included as part of the information or identification sign;
provided, that the electronic message display:
      1.   Shall not exceed forty nine percent (49%) of the total sign area
proposed for the freestanding sign.
      2.   Shall be included as part of the total square footage permitted for
either an information or identification sign.
      3.   Shall not be placed at the top of the sign pole and shall not be
lower than ten feet (10') from the ground, but shall be designed to be an
accessory feature to the sign.
      4.   Shall not be used for off-premises advertising.
(1979 Code § 15.12.260; amd. Ord. 80-4, 1-31-1980; Ord. 88-38, 9-22-1988; Ord.
89-27, 10-19-1989)
18-3-19: DIRECTORY SIGNS:
Any professional or business office, public or semi-public building, industrial
park, shopping center, airport or similar use may install an informational
directory sign, provided the area is limited by the appropriate provisions of
Appendix A of this Title and further; provided, that it does not promote the
sale or use of product or service except when used in connection with a mall or
shopping center according to the provisions of Section
18-3-18 of this Chapter.
(1979 Code § 15.12.280; Ord. 80-4, 1-31-1980; amd. Ord. 89-27, 10-19-1989)
18-3-20: PROPERTY SIGN TIME LIMITS:
Not more than one property sign may be erected on each street frontage of the
property which is the subject of the sign. Property signs announcing the
destruction, construction or remodeling of a building, or announcing the
enterprise to be allocated in a building under construction, or announcing the
name and address of the architect or contractor of the building or the owner
thereof, shall not be erected more than thirty (30) days prior to construction
and shall be removed within thirty (30) days after completion of construction.
Property signs offering such property for sale or lease shall be removed within
thirty (30) days after sale or lease of such property.
(1979 Code § 15.12.220; amd. Ord. 96-61, 11-19-1996)
18-3-21: TEMPORARY DIRECTIONAL SIGNS TIME LIMITS:
No temporary directional sign shall remain on any lot or parcel for a period of
greater than forty eight (48) consecutive hours.
(1979 Code § 15.12.290; Ord. 96-61, 11-19-1996)
18-3-22: HISTORICAL SIGNS:
Any sign designating property, which has been designated as a historic resource
under Title 17 of this Code, is subject to the provisions of this Title;
provided, however, that the Mayor, upon recommendation by the Planning
Commission, can waive any restrictions found in the provisions of this Title in
allowing the erection of such a sign, if it is determined that such waiver
would be necessary to protect an existing historic sign or there is historic
evidence that the type of sign existed in the past and has been issued a
certificate of historic appropriateness by the Ogden City Landmarks Commission.
The Mayor may impose reasonable conditions to meet the intent of any ordinance
requirement which is the subject of the waiver.
(1979 Code § 15.12.270; amd. Ord. 96-61, 11-19-1996)
18-3-23: BANNERS FOR SPECIAL OCCASIONS:
Permits may be issued by the building official for hanging of display banners
or other cloth decorations for special occasions, such as religious,
charitable, civic or festive occurrences; or for Christmas decorations; or in
celebration of some event of religious, national, state, or civic significance;
or in honor of a visit from a person or persons of note. It is specifically
prohibited to incorporate in any such decorations any political advertising or
advertising of a commercial nature. Permits issued pursuant to this section may
be issued without charge of any fee, but shall specify a period of time, not to
exceed ninety (90) days, during which such signs shall be permitted to be used.
Banners and decorations permitted by this section shall be maintained in a
professional, neat and attractive condition, e.g., no fraying, cracking or
peeling of the sign.
(Ord. 2014-15, 4-8-2014)
18-3-24: BANNER SIGNS FOR NEW BUSINESS:
Banner signs may be hung on the premises of a new business in order to announce
the opening of such new business; provided, that such banner signs may only be
erected on the premises up to fifteen (15) days prior to the grand opening or
date of final business license inspection and shall be taken down thirty (30)
days after the final business license inspection.
(1979 Code § 15.12.242; amd. Ord. 96-61, 11-19-1996)
18-3-25: MENU BOARD SIGNS:
Menu board signs for drive-in restaurants shall comply with the following
regulations:
   A.   A maximum of two (2) menu board signs, either freestanding or wall
mounted, shall be allowed per business and shall be located not less than forty
five feet (45') from the street property line.
   B.   Maximum area shall not exceed twenty four (24) square feet per sign.
   C.   Maximum sign height shall not exceed six feet (6') for freestanding
menu signs.
   D.   The sign area for a menu board shall not be counted in the total
aggregate sign area for the business.
   E.   The display area of the menu board sign shall not face a street.
(1979 Code § 15.12.290; amd. Ord. 90-25, 5-17-1990)
18-3-26: NONCOMMERCIAL OPINION SIGNS; TRANSITION PROVISIONS:
The regulation of noncommercial opinion signs and political campaign signs has
been referred to the planning commission for study and recommendation. It is
the intention of the city council to refrain from the regulation of
noncommercial opinion signs and political campaign signs on private property in
residential areas during this study period. Until further adoption of such
regulations, noncommercial opinion signs and political campaign signs on
private property shall be considered exempt from the provisions of this title.
(1999 Code; amd. Ord. 2007-62, 8-21-2007)
18-3-27: OFF PREMISES SIGN REGULATIONS:
   A.   Prohibition: As of August 20, 2001, off premises signs shall not be
allowed as either a permitted or conditional use within the jurisdictional
boundaries of the city. Off premises signs legally existing on August 20, 2001,
may continue as a nonconforming use, and may be:
      1.   Maintained or restored, or repaired in event the structure is
damaged by casualty, act of God, or vandalism, all in accordance with the
requirements of section 10-9-511, Utah Code Annotated, as amended; or
      2.   Relocated in accordance with the requirements of subsection C of
this section.
   B.   Replacement: A nonconforming off premises sign structure may be
replaced in order to structurally improve the structure by the owner of the
sign at the same location with a new sign structure, provided that the
following conditions are met:
      1.   The new sign or sign structure shall not exceed the height or square
footage of the sign face or sign structure being replaced.
      2.   A landscaped front yard setback meeting the following requirements
shall be installed and maintained on the lot or parcel upon which the sign is
located:
         a.   The landscaped setback shall be, at a minimum, the depth of the
setback required for parking lots in the respective zone where the sign is
located.
         b.   The landscaped setback shall be along the full frontage of the
lot or parcel where the sign is located and meet the landscaping requirements
of the zoning ordinance.
         c.   Maintenance of the landscaping shall be the responsibility of the
property owner of the lot or parcel on which the sign is located.
         d.   If the landscaping setback is not already installed, a financial
guarantee, guaranteeing installation of the landscaping and meeting the
requirements of section
15-13-23 of this code, shall be provided.
         e.   Notwithstanding the above, a landscaped setback shall not be
required for any sign on a lot or parcel which abuts I-15 or any sign
designated in the cap and replace program.
      3.   The sign and sign structure shall include physical additions, or
other accepted design elements, which reasonably discourage birds from roosting
on the sign structure.
      4.   A sign permit for the replacement structure must be obtained by the
owner of the sign prior to the removal of the old structure and the new
structure installed during the time period allowed by the permit in order to
benefit from this provision.
   C.   Cap And Replace Program:
      1.   In order to take advantage of the provisions of the cap and replace
program the owner of any off premises sign must be a program participant. A
"program participant" shall mean a person owning one or more off premises signs
within the city who has sought the benefits of this subsection, commonly
referred to as "Ogden City's cap and replace program for off premises signs",
by voluntarily agreeing and identifying in writing the signs that will be
involved in this program and agreeing in writing to comply with the provisions
of this subsection. The program participant shall also agree that they will, in
matters of relocation that may accrue to such owner under title 72, chapter 7,
part 5, outdoor advertising act, section 10-9a-513, Utah Code Annotated or
other similar provisions under state law, as to identified off premises signs
owned by the program participant within the city, first seek relocation based
on the cap and replace program standards. Such agreement shall be in a form
approved by the director and the city attorney.
      2.   A nonconforming off premises sign structure owned by a program
participant and placed in the cap and replace program by the program
participant may be relocated pursuant to this subsection provided there is no
resulting increase in the total number of off premises signs that presently
exist in Ogden City as of November 1, 2006. That total number of allowable
signs shall be reduced by the number of off premises signs that lose their
nonconforming right or the complying signs of the cap and replace program that
lose their rights due to abandonment or removal without timely replacement or
relocation. Relocation pursuant to this subsection will be allowed if all of
the following conditions are met:
         a.   The relocation of off premises signs shall be allowed to occur
only in the following approved locations:
            (1)   12th Street from the west city limits to Washington
Boulevard;
            (2)   Wall Avenue from 9th Street to 20th Street on the west side
of the street, from 9th Street to 18th Street on the east side of the street
and from 27th Street to 36th Street on both sides of the street;
            (3)   Commercial zones along Washington Boulevard excluding the
west side of the street from 18th Street to 20th Street and both sides of the
street from 20th Street to 27th Street. An off premises sign which is solely
electronic message display or animated and attached to the building and does
not extend above the cornice of the building may be allowed on Washington
Boulevard between 20th and 27th Streets upon approval of the planning
commission of size and location of the sign on the building. The planning
commission review will be to determine that important features of the building
are not covered up and that the size of the sign is not out of character with
the scale of the building to which the sign is attached;
            (4)   Commercial zones along Harrisville Road;
            (5)   1900 West;
            (6)   Midland Drive;
            (7)   Pennsylvania Avenue;
            (8)   I-15 corridor according to the state regulations;
            (9)   20th Street and 21st Street west of Wall Avenue;
            (10)   31st Street from 1900 West to Washington Boulevard; or
            (11)   On adjacent property of the existing sign on the same or on
the other side of the street, one lot either direction parallel of the existing
sign provided property is zoned commercial or manufacturing.
            (12)   Riverdale Road from its intersection with Washington
Boulevard southwest to 36th Street.
         b.   Off premises signs moved to approved locations shall conform with
all sign requirements listed in this section as well as the requirements of
this title. When an off premises sign is to be relocated a permit for the
approved relocation is required and removal of the off premises sign in the
nonconforming location must take place prior to the use of the new sign. If
relocation is not planned during the normal time frame of a permit the sign
owner may obtain a sign credit permit at the time of removal of the
nonconforming sign which will specify the size and height of the sign being
removed and allow the replacement sign permit to be issued in conformance with
this section within five (5) years from the time of receiving the credit
permit, with the ability to receive one 5-year extension of said permit upon
request to the community and economic development department prior to the
expiration of the credit permit. If the off premises sign is not reconstructed
at the new location under a sign permit issued in the five (5) year time frame
or its approved extension the ability to relocate the specific off premises
sign is forfeited, and the previously issued permit shall terminate and expire.
         c.   When an off premises sign is relocated to any of the above
allowed locations the sign must conform with all of the following requirements:
            (1)   The square footage of the relocated off premises sign shall
not be larger than the square footage of the off premises sign which is being
removed. If a larger square footage sign of up to a maximum of six hundred
seventy five (675) square feet is desired and the sign removed was not equal
size, the program participant may determine to remove multiple smaller signs
whose combined square footage will meet six hundred seventy five (675) square
feet and thus reduce the number of signs credited in exchange for a larger sign
that equals the maximum square footage allowed.
            (2)   Any relocated off premises sign shall have a minimum linear
spacing of five hundred feet (500') from any existing off premises sign.
            (3)   The height of the relocated off premises sign shall be
restricted to a maximum height of fifty feet (50') or twenty five feet (25')
above the adjacent road surface whichever is greater.
   D.   Meeting Locations Option: Relocations of off premises signs occurring
pursuant to title 72, chapter 7, part 5, outdoor advertising act, and section
10-9a-513, Utah Code Annotated, or other similar provisions under state law, by
other than a program participant shall consider the requirements of subsections
C2a and C2c(1) and C2c(2) of this section, as meeting the mutually agreed upon
locations option as identified in state law.
(Ord. 2001-52, 7-17-2001, eff. 8-20-2001; amd. Ord. 2002-47, 8-27-2002; Ord.
2006-77, 11-28-2006; Ord. 2011-35, 6-21-2011; Ord. 2015-48, 11-17-2015)
18-3-28: SPONSORSHIP SIGNS:
Public entities owning or operating a public recreation facility, limited to
stadiums, arenas, fairgrounds, or athletic fields, may place sponsorship signs
on or within the facility, if all of the following requirements are met:
   A.   The signs are directed to the general public inside the facility and
are not directly visible to the general public outside the facility when viewed
from adjacent properties, any public street or developed public trail; provided
that signs located on ball field fences and facing the infield side of the
fence shall not be prohibited if visible from such locations.
   B.   The signs are permanently secured to a fence, building or structure.
   C.   Sponsorship signs shall not promote specific events, products or
services of sponsors.
   D.   Sponsorship signs attached to a building or structure having a use
other than the mere support of such signs, other than a fence, shall be limited
to a maximum area of five percent (5%) of the surface area of the building or
structure on which it is attached.
(Ord. 2004-65, 9-21-2004)
18-3-29: ELECTRONIC MESSAGE DISPLAY SIGNS:
Electronic message display signs shall be restricted to the following
requirements when located in the C-1, A-C and A-I zones:
   A.   Electronic message display signs must have an automatic dimmer to
reduce sign intensity after dark.
   B.   Hours of operation for an electronic message display sign are from six
o'clock (6:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. only.
   C.   A message shall not be displayed by means of flashing or rapid blinking
except when changing to a different message. Each individual message shall
remain for a minimum of three (3) seconds.
   D.   The sign shall not cause glare or be intensely lighted at dark so that
it creates a nuisance or hazard to vehicle traffic, pedestrians or neighboring
residential properties.
   E.   In the A-I and A-C zones the signs shall not be perpendicular to
runways or create conflicts with the safe operation of the airport.
(Ord. 2005-68, 12-6-2005; amd. Ord. 2006-20, 4-25-2006)
18-3-30: SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS AND RESTRICTIONS FOR SIGNAGE IN THE JUNCTION
DEVELOPMENT:
   A.   The planning commission may grant waivers from the following types of
regulations provided in this title for development located in "the junction"
which is defined by the west side of Washington Boulevard to the east side of
Grant Avenue and the north side of 22nd Street to the south side of 24th
Street:
      1.   Maximum sign area square footage;
      2.   Maximum height of sign attached to a building; and
      3.   Sign materials for projecting signs.
   B.   In order to consider waivers for subsection A1 or A2 of this section it
must be determined that such an exception is based on:
      1.   The sign being architecturally compatible to the design of the
building in terms of materials, scale and location on the building;
      2.   The sign elements which create the need for the exception are design
features incorporated into the building theme; and
      3.   The signs help the individual building meet the block 32 and 39
design guidelines in terms of creating street activity and character and are
also consistent with the context of the buildings adjacent to the building
seeking the exception.
   C.   In order to approve a waiver that would allow vinyl or other sign
materials besides wood or metal for a projecting sign it must be shown that:
      1.   The sign material is of durable strength to the elements;
      2.   The method of attachment will not damage the building and is
designed as an original feature of the building; and
      3.   The sign will be maintained and not allowed to be retained in a torn
or faded condition;
      4.   The sign is an accessory sign to other wall mounted signs on the
building or is a decorative feature and in either purpose adds variety and
color to the streetscape.
   D.   Notwithstanding the other provisions of this title, the following sign
materials and lighting methods of signage will not be allowed in "the junction"
as defined in subsection A of this section:
      1.   Plastic awnings with or without backlighting;
      2.   Solid plastic sign faces which are backlighted, provided this does
not preclude the use of individual letters mounted on a building for signage;
or
      3.   Handwritten signs done by individuals who are not sign contractors
and do not display professionalism of clean line edges, letter proportions,
recognized lettering fonts, and industry standard sign materials.
(Ord. 2006-54, 8-22-2006)
18-3-31: SPECIAL REGULATIONS REGARDING USE OF SEARCHLIGHTS OR SPOTLIGHTS:
   A.   Searchlights or spotlights may be used in the community commercial zone
(C-2/CP-2), regional commercial zone (C-3/CP-3), manufacturing zones (M-1, M-2,
OCIP, MRD or DDR) or central business district zone (CBD or CBD-I) in the
manner described in this title. Searchlights or spotlights may not be used in
any other zone, including, but not limited to, the limited scale neighborhood
commercial zone (NC-1), expanded scale neighborhood commercial zone (NC-2),
neighborhood commercial zone (C-1/CP-1) or any conditional overlay zone. When
permitted by this title, the use of searchlights or spotlights is in addition
to any other sign or signs allowed by law.
   B.   Searchlights or spotlights must be directed into the sky and cannot
direct their beam of light to the mountains or buildings.
   C.   Searchlights and spotlights must be a steady beam and cannot flash or
alternate colors.
   D.   The use of searchlights or spotlights cannot interfere with any state
or federal regulations or purposes regarding aircraft safety.
   E.   A searchlight or spotlight may not be used or operated at any location
in the city, including locations with an existing practice of using
searchlights or spotlights, until a permit has been obtained in the manner
described in subsection 18-1-5B of this title and the requirements and
limitations contained in this section are met.
   F.   The total number of nights on which a searchlight or spotlight may be
used on any single parcel or lot, whether on single or consecutive nights, is
limited to not more than twelve (12) nights per calendar year. The permit
holder shall notify the division of building services, in writing, at least
twenty four (24) hours in advance of each night or nights a searchlight or
spotlight is proposed to be used.
(Ord. 2010-9, 4-6-2010)
18-3-32   SPECIAL REGULATIONS FOR CANNABIS PRODUCTION ESTABLISHMENTS AND
MEDICAL CANNABIS PHARMACIES.
The following requirements apply to signs used for a cannabis production
establishment or a medical cannabis pharmacy:
   A.   The only sign type allowed is a wall sign that does not exceed four
feet (4') by five feet (5') in size;
   B.   Painted wall signs are not permitted;
   C.   Signage shall not be displayed in any manner on or in exterior windows;
   D.   The sign is limited to the following:
      1.   Name of business;
      2.   Hours of operation; and
      3.   A green cross.
(Ord. 2019-46, 10-22-2019)
CHAPTER 4
PUBLIC PROPERTY
SECTION:
18-4-1: Signposting Prohibited; Public Property
18-4-2: Erection Over Public Rights Of Way
18-4-1: SIGNPOSTING PROHIBITED; PUBLIC PROPERTY:
It is unlawful for any person to fasten, attach, paint or place any sign,
handbill, poster, advertisement or notice of any kind or sort, whether
political or otherwise, or to cause the same to be done in or upon the
curbstone, lamppost, telephone pole, electric light or power pole, hydrant,
bridge, or tree or in or upon any portion of any sidewalk, park strip or
street, except where expressly provided in this title. It shall be unlawful to
paste, place, paint or attach any "sign" defined in this title on any building,
street or property of the city.
(Ord. 2013-12, 3-5-2013)
18-4-2: ERECTION OVER PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY:
It is unlawful to erect and/or maintain any sign over any street or alley,
except as herein expressly provided.
(1979 Code § 15.12.200)
CHAPTER 5
APPENDIX A
SECTION:
18-5-1: Appendix A; Signs
18-5-1: APPENDIX A; SIGNS:
   APPENDIX A
 
                           Zone In Which Maximum Sign
Major Sign Group Sign Type Sign Is       Area(s) Of   Height     Location Of
                           Permitted     All Signs On Regulation Sign On Site
                                         Property
                                                        30 ft.
                                          2 sq. ft. per unless
                                          linear foot   attached to
                            C-1, CP-1,    of building   a building,
                            PI, CRC-1 and frontage with and then
                            PCR           a maximum of  should not
                                          200 sq. ft.   extend above
                                                        roof or
                                                        parapet wall
                                                        For all
                                                        zones except
                                                        A-I and A-C:
                                                        40 ft.
                                                        unless
                                                        attached to
                                                        a building,
                                          4 sq. ft. per and then
                            C-2, CP-2, C- linear foot   shall not    Must not be
                            3, CP-3, CBD, of building   extend above placed on or
                            CBD-I, CBC,   frontage with the roof or  over public
                            A-I, A-C      a maximum of  parapet      right-of- way
                                          400 sq. ft.   wall. For A-
                                          per frontage  I and A-
                                                        C Zones:
                                                        Shall not be
                                                        taller than
                                                        or extend
                                                        above roof
                                                        or parapet
                                                        wall
                                                        50 ft.
Business sign:                            5 sq. ft. per unless
A sign which                              linear foot   attached to
directs                     M-1, M-2, MP- of building   a building,
attention to                1, MP-2       frontage with and then
the principal  Wall sign,                 a maximum of  shall not
business or    flat sign,                 675 sq. ft.   extend above
service        freestanding                             roof or
performed on   sign                                     parapet wall
the premises.               All                         6 ft. unless
A maximum of                Residential                 attached to
40% of copy                 Zones:        1 sign per    a building,
area may be                              use, with a   and then
multiple copy               a.            maximum of 16 shall not
                            Nonconforming sq. ft.       extend above
                            use                         roof or
                                                        parapet wall
                                          2 sq. ft. per
                                          linear foot
                                          of building
                                          frontage on                Freestanding
                                          arterial. May              signs shall
                            b.            employ up to               be set back
                            Nonconforming 2 of 3 sign                10 ft. to
                            use along     types (wall,               property line
                            arterial      awning or                  and 20 ft. if
                            street        monument). No              perpendicular
                                          sign to                    to the
                                          exceed 120                 street. Must
                                          sq. ft. Total              not be placed
                                          signage not                on or over
                                          to exceed 200              public right-
                                          sq. ft.                    of-way
                            c. Reuse of
                            commercial    40 sq. ft.    6 ft.
                            building
                            New sign
                                                        Determined
                            Existing      Not to exceed as part of
                            signs         60 sq. ft.    conditional
                                                        use approval
                                                        Shall not
                            d. Home       2 sq. ft.     extend above
                            occupation                  roof or
                                                        parapet wall
                                                        Height of 10
                                                        ft.; for
                                          Included in   freestanding Shall not be
                            C-1, CP-1, C- total square  signs in C-  closer than
               Animated     2, CP-2, C-3, footage for   1, A-C and   75 ft. to any
               sign and     CP-3, CBD,    wall or       A-I Zones    residential
               electronic   CBD-I, M-1,   freestanding  maximum      zoned lots
               message      MP-1, M-2,    signs in      height the   and may not
               display      MP-2          respective    same as      extend over
                                          zones as      listed above public right-
                                          noted above   for other    of-way
                                                        respective
                                                        zones
                                                                     No projecting
                                                                     sign may
                                          Included in                extend more
                            C-1, CP-1, C- total square               than 24 in.
                            2, CP-2, C-3, footage for   Minimum of   from building
                            CP-3, A-C, A- respective    10 ft. above to which it
                            I, M-1, MP-1, zones as      grade        is attached,
                            M-2, MP-2     noted above                or over any
                                                                     public right-
                                                                     of-way or
                                                                     sidewalk
                                                        Minimum of
               Projecting                               10 ft. above
               sign                                     grade.       No projecting
                                                        Maximum      sign may
                                          A maximum of  below        extend more
                                          30% of total  cornice or   than 6 ft.
                                          square        roofline of  from building
                            CBD, CBD-I    footage for   building,    to which it
                                          respective    whichever is is attached,
                                          zones as      lower.       or over any
                                          noted above   Maximum      public right-
                                                        length of    of-way or
                                                        sign from    sidewalk
                                                        top to
                                                        bottom is 25
                                                        ft.
                                                        Not less
                                                        than 12 ft.  Shall not be
                                                        above        closer than 2
                                                        sidewalk or  ft. to curb
                                                        ground if    line, nor
                                                        more than 2/ project more
Business sign                             Included in   3 distance   than 15 ft.
                            C-2, CP-2, C- total square  from         over public
                            3, CP-3, CBD, footage for   property     right- of-
               Marquee sign CBD-I, M-1,   respective    line to      way. An
                            MP-1, M-2,    zones as      curb; 8 ft.  encroachment
                            MP-2          noted above   above        permit is
                                                        sidewalk or  required for
                                                        ground if    any marquee
                                                        less than 2/ over the
                                                        3 distance   public right-
                                                        from         of-way
                                                        property
                                                        line to curb
                                                        C-2/CP-2: 20
                                                        ft. above
                                          Included in   roof or
                            C-2, CP-2, C- total square  parapet wall Must not be
               Roof sign    3, CP-3, M-1, footage for               placed on or
                            MP-1, M-2,    respective    C-3/CP-3, M- over public
                            MP-2          zones as      1/MP-1, M-2/ right-of- way
                                          noted above   MP-2: 40 ft.
                                                        above
                                                        parapet wall
                                          All banners
                                          (except with
                            C-1, C-2, C-  waiver) not   Not extend
               Building     3, CBD, CBD-  to exceed 20% above        Attached to
               banner sign  I, MU2, M-1,  of the        building     building
                            M-2           allowable     parapet
                                          business
                                          signage
                                          All banners
                                          not to exceed Maximum      Setback 10
               Freestanding C-1, C-2, C-  20% of the    height of 6  ft. from
               banner sign  3, M-1, M-2   allowable     ft. or, if   property line
                                          business      flag, 10 ft.
                                          signage
                                          12 sq. ft.    Maintain a   Setback 10
               Light pole   C-1, C-2, C-  per light     10 ft.       ft. from
               banner sign  3, MU2, M-1,  pole, does    ground       front
                            M-2           not have      clearance    property line
                                          maximum
                                          1 (24 in.                  6 ft. wide
                            NC-1, NC-2,   width x 42                 clear path, 3
               Temporary    CBD, CBD-I,   in. high)     42 in.       ft. from
               sign         MU2, C-2, C-3 sign per                   building or
                                          business                   maximum 5 ft.
                                          frontage                   from curb
                            All           1 sign only
                            Residential   per street
                            Zones and O-  frontage and
                            1 Zones less  not exceeding
                            than 1 acre   16 sq. ft.
Property sign:              in size       per sign
                           All           1 sign only
A. A sign                   Residential   per street    10 ft.
identifying a               Zones and O-  frontage and  unless
construction                1 Zones 1     not exceeding attached to
project. The   Wall sign,   acre or more  32 sq. ft.    a building   Must not be
sign may       flat sign,   in size       per sign      and then     placed on or
contain name   freestanding               1 sign only   shall not    over public
and project,   sign                       per street    extend above right-of- way
name of                     Commercial    frontage and  roof or
construction                Zones         not exceeding parapet wall
firm(s),                                  100 sq. ft.
architect and                             per sign
developer                                 1 sign only
                                          per street
                            Manufacturing frontage and
                            Zones         not exceeding
                                          300 sq. ft.
                                          per sign
                            Residential
                            and O-1 Zones               7 ft. unless
                                         1 sign only   attached to
                            Legal         per street    a building
                            commercial    frontage and  and then
B. A sign                   use in        not exceeding shall not
offering the                Residential   6 sq. ft. per extend above
property for   Wall sign,   Zone not      sign          roof or
sale or lease. flat sign,   including                   parapet wall Must not be
The sign may   freestanding home                                     placed on or
contain the    sign, banner occupation                               over public
name of the    sign                                     10 ft.       right-of- way
seller, real                              1 sign per    unless
estate agent                Commercial    street        attached to
or agency                   and           frontage and  a building
                            Manufacturing not exceeding and then
                            Zones         32 sq. ft.    shall not
                                          per sign      extend above
                                                        roof or
                                                        parapet wall
                                          250 sq. ft.
                                          maximum per                Must not be
Scoreboard                                sign for                   placed on
sign: A sign                              schools and                public right-
used to keep   Freestanding All zones     public parks; 30 ft.       of-way and
score of an    sign                       800 sq. ft.                signs must
athletic event                            for                        face the play
                                          professional               portion of
                                          league                     the field
                                          stadiums
Sponsorship
sign: A sign
that
recognizes by                                                        Must not be
name, logo or                                                        placed on
other visual                                            Shall not    public right-
means the                                               extend above of-way and
financial      Flat sign,                               the fence,   signs must
contributions  wall sign,   All zones     None          building or  meet the
of a business, freestanding                             structure to location
group or       sign                                     which it is  requirements
individual as                                           attached     of section
a sponsor of                                                         18-3-28 of
the facility,                                                        this title
building or
structure on
which the sign
is located
                            Pennants      Pennants with
Specialty                   allowed in    a maximum     20 ft.
sign:                       the following size of 12    maximum      Shall not be
Triangular     Freestanding zones: C-2,   in. base and  height and   placed on or
pennants of    sign         CP-2, C-3,    sides not to  minimum      over public
reinforced                  CP-3, M-1,    exceed 24 in. clearance of right-of- way
fabric                      MP-1, M-2,    in length     10 in.
                            MP-2
Nameplate: A
sign
indicating the Flat sign,
name of a      wall sign,   All zones     11/2 sq. ft.  None         None
person or      projecting
persons        sign
residing on
the premises
                                          All
                                          Residential
                                          Zones: 1 sq.
                                          ft. of sign
                                          area for each
                                          250 sq. ft.
                                          in a building
                                          or group of
                                          buildings on
                                          a common
                                          parcel to a
Identification                            maximum of 60 Shall not
sign1: A sign                             sq. ft. A     extend above
which                                     minimum of 12 roofline or
identifies the                            sq. ft. of    parapet. The
name of a                                 sign area     height of
subdivision,   Wall sign,                 will be       the
industrial     flat sign,                 allowed for   freestanding Must not be
park, airport, freestanding All zones     buildings     sign shall   placed on or
church,        sign,                      with less     not extend   over public
school,        projecting                 than 3,000    above the    right-of- way
apartment      sign                       sq. ft. of    height of
complex, mall                             floor area    the closest
or shopping                                            building on
center, public                            Historic      the same lot
or semipublic                             residential   as the sign
building                                  buildings: 9
                                          sq. ft.
                                           
                                          All
                                          Commercial
                                          Zones: 100
                                          sq. ft.
                                           
                                          All
                                          Manufacturing
                                          Zones: 200
                                          sq. ft.
                                          Residential
                                          Zones: 1 sq.
                                          ft. of sign
                                          for each 250
                                          sq. ft. of
                                          gross floor
                                          area in a
                                          building or
                                          group of
                                          buildings on
                                          a parcel to a
                                          maximum of    Shall not
                                          150 sq. ft.   extend above
                                                       roofline or
                                          Historic      parapet. The
               Wall sign,                 residential   height of
               flat sign,                 buildings: 9  the          Must not be
               freestanding               sq. ft.       freestanding placed on or
               sign,        All zones                  sign shall   over public
Information    projecting                 C-1, CP-1,    not extend   property
sign1: A sign  sign                       PI, CRC-1,    above the
designed to                               PCR Zones:    height of
provide                                   200 sq. ft.   the closest
directory                                              building on
information                               C-2, CP-      the same lot
such as the                               2 Zones: 300  as the sign
tenants within                            sq. ft.
an industrial                              
park, the                                 C-3, CP-3,
nature of                                 CBD, CBC
coming events,                            Zones: 400
meeting                                   sq. ft.
schedules,                                 
hours of                                  M-1, MP-1, M-
operation,                                2, MP-
directing                                 2 Zones: 675
traffic                                   sq. ft.
patterns, etc.                                                       Minimum
                                                                     setback of 20
                                          Included in                ft. from
                                          total square  The height   property line
               Electronic                 footage for   of the       (except for
               message                    Residential   freestanding schools along
               display                    Zones as      sign shall   arterial
               sign;                      noted above.  not extend   streets it
               provided,                  Electronic    above the    may be
               that the     All           message       level of the reduced to 1
               electronic   Residential   display is    closest      ft.), 300 ft.
               display      Zones         limited to    building on  from any
               shall only                 maximum of    the same lot existing home
               be operated                25% of total  as the sign. on same side
               from 6:00                  signage       The minimum  of street and
               A.M. to 10:                allowed       height shall 120 ft. from
               00 P.M.                    except for    be 10 ft.    any existing
                                          public                     home across
                                          schools                    the street
                                                                     opposite the
                                                                     sign
Temporary
directional
sign: A sign
giving
direction to a
specific
location,
either on or
off of the
property on
which the sign
is located,
for any public
or private
event. Such
signs are                                               3 ft.;
limited to                                1 sign per    except 2 ft. Must not be
instruction or Freestanding               lot, not      if located   placed on or
direction only sign         All zones     exceeding 6   within a     over public
and are not to                            sq. ft.       sight        right-of- way
have any form                                           triangle
of commercial
advertising on
them other
than a company
logo. Such
signs shall
not be
illuminated in
any manner. No
sign shall
remain on any
lot or parcel
for a period
greater than
48 consecutive
hours
 
Notes:
   1.    Site may take advantage of either an identification or an information
sign, but not both.
   2.    See subsection
15-39-8B7 of this Code.
(Ord. 2019-6, 1-22-2019)
